



Download Request: All Documents: 1-307
Time Of Request: Thursday, November 23, 2017  13:12:19 EST
Send To:

MEGADEAL, ACADEMIC UNIVERSE
UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO
LIBRARY
CHICAGO, IL


Terms: ((Vietnam OR Viet Nam) and Date(geq(07/01/1995) and leq(09/30/1995)))


Source: The New York Times
Project ID:



                               1 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 1, 1995, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Students Who Want Extra Help;
One-Year Limit on Remedial Work at CUNY Dismays Many

BYLINE: By LYNDA RICHARDSON

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 21;  Column 2;  Metropolitan Desk;  Second Front

LENGTH: 1367 words


Rebecca Van did not tell a soul that she was taking remedial English 100 at John
Jay College of Criminal Justice in Manhattan. Two times a week she slipped into
her seat in a packed classroom and struggled to organize her thoughts on paper.
She labored through essay tests on topics like sex education and abortion in the
50 minutes that were allowed. She took the same class three times before she
passed.

Ms. Van, 22, felt a bitter shame.

She also did not tell anyone that she had been among the top 30 seniors, all
college bound, in her class at New Utrecht High School in Bensonhurst, Brooklyn.

It took a year and a half of frustration and hard work at John Jay, a division
of the City University, before Ms. Van passed the examination that moved her out
of the remedial course and into English 101. Now a junior who is majoring in
criminal justice, she has a 3.8 grade point average.

"There are a lot of students like me who, when it comes to test taking, they are
nervous and don't manage their time that well," said Ms. Van, who plans to
pursue a master's degree after graduation and then a doctorate. She added that
she also wanted to write a book on crime and punishment.

For Ms. Van, success at CUNY was a matter of time, three semesters exactly. But
under a strict admissions policy adopted by the university trustees on Monday,
many students will no longer be accepted into its four-year colleges if they are
judged unable to complete all remedial work in their first year.

Starting in 1996, incoming students will not be allowed to take repeated
remedial courses or courses in English as a second language for more than a year
on their way to bachelor's degrees.

If admissions officials judge that a student needs more than that, the student
will be expected to receive instruction in night school or in one of the six
junior colleges of the university system.

The new policy is part of a fiscal package that is intended to close a budget
gap and that will also raise tuition $750 a year, to $3,200, at the four-year
colleges and $400, to $2,500, at the junior colleges.

Officials say they expect the package to save $2 million of the $17 million
spent on remedial education each year.

One-third of those entering the four-year colleges take at least one remedial
course. Last year, 15,000 were enrolled.

Ms. Van said the new policy was certain to restrict access for many talented
students. "There's a lot of students who deserve as many chances as possible to
pass," said Ms. Van, who is an assistant in the career-advisement office at John
Jay, getting in touch with recruiters and sending out students' resumes. "A lot
of good students won't be able to continue. They would be very discouraged. A
community college is nothing."

Beyond the debate over whether remedial programs have led to lower standards and
waste teaching time, there are the voices of students like Ms. Van and others.
Many are immigrants or members of minority groups, and many are poor.

For many, academic failure does not come from an unwillingness to work hard.
Shortly after Ms. Van arrived with her family in the United States from Vietnam,
she said, she would watch other children go off to summer camp while her father
made his children stay indoors to work on reading and mathematics.

She was grilled on sixth-grade classwork when she was heading to the fifth
grade. Her father doubled her homework if she failed. "He wanted us to be more
advanced," she said.

Some CUNY students like Ms. Van have benefited from the extra time in remedial
classes. But others have struggled to stay afloat.

Jakelin Gomez, a shy freshman at York College who wants to be a psychologist,
does not know enough English to comprehend fully what is before her. "Sometimes
you have trouble," said Ms. Gomez, who will begin a second year of remedial
lessons in the fall.

For Ms. Gomez, 23, a freshman who arrived a year and a half ago from Colombia,
it has been a major effort to learn how to read, write and even speak English.
One day in a classroom at York, Ms. Gomez wrote an essay about a fire in her
apartment building in Briarwood, Queens, where she lives with her father, a
gardener.

"I was sad because I was needing respiration," she wrote. "I wake up very
afraid."

She listens attentively to her teacher, who draws English words from his
reluctant students by asking what they expect from college. "He is asking us
something about what we want to do," Ms. Gomez said. "We talk about it. We ask
for vocabulary when we don't understand."

Ms. Gomez has taken two semesters of English as a second language as well as
remedial math and reading at York, a liberal arts institution in Jamaica,
Queens, with an emphasis on the sciences. She is now in summer school, where she
is receiving added remedial lessons. In her sophomore year, she is scheduled to
take yet more.

At the college, Ms. Gomez is known as a student who is unsure of herself. Her
voice is little more than a whisper. Her grade point average is 2.7. She studies
hard, but college is a constant struggle.

Ms. Gomez is dreamy-eyed about America, happy to have joined her father in the
land of opportunity. She left a rural town where she said the only opportunities
for many women without college educations were working as housekeepers or
hospital cleaners. She envisions opening her own psychologist's office and is
working toward that as a supermarket cashier while she is a full-time student.

But she is the kind of student who would be unlikely to find her way to York as
a freshman under the new policy, some officials said.

Under the policy, admission requires not only an 80 average or ranking in the
top third of the class, but also sets other criteria. To determine whether a
student can complete the needed remedial work in a year, the university will
look at the performance on tests in math, reading and writing, high school grade
point average, the types of high school courses taken and Scholastic Achievement
Test scores, officials said.

Ms. Gomez said the new policy was unfair, adding: "Sometimes you need more time
to learn something. You have to suffer like shock. It's a new language.
Sometimes some people learn fast. But some no. Some need more time. You want to
survive here. You have to learn the language, because otherwise you can't do
anything without English."

When students can no longer take remedial courses for more than a year, Ms.
Gomez said, "they are going to feel sad and discouraged if you don't pass it in
one year."

"Sometimes they throw it away," she added.

Tanya Salas, a junior at Brooklyn College, said she did not consider night
school or junior college a palatable alternative for students who did not finish
remedial work in a year. "It's discouraging," she said.

Ms. Salas arrived from Ecuador seven years ago, barely speaking English. She
went to night school four days a week and learned how to say, "Good morning" and
"Thank you" and "Goodbye." "But," Ms. Salas said, "it didn't help me to read and
write at college level."

Ms. Salas is unapologetic about her two years in remedial classes. "I want to be
a taxpayer, not a tax consumer," she said. "Don't they see that this will hurt
society? It's better to have somebody in school rather than in the streets."

At Brooklyn, Ms. Salas learned how to communicate with others and received her
first taste of the promising opportunities before her. She took remedial writing
for two years and reading and math for a year and a half.

Now, the student who once struggled in math is tutoring students in calculus,
statistics, probability and linear algebra. Ms. Salas is majoring in math and
plans to enroll in a doctoral program.

"It broke my heart to know that not many students are going to be able to take
remedial courses," she said. "Can you imagine what would have happened to me
with the change? I would be punished and it's not my fault. I would be punished
for not speaking and reading and writing and having math to the level that I was
supposed to have. But now, with two years of opportunity of education and help,
my whole life has changed, and I know it will be better."

LOAD-DATE: July 3, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: A student at John Jay College, Rebecca Van, who took remedial
English three times. Now a junior, she has a 3.8 grade point average. (Angel
Franco/The New York Times)(pg.21); A junior at Brooklyn College, Tanya Salas,
who arrived from Ecuador seven years ago, said sending students to night school
or junior college to complete their remedial work would be discouraging to them.
(Chester Higgins Jr./The New York Times)(pg.24)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                               2 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 1, 1995, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Observer;
The Amending Toot

BYLINE: By RUSSELL BAKER

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 19;  Column 1;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 650 words


Well, it looks like Congress is going to stop this flag desecration that's been
going on. Going on somewhere. Not sure where anymore.

Went on all the time everywhere, though, back in Vietnam War days. At least
everywhere a television camera caught an anti-war demonstrator in its view
finder.

Congress is going to fix that.

Next time there's a Vietnam War there's going to be none of that burning the
flag, none of that sewing the flag on the seat of your pants and sitting on it.

Congress is going to amend the Constitution to stop it. That's right: the
Constitution Itself. The Big Parchment. Going to amend it.

Now, now, none of that talk about Congress being on a Constitution-amending
toot. Congress doesn't go on toots. Just because it's spent half the year trying
to amend this noble document -- noblest of all documents -- you can't call that
an amending toot.

Is it a toot when Congress comes out for the flag? Congress standing up and
voting for the flag, is that a toot?

A Congress has the courage to sit there in Washington -- inside the Beltway,
mind you -- the Beltway! -- has the guts to sit there inside that Beltway and
tell America it loves the flag -- is that your idea of a toot?

When the House of Representatives -- Democrats and Republicans by the dozen --
voted against flag abuse by amending the Constitution that was no toot. Just
plain old courage.

Now it's up to the Senate to stand and be counted. The famous old veteran
Capitol observers are saying it looks like the Senate probably will muster up
the courage to move the amendment right along to the states.

So flag burners can feel the iron hand of the law next time they decorate the
seat of their pants with Old Glory.

Sure, a lot of Congressmen and Senators will probably be voted out of office
next election for showing the courage to stand up to those who would say "To
hell with the flag!"

And what is it that makes them willing to risk their careers? What gives them
such courage?

It's as simple as this:

Congress loves the flag. Loves mother too, of course.

And loves home. At least the American home. Provided it is a two-parent home.

And neither parent is an immigrant.

Or on welfare.

There's a good chance, if the flag amendment flies all the way through, that
Congress will be encouraged to push for a home-and-mother amendment to the
Constitution. The idea already has a lot of supporters willing to stand up and
be counted against the home-and-mother hate bloc.

These brave solons and solonesses haven't yet decided though whether to fight
for one home-and-mother amendment that would make it a crime to desecrate home
and mother.

There's some fear that lumping home and mother in one amendment might bring the
home haters and the mother haters into a coalition that would make it impossible
to pass the amendment.

Some think it would be politically smarter to go for separate amendments. One
dealing with home desecration, the other with mother desecration.

The big question of course is, Is it fair to ask Congressmen to risk political
ruin by coming out for the flag, then ask them to go back once more into that
deadly breach by coming out for home and mother?

The word from those famous old veteran Capitol observers is that it would take
more guts than anybody has a right to expect of a Congressman with an election
year just around the corner.

Most likely, they're saying at the Capitol, Congress will exhaust most of its
courage this year in the struggle to save the flag.

If these brave men and brave women survive the fury of the voters next year,
they may just possibly have enough fight left to stand up for a home amendment
in the following Congress. Most think the mother amendment will never make it,
though.

Too many mothers nowadays belong to the single-mother variety. For Congress,
that's pushing motherhood beyond the limit.

LOAD-DATE: July 3, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                               3 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   July 2, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

BEST SELLERS: July 2, 1995

SECTION: Section 7; Page 14; Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1467 words



          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Fiction

 1      2  10   THE RAINMAKER, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $25.95.) A young
                man barely out of law school tries to expose a corporation's
                multibillion-dollar scam.

 2      1  151  THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner,
                $17.95.) A photographer and a farmer's lonely wife in Iowa.

 3          1   ROSE MADDER, by Stephen King. (Viking, $25.95.) Fleeing an
                abusive husband, a woman seeks happiness in a strange city by
                creating her own myth.

 4      3   5   THE APOCALYPSE WATCH, by Robert Ludlum. (Bantam, $24.95.)
                Tracking a neo-Nazi movement with designs on American and
                European officials.

 5      6  70   THE CELESTINE PROPHECY, by James Redfield. (Warner, $17.95.) An
                ancient manuscript, found in Peru, provides insights into
                achieving a fulfilling life.

 6      5   8   LET ME CALL YOU SWEETHEART, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Simon &
                Schuster, $24.) An unusual murder case haunts a prosecutor's
                career and her private life.

 7      8  54   POLITICALLY CORRECT BEDTIME STORIES, by James Finn Garner.
                (Macmillan, $8.95.) Classic tales respun to avoid offending
                current sensibilities.

 8      4  145  OH, THE PLACES YOU'LL GO! by Dr. Seuss. (Random House, $15.)
                The problems of finding your way through life; in verse and
                pictures.

 9      7   7   ONCE UPON A MORE ENLIGHTENED TIME, by James Finn Garner.
                (Macmillan, $9.95.) Eight more "politically correct bedtime
                stories."

 10    11   4   STRANGE HIGHWAYS, by Dean Koontz. (Tartikoff/Warner, $23.95.) A
                collection of suspense tales, including novels, novellas and
                short stories.

 11     9  10   LADDER OF YEARS, by Anne Tyler. (Knopf, $24.) At 40, a woman
                leaves her physician husband and children to start a new life
                in a strange town.

 12*        1   REDEMPTION, by Leon Uris. (HarperCollins, $25.) In a sequel to
                "Trinity," the Larkin family continues to fight for Irish
                independence.

 13*   10   6   MIND PREY, by John Sandford. (Putnam, $23.95.) Lucas Davenport
                pursues the kidnapper of a psychiatrist and her two daughters.

 14         1   THE WITNESS, by Sandra Brown. (Warner, $21.95.) A seemingly
                happy public defender and wife is plunged into a morass of
                bigotry and hate.

 15    12   2   MYSTIQUE, by Amanda Quick. (Bantam, $21.95.) A medieval English
                warrior, on a search for a crystal that will make him the
                master of new lands, finds love.

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Nonfiction

 1     11   2   A GOOD WALK SPOILED, by John Feinstein. (Little, Brown,
                $23.95.) A sportswriter reports on the P.G.A. Tour in 1993 and
                1994.

 2      3   5   DAVE BARRY'S COMPLETE GUIDE TO GUYS, by Dave Barry. (Random
                House, $21.) A humorist explains the strange ways of a species
                of males called "guys."

 3      1  38   THE HOT ZONE, by Richard Preston. (Random House, $23.) The
                discovery of the deadly Ebola virus in Virginia and the efforts
                to keep it from spreading.

 4      4   5   SPONTANEOUS HEALING, by Andrew Weil. (Knopf, $23.) A physician
                explains the ways in which the body heals itself.

 5*     5  69   MIDNIGHT IN THE GARDEN OF GOOD AND EVIL, by John Berendt.
                (Random House, $23.) The mysterious death of a young man in
                Savannah, Ga.

 6      2  27   SISTERS, by Carol Saline. Photographs by Sharon J. Wohlmuth.
                (Running Press, $27.50.) The relationships of 36 sets of
                sisters, reported in words and pictures.

 7      7  10   IN RETROSPECT, by Robert S. McNamara with Brian VanDeMark.
                (Times Books/Random House, $27.50.) The author recalls his role
                in the Vietnam War.

 8      6  20   THE DEATH OF COMMON SENSE, by Philip K. Howard. (Random House,
                $18.) How governmental rules and regulations are fettering the
                lives of all Americans.

 9      8  80   THE BOOK OF VIRTUES, by William J. Bennett. (Simon & Schuster,
                $30.) Moral stories adapted from the Greeks, the Bible,
                folklore and elsewhere.

 10    10   2   NEW PASSAGES, by Gail Sheehy. (Random House, $25.) How changing
                social conditions and longer life expectancies are affecting
                our lives.

 11         1   By GEORGE, by George Foreman and Joel Engel. (Villard, $23.)
                The autobiography of the heavyweight champion.

 12     9   4   KATO KAELIN, by Marc Eliot. (Harper Paperbacks, $20.) A friend
                of O.J. Simpson's on events surrounding the murders of Nicole
                Simpson and Ron Goldman.

 13*   12  11   FROM BEGINNING TO END, by Robert Fulghum. (Villard, $20.) The
                rituals we practice and the spiritual journeys we take, from
                childhood to old age.

 14         1   LESLIE NIELSEN'S STUPID LITTLE GOLF BOOK, by Leslie Nielsen and
                Henry Beard. (Boswell/Doubleday, $17.50.) Reminiscences and
                tips; humor.

 15        27   DON'T STAND TOO CLOSE TO A NAKED MAN, by Tim Allen. (Hyperion,
                $19.95.) Anecdotes and meditations on life by the star of "Home
                Improvement."

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous

 1      1  110  MEN ARE FROM MARS, WOMEN ARE FROM VENUS, by John Gray.
                (HarperCollins, $23.) Communicating.

 2      2  15   THE SEVEN SPIRITUAL LAWS OF SUCCESS, by Deepak Chopra.
                (Amber-Allen/New World Library, $12.95.) How to "generate
                wealth in all its forms."

 3      4   7   HOW TO ARGUE AND WIN EVERY TIME, by Gerry Spence. (St.
                Martin's, $22.95.) A lawyer describes ways to win arguments at
                home and at work.

 4          8   MARS AND VENUS IN THE BEDROOM, by John Gray. (HarperCollins,
                $22.) Maintaining passion.


Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending June 17, at 3,050 bookstores
plus wholesalers serving 28,000 other retailers (gift shops, department stores,
newsstands, supermarkets), statistically weighted to represent sales in all such
outlets nationwide. An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely
distinguishable from those of the book above.
And Bear in Mind
(Editor's Choices of other recent books of particular interest)

 AND WHEN DID YOU LAST SEE YOUR FATHER? by Blake Morrison. (Picador USA, $21.)
An English poet's perfectly convincing memoir of his father, a man both
overbearing and engagingly quirky, whose death comes to the reader as a
surprise.

THE BEAUTY OF THE BEASTLY: New Views on the Nature of Life, by Natalie Angier.
(Peter Davison/Houghton Mifflin, $21.95.) Essays and excursions by a New York
Times science reporter who deals gracefully with current ideas about the
innerest workings of us organisms.

COLD SNAP: Stories, by Thom Jones. (Little, Brown, $19.95.) A collection that
turns a merciless, ironic gaze on the organic trap called life, in which
spiritual beings -- humans -- are forever in jeopardy of mere chemical accidents
or biological insults.

EMBLEMS OF MIND: The Inner Life of Music and Mathematics, by Edward Rothstein.
(Times Books/Random House, $25.) Sure they are alike, as everybody knows;
however, they are totally different! A New York Times critic schooled in both
explores paradoxes as old as Pythagoras.

GEORGE ELIOT, VOICE OF A CENTURY: A Biography, by Frederick R. Karl. (Norton,
$30.) A civilized, sensible biography of an author who, for all her insight into
women's mentality, hoped to see them develop the intellectual and social
attributes of the better sort of men.

INDEPENDENCE DAY, by Richard Ford. (Knopf, $24.) Frank Bascombe, angst-ridden
hero of Mr. Ford's 1986 novel, "The Sportswriter," approaches middle age with an
unmanageable son, an unrepentant ex-wife and a sense of the "observance of human
possibility," which doesn't, he fears, apply to him.

THE LOVE LETTER, by Cathleen Schine. (Houghton Mifflin, $19.95.) Helen is 42,
capable and loves Edith Wharton. Johnny is 20, acne-spotted and -- like,
excellent! -- a big Tom Robbins fan. In this comic novel they fall in love.

A MAN'S WORLD: How Real Is Male Privilege -- And How High Is Its Price? by Ellis
Cose. (HarperCollins, $22.) A skilled analyst of gripes finds that most men
(including so-called angry whites) are more confused than angry and more subdued
than privileged; to his argument he brings persuasive numbers and moderate
tones.

THE NEXT AMERICAN NATION: The New Nationalism and the Fourth American
Revolution, by Michael Lind. (Free Press, $25.) An intelligent, industrious, not
very cheerful look at possible futures. Balkanization through identity politics?
Stratification, Brazilian style?

THE PRICE OF A CHILD, by Lorene Cary. (Knopf, $23.) A sensual, funny first novel
that transposes to pre-Civil War Philadelphia the theme of the author's 1991
memoir, "Black Ice": the duty of an escapee toward the oppressed she leaves
behind.

SHELLEY'S HEART, by Charles McCarry. (Random House, $23.) A really smart
thriller about the Presidency, by a journalist who well understands how the
gears of power are shifted.

LOAD-DATE: July 2, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                               4 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   July 2, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

JERSEY;
It's a Grand Old Flag, Not Just an Icon

BYLINE: By JOE SHARKEY

SECTION: Section 13NJ;  Page 1;  Column 3;  New Jersey Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 737 words


JULY 4 approaches this year with booming demands that the Bill of Rights be
amended at once to put a stop to public flag desecration.

Since this act actually occurs with less frequency than a nickel-slot jackpot,
the hubbub is a sure sign of one thing: The 1996 Presidential campaign is about
to bear down on us like a freight train.

So it is time to take a sounding at Annin & Company, the 149-year-old
Roseland-based manufacturer that is to flags what Campbell's is to soup. You
might remember Annin as the flag factory where George Bush deftly wrapped
himself in Old Glory during the 1988 campaign, generating brilliant red, white
and blue visuals that left poor Michael Dukakis in the dust, imagewise, behind
the wheel of that tank.

At Annin, they seemed a bit surprised. The 1996 campaign can't be on us already!

C. Randolph Beard, the company president and a descendant of the founder, said
this about the new flag flap: "Our role is to produce a flag and not be
concerned about how it is used." But if putting a proposed flag-burning
amendment to the voters is the only way to finally confront the issue, "so be
it," he said.

One of the problems with legislating behavior about the flag is the wide range
of images people carry around about their flag. Though he was an infantryman in
Korea, Mr. Beard's favorite is the smart way an American flag looks at seaside,
its vibrant colors snapping over wind-tossed waves.

On Annin's factory floor in Verona, Minnie Howell had her own. "I just love
seeing the flag in a small town," said Ms. Howell, an Annin flagmaker for 10
years who wore a red, white and blue blouse with white stars embroidered on the
pocket. She grew up in rural Georgia, and closely guards whatever memories she
has as a black child coming of age in a place where the Confederate flag still
waved defiantly. "It's very complicated," she said, and left it at that.

It would be simpler if the flag were just an icon, a fixed symbol cut, sewn and
embroidered from those big bolts of cotton, wool and nylon by about 350 union
workers in a Jersey flag factory. But icons never convey so many messages.

For example, Annin's top-of-the-line model is a $2,450 behemoth, 30 by 60 feet.
A car dealer hoisting one of those swimming-pool-sized beauties alongside Route
46 might well be sounding a genuine whoop of capitalistic joy.

But a passer-by might see the same flag as an advertising gimmick, even a ploy
to circumvent zoning regulations on the size of signs.

At the flag factory, Dorothy Marek was quick to declare what the flag meant.
"Freedom."

Freedom to burn it? she was asked.

"Absolutely not!"

To use it for advertising?

"I guess it depends on what they're advertising." A few feet away, Betty Rotolo
frowned. "It's very complex, you know." Old images flood back. "I have a flag
that my mother gave me. It was on my father's coffin. He was a World War I vet.
It's so personal."

Obviously, the generation that helped to win the Second World War carries deep
emotional imprints, easily summoned by the flag: pride, determination, fear,
deprivation, longing, sometimes inexplicable tragedy, finally triumph.

A member of that generation, Peggy Gaeta, 26 years making flags, paused near a
sewing table to say; "These days, I guess the flag means individual freedom to
me. I come and go as I please." Then other memories come back.

"I just thought of a couple of guys from our old high school crowd who went to
the war and didn't come home." She waved images away. "Joy, pride, sorrow, the
good old times. The flag says different things to me at different times in my
life."

But the Baby Boom generation, indelibly marked by the Vietnam war, can summon
its own unique images. A 45-year-old friend who avoided the draft recalled
terrible arguments with his father over Vietnam during the early 70's. Though
father and son were always close, that wound took a long time to heal.

"I was never comfortable with the flag," he said. "But time passed. Got married,
had kids, a house. One summer, 1990, I actually bought a flag. We had my folks
over for a picnic the Fourth of July. My father stood there, and all he said
was, 'I see you got a flag.' And that was it. For the both of us, the Vietnam
war had finally come to an end. And when I hang that flag on our front porch
this weekend, that's the personal statement I'll be making, that my father and I
found our peace."

LOAD-DATE: July 2, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                               5 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   July 2, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

MUTUAL FUNDS;
Stalking the World's Elusive Emerging Markets

BYLINE: By REED ABELSON

SECTION: Section 3;  Page 8;  Column 1;  Money and Business/Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1059 words


AS one of the first mutual fund managers to dive into emerging markets like
Turkey and Argentina nearly a decade ago, J. Mark Mobius is used to being ahead
of the crowd.

But now that the crowd has overrun many of his favorite haunts, Mr. Mobius seems
to be hanging back. The 58-year-old stock picker, who runs two well-regarded
funds in the Franklin Templeton Group and endlessly circles the globe stalking
bargains, is sitting on a mound of cash.

Even after sharp declines in emerging stock markets over the last 18 months,
stock prices are not low enough to entice him -- perhaps the best known
cheerleader of emerging markets.

Call it a case of aftershock. After emerging markets soared to dizzying heights
in 1993, every portfolio manager with a passport became a willing investor in
far-flung countries. Many of the novices got a rude surprise last year when the
devaluation of the Mexican peso sent markets from Argentina to Malaysia reeling.
Those who still believe in these fast-growing countries are now plunging back in
as stock prices recover but remain shy of their 1993 highs.

"I've been forced to seek newer markets and forced to wait until markets come
down in price," said Mr. Mobius, who has diversified into 35 countries, up from
six when he began his first fund in 1987. He is buying selectively in markets
like Argentina, Hong Kong and Mexico and dabbling in new markets like the Czech
Republic.

Still, nearly a third of the $2.1 billion in his Templeton Developing Markets
Trust was in cash at the end of March. Although that's down from 43 percent a
year ago, it's about three times the 12 percent average for similar funds,
according to Lipper Analytical Services, a research firm in New York.

"We're not too worried about cash levels," said Mr. Mobius, although the fund
aims to be fully invested. "We try to find the best deals, and if we can't we
don't invest."

Other managers are not nearly so picky. Richard Hazlewood, the manager of the
Fidelity Emerging Markets Fund, has invested most of that fund's $1.4 billion in
assets after starting 1994 with some 30 percent cash. "The devaluation of the
Mexican peso threw up some tremendous values," Mr. Hazlewood said. "Other
counties got tarred with the Mexican brush."

Sitting on some cash helped returns last year, when emerging markets tanked. Mr.
Mobius's first fund, the Templeton Emerging Markets Fund, a closed-end fund
whose shares trade on the New York Stock Exchange, has gained 22 percent
annually over the last five years. The newer and larger fund, Templeton
Developing Markets, has returned 13 percent annually over the last three years,
handily outperforming most of its peers. Mr. Mobius's tendency to hold lots of
cash has hurt returns, however, when they are compared with market averages.

Along with his diversified funds, Mr. Mobius runs a few narrow ones: Russia,
China World, Dragon and Vietnam Opportunities. Because of the volatility of
these and other developing markets, investment advisers recommend that
individuals put only a small portion of their assets there.

No matter where he ventures, Mr. Mobius is committed to buying undervalued
stocks. The average price-to-earnings ratio of stocks in his portfolios is
substantially lower than averages for other funds. While many of his peers mimic
an index, buying stocks of large popular companies in various markets, Mr.
Mobius focuses on the next tier of companies. After looking at various markets
and studying stock valuations and trading patterns, he and his analysts meet
with a prospective company's management to talk about its prospects. "It's very,
very systematic," he said. "We don't listen to hot tips. We don't take brokers'
calls."

To do this, Mr. Mobius maintains a frenetic pace, visiting some 200 companies
each year worldwide. A typical month involves flights to Europe, South Africa,
Vietnam and New York from his office in Hong Kong.

ONCE he buys a stock, he holds it an average of five years, keeping turnover low
at just a fifth of the portfolio each year. "If we buy it and the price goes
down, if our outlook hasn't changed, we buy more," he said.

The markets where he can be found now are those that took the worst beating last
year. "Hong Kong is still the cheapest and has the best companies," said Mr.
Mobius, who has invested about 17 percent of the portfolio there. Its major
market index dropped 30 percent in dollar terms in 1994.

Uncertainty over what will happen in 1997, when China takes control over the
British colony, has caused some investors to avoid the market. "When it gets
down to it, nobody knows what's going to happen," he said. "The fundamentals are
very, very good." Among the Templeton fund's largest holdings is Cheung Kong
Holdings, a Hong Kong real estate company available here in American depository
receipts.

Mexico is also alluring. "We were buying in Mexico during the crash and continue
to buy," Mr. Mobius said. Among his favorites is DESC Sociedad de Fomento
Industrial, a Mexican conglomerate with interests in food, petrochemicals and
auto parts, also available as an A.D.R.

While he reduced some holdings in Brazil after last year's run-up, he is
studying prospects there again, now that the market has turned down. He also
finds Argentina exciting and likes the telephone and gas companies, which the
government is selling.

In terms of even less-established stock markets, he is still waiting to invest
in Egypt and has only nibbled at Pakistan and Sri Lanka because of past price
run-ups.

And many more markets once captivating are simply overpriced. "We're not
terribly excited about places like Malaysia and Thailand," he said, or Chile and
Colombia.

The fact remains that there are few undiscovered places, especially where
investors can look forward to annual percentage returns in the upper teens, he
says.

But price isn't the only determinant of a market for Mr. Mobius. Other practical
matters, like stock custody and stock settlements, can keep him away. Such
concerns have him approaching Hungary, India, Poland and Russia with extreme
caution.

Another key consideration is whether there is enough of a market to allow him to
sell a stock when the time comes. "A lot of regulators are missing the point,"
he said. "It's not the cheating that goes on, but the lack of liquidity for the
investor."

NAME: J. Mark Mobius

LOAD-DATE: July 2, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: J. Mark Mobius, who searches for bargains in emerging stock
markets, runs the Templeton Developing Markets fund. (Phillip Greenberg/The New
York Times)

Graph: "Fits and Starts" shows monthly value of $1,000 invested in October 1991,
when the Templeton Developing Markets fund was created.

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                               6 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   July 2, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

F. A. Resch; Photo Editor, 89

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 32;  Column 2;  National Desk

LENGTH: 138 words

DATELINE: GREENWOOD, S.C., June 30


F. A. Resch, executive news photo editor of The Associated Press for 30 years
who guided the expansion of a fledgling photo service into a network that served
700 newspapers, died on Tuesday. He was 89.

Mr. Resch held the top photo position at the news agency from 1938 to 1968,
overseeing photographic coverage of World War II, the Korean War and the Vietnam
War. During those years, The Associated Press won seven Pulitzer Prizes for
photography.

A native of Chicago, he joined the A.P. in Kansas City in 1928 and went on to
work in Chicago, St. Louis and New York.

He is survived by his wife, Katherine, of Greenwood; a son, Tyler, of North
Bennington, Vt., and two stepsons, Thomas D. Temple 3d of Georgetown, S.C., and
Robert M. Temple of Columbia, S.C. Mr. Resch's first wife, Louise, died about 25
years ago.

LOAD-DATE: July 2, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                               7 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   July 2, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section 1; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 692 words



International 3-11

COLOMBIAN GUERRILLAS FIGHT ON
Long after guerrillas in nearby countries have given up their guns, Colombia's
guerrillas fight on, keeping alive Latin America's longest and largest
insurgency. 1

VIETNAMESE EX-MIGRANTS PROSPER
The experiences of the boat people who have already returned to Vietnam suggest
that they have little to fear in their homeland; some families are prospering. 3


RUSSIAN LEADERSHIP SURVIVES
The Russian Government averted a political showdown when opponents in Parliament
failed to gather the votes needed to pass a crucial vote of no confidence. 9

MEXICAN PRESIDENT UNDER FIRE
News Analysis: After months of crisis, President Ernesto Zedillo has
acknowledged mistakes and is trying to get his administration off to a new
start. 6

SOUTH AFRICAN CHIEFS RESIST
In many parts of rural South Africa, plans by the Government of President Nelson
Mandela to take over financing of traditional chiefs are seen as an affront. 8

BRITAIN'S TORIES AND EUROPE
The British Conservative Party's leadership election on Tuesday will influence
which direction the party takes -- toward or away from further integration into
Europe. 8

HEAT WAVE IN IRELAND
The Irish, who live in one of the rainiest countries in Europe, have been
enjoying, and suffering, the biggest heat wave to descend on the island in
years. 4

ISRAEL AND THE P.L.O. MEET
Israel and the P.L.O. struggled to reach an agreement on expanded Palestinian
self-rule, but seemed unable to settle all their differences to meet a July 1
target. 10

National 16-24

HEALTH PLANS IN TROUBLE
Ambitious plans to extend health insurance to more people have died or stalled
as the states turn their attention to cutting budget deficits. Meanwhile, the
number of uninsured people is growing fast.  1

COMFORT WITHOUT THE CREATURES
Recreational vehicles, bearing all the amenities of home, are changing the
nature of campgrounds and even national parks.  1

COMING OUT ON LINE
A growing number of gay teen-agers are using the Internet and other computer
networks to declare their homosexuality, ask questions and seek support.  1

UNWELCOME GUESTS
The plans of a free-spirited group to hold a gathering in New Mexico has angered
local residents.  16

TRADER WHO LOST COLLEGE FUNDS
The Common Fund, which suffered a loss of $128 million on investments, said that
a 39-year-old trader who has worked at First Capital Strategists for 12 years
caused the deficit. College and university endowments could suffer.  20

LIFE AFTER THE BOMB
It may be years or even decades before people in Oklahoma City can say that
things have returned to normal. But two months after the bombing there, the city
is trying to get back to work.  18

CUTTING TAXES ON FAITH
The tax cut promised by the Republicans would remain in place even if Congress
reneged on its promise to balance the budget.  22

ABORTION FOES GATHER
Abortion opponents at a convention of the National Right to Life Committee said
the political climate was shifting in their favor.  22

Metropolitan 25-31

DRUGS BEHIND BARS
Drugs are seeping, and in some cases flowing, into the nation's prisons as the
war on drugs has packed them with drug dealers and drug users. 1

UNCERTAIN SAVINGS
In announcing that labor leaders had agreed on $600 million in contract
concessions, Mayor Giuliani secured a large part of the cash he needed to
balance New York City's budget -- at least on paper.  1

A MILDER NEW YORK
The New York City news media, usually packed with chilling accounts of urban
mayhem, have been presenting a mellower portrait of city crime lately. Some
reporters say it's the Mayor's doing. 25

THE MAFIA AND THE MOLE
Thirteen years ago, the careers of R. Lindley DeVecchio, an F.B.I. agent, and
Gregory Scarpa, a Mafia gangster, became secretly entwined. Mr. Scarpa was a
prized mole for the bureau; Mr. DeVecchio was his handler. But the relationship
backfired. 25

Fresh Air Fund 31

Obituaries 32

Wolfman Jack, raspy voice of radio.

LOAD-DATE: July 2, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                               8 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   July 2, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

A Day in the Life of Central Park

BYLINE: By BRUCE WEBER

SECTION: Section 13;  Page 1;  Column 1;  The City Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 3139 words


JUNE 17 was the first Saturday of city summer, a week early by the calendar, but
tell that to the weather -- warm and close, a blue sky going pale by late
afternoon -- and its concomitant siren song to human nature, making people antsy
and irresistibly beckoning them outdoors in loose (or little) clothing. It is on
days like this, paradoxically, that Manhattan streets seem less congested than
usual, and that the city itself has an empty, or at least a manageable feel.

Of course, the summer-house season has kicked in, and the weekend hordes have
left their normally swarming thoroughfares to tourist buses and their sidewalks
to people in brand new Big Apple T-shirts craning their necks at the skyline.

But there is another factor, a kind of mass reshuffling of the populace that the
exigencies of the weekend, and the weather, require. God knows how he knew it,
but the need for a mid-city recreational escape was exactly what Frederick Law
Olmsted, who designed Central Park (with Calvert Vaux) and was its first
superintendent, envisioned.

"The time will come when New York will be built up," Olmsted wrote in his
winning 1858 design proposal. "There will be no suggestion left of its present
varied surface with the single exception of the few acres contained in the Park.
Then the priceless value of the present picturesque outlines of the ground will
be more distinctly perceived."

No one who has been to New York in the last half-century could doubt Olmsted's
perspicacity -- certainly, no one who was in the park on June 17. It was a
representative day in New York: a day when the city, with leisure on its mind
instead of work, simply relocates, and Central Park, as public as an ocean,
becomes, in effect, the city's rumpus room, where collectively its citizens
perform most physical activities the world has yet imagined (and many
contemplative ones as well).

Though at 843 acres, Central Park is nowhere near the most capacious outdoor
space in New York City -- that distinction belongs to Pelham Bay Park in the
north Bronx -- it is far and away the best used. On an optimum weekend day, like
June 17, the park attracts 200,000 to 250,000 people, according to Jack T. Linn,
the city's deputy parks commissioner, which makes it more densely populated than
Bombay.

Of course, not everyone was there at the same time, but the shape of Central
Park's activity over the course of a day, as observed by a team of reporters and
photographers for The New York Times from dawn until the park's official closing
at 1 A.M., was much the same shape as that of a city unto itself. There was a
groggy wakening, a flurry of morning activity, a lassitude at noon, a
kaleidoscopic frenzy in the late afternoon, a gradual relaxation into evening
and, in the end, a descent into an eerie night.

Frederick Olmsted died in 1903, and there was much he did not foresee: in-line
skating, wine coolers, stereo headphones, hacky-sack, ultimate frisbee, frozen
lemonade or an animated cartoon showing on four huge screens, and who knows what
he would have thought of them. He probably did worry about cars. Four years
before he died, the first automobile ventured into Central Park, illegally. But
by 1906 the parade of cars had legally begun, and people were already
complaining about the traffic. It took 60 years to get the automobiles out
again, at least on weekends, restoring a measure of simplicity and serenity to a
place that Olmsted conceived as a refuge for the "tired workers" with no other
place to go for a respite in Arcadia.

The most significant time for a park, Olmsted once said, "is at that season of
the year when the fewest visitors come to it in carriages, when all citizens who
can have gone to the country."

5:40 A.M.  To enter the park at this hour is to be wary of disturbing things.
Daylight has not yet woken the homeless. Just outside the entrance at 96th
Street and Central Park West, an old man sleeps sitting upright on a bench, his
hands in the pockets of his dirty gray coat. Inside the gate, a younger man
wearing a baseball cap is curled in a fetal position on the grass beneath a
rocky crag. Squirrels leap over him.

6:15 A.M On East Drive, just north of the 79th Street Transverse, bicycle racers
are queueing up to register for the weekly competitive sprint, sponsored by the
Century Racing Club, around the park's 6.2-mile inner circumference.
Futuristically helmeted, clad in aerodynamic spandex, they're a focused bunch
who appreciate the park and the hour for accommodating their furious pedaling.
"It's a good road course, a clear road most of the time," says Jim Boyd, the
club's president. "And it's not the roller rink it can become."

7:30 A.M.  Crews from the West 79th Street maintenance depot head out to the
Great Lawn in water trucks and long-bed pickups, part of the huge re-seeding and
refuse collection that followed the premiere of Disney's "Pocahontas" on June
10.

Nelson Nicholas, the principal park supervisor, who runs the clean-up operation,
often from a golf cart, says the experience each morning is like "coming home to
a house after a party and evaluating the damage."

For maintenance purposes, the park is divided into 49 zones, with at least one
worker responsible for each. Ordinarily, Mr. Nicholas says, cleanup crews report
daily at 7 A.M. and on a good day are finished in about four hours. But whatever
victory the crews claim is always pyrrhic. "By the time we get it clean," he
says, "it's starting to get dirty again."

9 A.M.  The Rubies, one of four all-girl teams in the Catholic Youth
Organization's Manhattan Youth Baseball League, arrive in the park's North
Meadow for their game against the Diamonds. The players, ages 8 to 10, gather
around their coach, Tom Hock, who reminds them to drink plenty of liquids
because it's such a hot day.

Then, with cries of "Remember, we're the Rubies!" they take the field, hoping to
improve on their 4-2-2 record. "We'll never lose again!" declares Danielle
Bolling, 9, the team's best hitter. Alas, she is wrong. The Diamonds prevail,
10-0.

10 A.M.  The first model yacht race of the day gets under way on the
Conservatory Water, better known as the boat pond, on the east side of the park
at 74th Street. Eleven men, members of the 75-year-old Central Park Model Yacht
Club, stand on the edge, holding transmitters that control their boats, which
are painted a variety of exquisite colors and range in value from $200 to
$3,500. The competition conforms to actual yacht racing rules, and indeed, the
captains, most of whom have sailed the open seas in somewhat larger vessels, are
as intent as they might be at the helm of a 40-foot sloop.

"I can tell you that compared to a real boat, it's much easier to throw this one
in the water," says Michael Gianturco, whose 17-year-old son, Alexander, is
racing "Viper."

Meanwhile, 10 blocks south, Gus is eating breakfast in relative peace before the
crowds begin to arrive at 10:30. Today's menu: live trout.

Gus is the anxiety-ridden polar bear for whom the Central Park zoo (officially
the Wildlife Center) hired a therapist (officially an animal behaviorist) last
summer to to cope with his compulsive swimming.

"He's much better now," says Roy Riffe, the senior keeper, dumping two buckets
of wriggling fish into the polar bear pool for Gus and two compatriots. Gus
pursues the fish, awkwardly at first, performing an ursine breast stroke.
Suddenly, he opens his jaw and closes it, decapitating an unlucky trout, pinning
it against the glass with his paws and chewing away at its middle.  "Looks like
he's filleting it now," says Tony Brownie, a zoo keeper.

11 A.M.  Carlos Jones, a 16-year-old high school student with a sweet, arcing
jump shot but slow feet, is fighting for respect on the only basketball courts
in Central Park, at the North Meadow Recreation Center just above the 97th
Street Transverse. He's in the middle of a tight game, the sun is high; the
temperature, and tempers, are rising.

Carlos has sunk a few, so the defense is playing him tighter; taking advantage,
Carlos maneuvers around his man for a drive to the hoop. As he lays the ball up,
his shot is blocked, hard, by the opposing center, a much bigger guy, and Carlos
hits the hot tar.

"That's all right, that's all right," he says, getting up, bobbing his head,
straightening his glasses. "It's just ball." On the very next play, a teammate
feeds him and he drains a long jumper, smiling.

11:15 A.M.  Just east of Belvedere Castle, a volunteer group working under the
auspices of the Central Park Conservancy is weeding with enthusiasm. The
Conservancy, a 15-year-old private foundation that shares the operation of the
park with the city, is now two-thirds through a three-year campaign to raise
$71.5 million. The money is being used to restore and revamp much of the park's
west side, including the nearby Great Lawn, which is to have its ballfields
re-aligned and its drainage system replaced (and, through re-seeding, its lawn
returned to greatness) beginning in the fall.

As a a bunch (a clump?), the weeders clearly have the Olmsted spirit. "It's a
chance to be an urban gardener," says Kathleen Brady, a writer, pulling up a
handful of mustard garlic. "It's the stuff we'd do if we had country homes."

NOON There's a waiting line at Claremont Stables on West 89th Street, where it
costs $33 an hour to rent a horse for a clip-clop along the park's 4.5 miles of
bridle paths. On a busy Saturday like this, the animals are booked solid,
particularly the customers' favorites, who, to judge by the requests of the
impatient people waiting, are Birch Bark and Scirocco. "I stopped therapy so I
could go riding in the park," says Cecelia Marcus, a lawyer in full riding
regalia.

12:30 P.M.  George C. Wolfe, producer of the New York Shakespeare Festival,
takes the stage at the Delacorte Theater to begin rehearsal of the Festival's
first summer production, "The Tempest," which he is directing. Today is the
first time the actors are in costume, on a near 90-degree afternoon.

Mr. Wolfe, dressed in a white tank top, shorts and a Yankees cap which he later
replaces with a straw fedora, is best known for having directed "Jelly's Last
Jam" and "Angels in America" on Broadway. This is his first experience at the
Delacorte. "I am," he says, "a park virgin."

The heat is brutal, and after a time, Mr. Wolfe turns his attention to two women
and a man portraying the goddesses Juno, Ceres and Iris, who are wearing hoop
skirts and standing on stilts. "How are you guys on the sticks doing?" he asks.

"Hanging in there," says Midori Nakamura, a.k.a. Iris.

12:45 P.M.  Isadore Block washes his black T-shirt in a fountain on the Literary
Walk, then wheels his shopping cart to the foot of the statue of Sir Walter
Scott.

Mr. Block, 74, who prefers the name Poet O, lives in a single room in a senior
center in Times Square, but he is in the park almost every day. "It's not
because I love it; it's because I have a mental need," he says. "It's a kind of
therapy for my brain, which is not all there in my old age."

The park provides his income as well, he says. At his side he keeps a small
bell, inviting passersby to ring it for good luck in exchange for a small
donation. Reaching into his bag, he pulls out a copy of one of his poems, which
reads in part:

We gaze back at nature's delight,

Thus springtime is our time

To permeate our parks

And talk to the trees

As the sun glitters through those leafy leaves.

Isn't it wonderful?
2:15 P.M.  The Mississippi Society's 16th annual picnic is under way on the East
Meadow north of 97th Street. Under white and yellow canopies, an electric band
plays a mixture of zydeco and country rock, and people line up for fried catfish
and hush puppies.

The city's parks commissioner, Henry L. Stern, welcomes the actual and
expatriate Mississippians before leaving for appointments unrevealed. First,
though, he stops at what he calls his favorite place in the park: a tiny,
secluded glen beneath Huddlestone Bridge, behind the Lasker Rink and Pool. It is
an idyllic spot: a small waterfall emptying into a rocky pool, a footpath along
a stream, towering trees, dappled light. It's cooler here than elsewhere in the
park, and there are no city sounds, just the seemingly out-of-place babble of
water coursing through the woods.

"It is," Mr. Stern says, "as close as you can get to a Manhattan forest."

Maybe 50 yards up the path, Alex Rios, 10, is fishing with a wobbly pole and
what looks like a paper clip for a hook. There's no bait, but as the
Commissioner watches, Alex pulls a crayfish from the stream bed. "Interesting,"
Mr. Stern says. "Crayfish. And just half a mile from the Mississippi picnic."

4:45 P.M.  The height of the day, and the Sheep Meadow and its surroundings are
in full chaotic bloom. Sunbathers are sprawled on the vast lawn in sometimes
startling stages of undress. In-line skaters are performing acrobatics on the
hill in front of Tavern on the Green, wig-wagging, on one skate or two, in and
out of the line of markers set up on the roadway. A theater troupe, the
Shakespeare Project, is performing "Taming of the Shrew" on a hillock
overlooking the meadow. (Conversation overheard between two female passers-by: "
'Taming of the Shrew?' Can I be the shrew?" "You are the shrew.")

And on the croquet courts, on the north boundary of the meadow that pretends to
silence in the midst of the mayhem, the New York State Croquet championships are
drawing to a close.

The players, in discreet white and rubber-soled shoes, wield their mallets and
walk with purposeful air around the lawn, whacking balls occasionally in what,
to an outsider, seems an utterly random enterprise.

"This is called six-wicket croquet," explains Chessye Crosby, adding that there
are four balls on the court because it is a doubles match. Ms. Crosby, who will
be 70 next month, took up croquet in 1988; hers is not a top-flight match. "I'm
not one of the better players," she says, as an opponent re-routes her ball.
"I'm happy to tell you I've won three matches today, but I'm playing like a
fishwife right now."

Ms. Crosby excuses herself; it's her turn. But suddenly there's action
elsewhere.

A fight has broken out on the Sheep Meadow; two boys in their early teens are
flailing at each other. Their friends have gathered around, jeering madly and
threatening one another profanely. They've thrown down their bikes.

The fight, which is either about a bicycle or a girl, doesn't last long. Jack
Linn, a deputy parks commissioner who is watching the croquet match, breaks it
up. He is helped by a man wearing a blue bandanna and a black T-shirt that says,
"One more cold New Yorker."

The man, who says he is 42 and lives near the park but will not give his name
because he says he works for the government, is a self-appointed park monitor.
"It was a mild dispute among friends," he says, dispersing the crowd. "It's over
now. That was another day. It happened in another life."

5:15 P.M.  On a ramp leading down to the Wollman Skating Rink, Yolanda Cortez,
just back from an extended stay in Italy, is walking with several relatives when
she is run over by an in-line skater; her ankle is broken.

Four years ago, a skater collided with a bus and the Conservancy instituted a
15-mile-per-hour speed limit, but few obey it; there are still about 200 serious
skating accidents a year in the park.

As it happens, Ms. Cortez, who is in her 30's, is the victim more of bad luck
than recklessness. The man who hit her, Damon Johnson, a 28-year-old stockbroker
who lives in Brooklyn, was unfamiliar with the area where he was skating, turned
a corner and plummeted down a ramp he didn't know was there.

As the Emergency Medical Service ambulance arrives, Ms. Cortez smiles at Mr.
Johnson and flashes him a peace sign.

"The young man was very responsible, very honorable," says her uncle, Joe Just.
Turning to Mr. Johnson, he says, "If it had to be anybody that hit her, I'm glad
it was you."

8:45 P.M.  In a hansom cab on the east side of the park, Jason Oshins, a
30-year-old lawyer, gets down on one knee and proposes to Alice Hurwit, a
28-year-old television producer.

"Will you do me the honor of being my wife?" he says.

She sobs, kisses him.

"I think I eventually said yes," she recalls a few minutes later, holding a pink
and red rose and wearing a pear-shaped diamond on her finger.

"It's the quintessential dream in the city to be in a horse-drawn carriage," Mr.
Oshin says. "It's so romantic, and it's something you normally you never do. I
always wanted to propose this way."

9 P.M.  Nightfall. Activity in the park recedes. The serious barbecuers along
Central Park North have finished packing up their long tables and are on the way
home. Tourists fill Tavern on the Green and the Boathouse Cafe on the east.
Around Bethesda Fountain, John Edmark lights candles, 48 of them. He sets each
in a plastic cup of water and places the cups around the fountain at equally
spaced intervals. Lovely.

Bethesda Fountain is one of the park's great symbols. Commissioned in 1863 as a
memorial to Union seamen in the Civil War, it was the first public sculpture in
New York City to be done by a woman, Emma Stebbins. In the 1960's the square
around the fountain was a gathering place for the pot-smoking anti-Vietnam crowd
known as flower children. And in Tony Kushner's epic play, "Angels in America,"
it is where the AIDS-afflicted hero, Prior Walter, gives a final benediction to
the audience, to humanity.

So what is Mr. Edmark's purpose?  "I have no reason," he says. "My fantasy is:
on summer solstice everyone brings a candle into the park and the whole park
lights up. But I don't think it will happen, so once a year I do this."

MIDNIGHT The Park is empty enough that individual sounds are carried clearly on
the cool night wind. "The Tempest" is still in rehearsals at the Delacorte,
dramatic bellows issuing out over the Great Lawn. Somewhere on the woods below
the 86th Street Transverse, teen-agers are walking with a boom box.  On East
Drive, the whirring of a single pair of skates on the pavement sounds like a
small aircraft coming in for a landing.

In the guardhouse on the south end of the Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis Reservoir,
the security guard is passing time watching television, ambling outside for a
chat. He won't give his name, but says he's worked the lobster shift there for a
year. It's almost always uneventful, he says; the only time he called the police
was when someone tossed a dead dog over the fence and into the water.

What will he do for the rest of the night? Not much, he says, though he looks
forward to dawn. "I watch the sun come up," he says. "Now that's peaceful."

LOAD-DATE: July 2, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: July 9, 1995, Sunday

CORRECTION:

A picture caption last Sunday with an article about a day in the life of Central
Park misidentified the body of water photographed at dawn. It was the Lake, not
the Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis Reservoir.


GRAPHIC: Photos: MORNING: As dawn breaks over the Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis
Reservoir (top), a lone cyclist (left) enjoys the solitude. A few hours later,
Anwar Hooks lands a fish in Harlem Meer and presents it to his sister, Tiffany.;
MIDDAY: Gus (above, left), the zoo's anxiety-ridden polar bear, chows down on a
trout. Moving to that Mississippi beat (above). Germano Coker (above, right)
serenades passers-by with Mozart's Concerto No. 4. "I make enough to keep my day
and my belly full," he says. Near Poet's Walk, Javone Holmes (left, foreground)
leads a class in the Chinese martial art of wushu. There are no mountains in
Central Park, but youngsters learn climbing at the North Meadow Recreation
Center.; EVENING: Near the zoo, just before twilight, artists capture the faces
of young and old alike. And after darkness has descended, a hansom carriage
(bottom) makes a solitary journey along East Drive. (Thomas Dallal for The New
York Times; Rachel Cobb for The New York Times; Carol Halebian for The New York
Times; Andrea Mohin/The New York Times; Monica Almeida/The New York Times; Steve
Berman for The New York Times) (pgs. 8 & 9)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                               9 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   July 2, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

You Can Go Home Again. And Again

BYLINE: By Tom Shone;   Tom Shone is the film critic of The Sunday Times of
London.

SECTION: Section 7;  Page 7;  Column 1;  Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1056 words



BEACH MUSIC
By Pat Conroy.
628 pp. New York:
Nan A. Talese/
Doubleday. $27.50.


AT the beginning of Pat Conroy's new novel, its narrator and hero, Jack McCall,
is living in Rome, trying to put his wife's suicide behind him -- along with the
rest of his troubled family history. It's an unlikely project. A Pat Conroy
character who succeeded in putting his troubled family history behind him would
last about as long as a Judith Krantz character who decided to cut back on
lipstick. And sure enough, when news of Jack's mother's impending death reaches
him, he returns to his native South Carolina, where, he tells us, "I found
myself fully in love with my own story all over again."

Nice as it is to encounter such self-confidence in a narrator, your pleasure may
pall when you hear Jack's idea of a story. "Stories don't have to be true," he
tells his young daughter, Leah. "They just have to help." It's the old Conroy
credo: the novel as therapy, populated with characters who don't so much
excavate their tortured past as explore it, re-explore it, map it out and then
distribute tourist brochures. "Beach Music" whips by all the familiar landmarks
of Mr. Conroy's family life, already fictionalized in novels like "The Great
Santini" and "The Prince of Tides." There's Jack's nouveau-riche mother. There's
his abusive, alcoholic father, afloat on the "interior seas" of his addiction.
Then there are his four brothers, including the schizophrenic John Hardin,
nursing his "deep uncharted canyons."

That's nothing. Jack has whole acres of ache unto himself. There's his Glacier
of Tears ("My own tears seemed landlocked and frozen in a glacier I could not
reach or touch within me") and, just past that, his Grottoes of Fear ("those
grottoes where I tended my own fear of my mother's illness"). There's also a
"deep sourceless river" of love in there somewhere, and even a few "pipes and
jets" of something or other. I couldn't quite place these, but they may well be
the pipes and jets that connect up to the Floodgates of Recall. "I felt the
floodgates of recall open up in a ceaseless flow."

Reading that, you suspect you're in for one helluva flood, and, sure enough,
"Beach Music" proves as wet and woozy as its title. It begins with a burst of
action -- there's a conspiracy afoot, a priest in hiding, a terrorist explosion
-- but once Jack hits his mother's hospital room in South Carolina, the novel
slows down for what is essentially a 500-page deathwatch, with frequent
interludes of reminiscence from any character who feels like chipping in and
helping out with the plot. We get to hear of Jack's best friend Jordan's
experiences protesting the war in Vietnam and another friend's grandfather's
account of the Russian Revolution, as well as Jack's mother-in-law's story of
how she survived the Holocaust -- and, for good measure, his father-in-law's
Holocaust story too.

MR. CONROY'S historical scene setting is pretty thin stuff ("the cleaver slashed
through the Ukrainian darkness one more time"), but then he isn't as much
interested in verisimilitude as he is in arrogating the moral authority these
stories confer on their teller. "Do I sound sincere enough?" asks one survivor
of the death camps, and the wretchedness of the question cuts to the very heart
of the novel.

"Beach Music" heaves with self-conscious sincerity, its characters positively
leapfrogging over one another in their race for the psychiatrist's couch. By the
end of the book, a rough count of the trauma score is as follows: Those whose
mothers have committed suicide, 4. Endured alcoholic and/or abusive fathers, 8.
Saw their parents killed, 4. Were themselves subsequently raped, 2. Went into a
coma as adults, 2. Tolstoy said that every unhappy family is unhappy in its own
way, but he never read Pat Conroy's fiction.

This is by far Mr. Conroy's most ambitious novel, but there is little to it
besides ambition. "Hey, a lot of telescoping. Lot of voice-over. We hit the high
points and cover the century," says another of Jack's friends, Mike, who, in the
book's subplot, is producing a mini-series about the events described in the
novel. "Our stories will form some kind of truth that none of us at this moment
grasps," he says, optimistically. "All of our voices will form one story line."
There's no mistaking the tone of nervous reassurance there: Mr. Conroy's plot
must be in a pretty sorry state if it needs a subplot congratulating him on what
a great film it'll make.

What all this has to do with the novel's narrator, aside from sustaining Mr.
Conroy's sense of his own sensitivity, is unclear. Jack's soul seems to have
been mysteriously on hand to suffer the psychological bruises of almost every
historical tragedy of the century: "Beach Music" is "Forrest Gump" in analysis.
"Hello Vietnam," says Jack to himself. "Time for us to make friends." And so it
goes, on and on.

Jack McCall has got to be the most monstrously smug creation since Robert
Kincaid in "The Bridges of Madison County." "I cooked fabulous meals for those
who came to comfort me," he modestly confides after his wife's suicide. At the
very end of the novel, his mother is finally about to die and he's at it again.
"In the week that followed I cooked fabulous meals for anyone who came to the
house to say goodbye to my mother." The prose in between these two fabulous
meals isn't anywhere near as easy to digest:

"Taking out 'Look Homeward Angel,' I read the magnificent first page and
remembered when I had been a 16-year-old boy and those same words had set me
ablaze with the sheer inhuman beauty of the language as a cry for mercy,
incantation, and a great river roaring through the darkness." Just listen to the
pounding taken by those prepositions. Almost every page of this book boasts a
similar sentence, blundering on through a thick impasto of self-consciously
lyrical effects, mixed metaphors, mid-sentence tense switches and object-subject
reversals: "Sleep felt like a black hole where all time fell in an endless
cascade that began with lost words at the touch of Leah's hand against mine and
ended in a sleep too soon in the coming."

So: the process of going to sleep felt like it ended in sleep. Mr. Conroy's
characters may have trouble forgetting their past, but his sentences seem to
have no such problem.

LOAD-DATE: July 2, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              10 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 4, 1995, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Paul Nguyen Van Binh, 84, Catholic Archbishop in Vietnam

BYLINE: By ERIC PACE

SECTION: Section 1;   Page 10;   Column 4;   Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 434 words


Archbishop Paul Nguyen Van Binh, who led the Archdiocese of Ho Chi Minh City,
formerly Saigon, for 35 years, died on Saturday. He was 84.

Official Vietnamese newspapers, according to The Associated Press, did not say
where he died. His health had been poor for some years, but he remained the
spiritual leader of Vietnam's largest Catholic community.

In 1977, the Archbishop, addressing the Synod of Catholic Bishops in Rome, made
it clear that he and other Vietnamese bishops had chosen to work as best they
could within their country's political system.

It was reported at the time that this attitude had the approval of the Pope at
that time, Paul VI, but that it was opposed by more conservative members of the
church hierarchy.

The Archbishop also told the Synod in 1977 that new priests in Vietnam must find
a way to speak in a new language that would be understood by congregations
steeped in Communist concepts.

And he said the Christians of Vietnam had to present "a new face, the authentic
face of Christ and of the church," because, as he put it, the church was being
accused of having been "in collusion with imperialism" in the past.

Earlier, in May 1975, after Saigon fell to the Vietnamese Communists, the
Archbishop called on Vietnamese Catholics to put forth "maximum efforts to
rebuild the nation and contribute to national reconciliation and concord."

In recent years, the question of who should assist and succeed him has generated
disagreement between the Vatican and the Vietnamese Government, which takes the
position that it must approve all important religious appointments, although it
is officially atheist.

According to official Vietnamese statistics, more than 6 million of the
country's more than 70 million people are Roman Catholics. The great majority of
the populace is Buddhist.

In April of this year, The Associated Press reported, a visiting Vatican envoy,
Msgr. Claudio Celli, proposed a candidate to succeed the Archbishop, but he left
Vietnam without having secured the Vietnamese Government's approval.

The reasons for that disagreement have not been disclosed, but the agency has
said that earlier the Vietnamese Government had thwarted the Vatican's desire to
have the Archbishop replaced by Msgr.  Nguyen Van Thuan, nephew of Ngo Dinh
Diem, who was an archfoe of Vietnamese Communists as President of South Vietnam
until 1963.

Nguyen Van Binh was born in Saigon, studied for the priesthood in Rome, was
ordained in 1937, served in various locations in Vietnam and was Bishop of Can
Tho before becoming Saigon's Archbishop in 1960.


NAME: Paul Nguyen Van Binh

LOAD-DATE: July 4, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Paul Nguyen Van Binh. (Associated Press, 1964)

TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              11 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 4, 1995, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

BOOKS OF THE TIMES;
Fixing America, Step by Step, No Grays Allowed

BYLINE: By MICHIKO KAKUTANI

SECTION: Section 1;   Page 27;   Column 1;   Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1138 words



TO RENEW AMERICA
 By Newt Gingrich
 260 pages. HarperCollins. $24.

Several Newt Gingriches are on display in his new book, "To Renew America."
There's the Speaker of the House, trying hard to sound statesmanlike as he
articulates his vision of America. There's the Republican "bomb thrower," as he
was often called during his days as the House minority whip, slipping in mean
little asides about Democrats and liberals. And there's the "happy 4-year-old
who gets up every morning hoping to find a cookie that friends or relatives may
have left for me somewhere."

The Speaker talks solemnly about history and civilization and renewal. The
partisan rails angrily against gun control, the welfare state and 1960's
radicals. And the 4-year-old rhapsodizes gleefully about the technological
marvels of the future: the possibility of a real, live Jurassic Park, and
honeymoon trips to outer space. ("Imagine weightlessness and its effects, and
you will understand some of the attractions," he exults.)

Together, these three Gingriches have produced a glib self-help manual for
America and Americans, a book (assembled with the help of the writer Bill
Tucker) that draws heavily on the Speaker's speeches, campaign riffs and a
history class he has been teaching for five years at small Reinhardt College in
Georgia. "To Renew America" doesn't just tell us what's wrong with this country;
it purports to tell us what we can do about fixing it step by step.

Like the much ballyhooed Contract With America, which lays out 10 major
Republican proposals, "To Renew America" is structured as a series of talking
points: easy-to-follow recipes for analyzing our problems and trying to cure
them.

The book as a whole focuses on the "six major changes" Mr. Gingrich believes
"are necessary to leave our children with an America that is prosperous, free
and safe." He goes on to discuss the "five basic principles" that form the heart
of our civilization, the "eight major changes" required to replace "the welfare
state with an opportunity society," the five forces "moving us toward becoming
the great, prosperous center of worldwide medicine," "three essential reasons to
balance the Federal budget" and a "seven-step program" that would "radically
reduce violence and drug dependency in America."

The problem with this schematic approach is that it allows the author to bounce
self-indulgently from topic to topic, reducing enormously complex problems to a
kind of highlight reel shot in stark blacks and whites. There are few subtleties
in the world that Mr. Gingrich depicts in these pages: like the Nazi-menaced
realm he delineates with such gusto in his new novel ("1945," written with
William R. Forstchen and published by Baen Books), it is a place where the
principles of good and evil, all-or-nothing prevail.

"To Renew America" begins with an observation borrowed from Charles Dickens,
"These are the best of times and the worst of times," and it ends with the
warning that America must choose whether "to renew or to decay." Mr. Gingrich
also makes the grandiose assertion that "unless we accept our role as world
leader, our planet will eventually be a dark and bloody place."

"The choice between these two futures is stark and decisive," he writes
portentously. "Either we will pull ourselves together for the effort or we will
continue to decay. There is virtually no middle ground."

The flip side to these gloomy prognostications is Mr. Gingrich's chirpy
optimism, optimism embodied in his Toffleresque vision of the future as a brave
new technological paradise in which "diagnostic chairs" will perform medical
diagnoses from home, and computer software will enable people to write their own
legal documents without a lawyer.

Mr. Gingrich's Pollyannaish optimism, however, is not confined to technology. If
we just put our minds to it, he suggests, we can do anything we want: all it
takes is a little positive thinking.

On the budget: "Actually, balancing the budget is a pretty straightforward
process. Once we set our minds to the task, it should not be all that
difficult."

On job creation: "Anyone with a little money, some free time and a willingness
to learn marketing can make money."

On illegal immigration: "If we work at it, we can dry up 95 percent of illegal
immigration within two or three years."

On America's problems in general: "I am convinced that if each of us does a
little bit, we can remake the world."

Such Norman Vincent Peale-esque homilies, which pepper the text of "To Renew
America," trivialize the genuinely important points the Speaker wants to make
about the Federal deficit, welfare and Government bureaucracy. In fact, Mr.
Gingrich's arguments in this volume are consistently undermined by his fast and
sloppy methodology: his penchant for citing highly anecdotal evidence to make
his case (if Bill Gates, the founder of Microsoft, succeeded without finishing
college, then why can't more children get ahead without relying on the school
system?); his tendency to ignore inconvenient facts (like failing to cite
interstate transportation of guns, when noting that Washington, D.C., has
stringent gun control laws but still suffers from a high crime rate), and his
quickness to overgeneralize ("Most tenured positions in higher education are now
held by passionate advocates of the anti-Vietnam War movement").

Just as debilitating is the Speaker's willingness to substitute easy sentiment
and nostalgia for rigorous analysis. Indeed, many of the suggestions in "To
Renew America" recall Mr. Gingrich's famous remarks about orphanages and the
movie "Boys Town." In discussing the need to communicate values to children, he
suggests the reader simply "get the Boy Scout or Girl Scout handbook. Or go and
look at 'Reader's Digest' and 'The Saturday Evening Post' from around 1955." He
invokes "the America of the wagon train, the barn raising, the flag raising on
Mount Suribachi, the Apollo trip to the moon," and even tries to lump the
Pilgrims, Tocqueville's "Democracy in America" and Norman Rockwell's paintings
of the 1940's and 50's together in a single sentence attesting to his belief in
what it means to be an American.

And what of Mr. Gingrich's portrait of himself in "To Renew America"? He talks
about his boyhood dream of becoming a zoo director or a vertebrate
paleontologist, and the impact that visiting the battlefield of Verdun had on
him as a teen-ager. He also points out that two of the formative influences on
his thinking were Arnold Toynbee's "Study of History" and Isaac Asimov's science
fiction epic, the Foundation trilogy, choices that underscore his tendency in
this glib, superficial volume to dwell on a romanticized past and an imaginary
future in his attempts to grapple with the problems of America in the present.


LOAD-DATE: July 4, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Newt Gingrich. (Stephen Crowley/The New York Times)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              12 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 5, 1995, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 958 words



International A2-8

TORIES VOTE TO KEEP MAJOR
John Major was easily re-elected as leader of the ruling Conservative Party,
insuring his survival as Prime Minister of Britain but not gaining the decisive
triumph that would have stamped his authority on a fractious party. A1

CHINA'S SHADOW OVER HONG KONG
Signs of Britain's waning presence are becoming more apparent in Hong Kong, as
is the looming shadow of China, which is take over the colony in June 1997. Some
say Hong Kong has long since ceased to be independent from China. A1


MILITANTS CLAIM EGYPT ATTACK
A Muslim militant group fighting to oust the Egyptian Government took
responsibility for an attempted assassination of President Hosni Mubarak. A3

P.L.O. AND ISRAEL REACH ACCORD
After months of failure and frustration, Israel and the P.L.O. outlined an
agreement on Israeli Army withdrawals in the West Bank that set the stage for
Palestinian elections and expanded self-rule. A3

IRISH DEBATE CAUSE OF VIOLENCE
 Violence resumed in Belfast and other parts of Northern Ireland amid debate on
who was responsible for the first sustained disorder since the I.R.A. cease-fire
began 10 months ago. A8

TROOPS TO BE KEPT IN CHECHNYA
In what served as a rebuke to the Chechen president's renewed demand for
independence, President Yeltsin issued a decree ordering Russian troops to be
permanently stationed in Chechnya. A8

Four incidents involving mysterious fumes trouble Tokyo. A4

Hanoi Journal: The Fourth of July in Vietnam. A4

National A10-19

REVERSING COURSE ON MILITARY
For the first time in many years, Congress would lock in military spending at
much higher levels than even the Pentagon requested and come close to ending the
post-cold war decline in arms spending.  A1

BOMB SUSPECT'S MILIEU
The world through which Timothy J. McVeigh moved in the two years leading up to
the Oklahoma City bombing was one of white supremacist literature and gun shows.
A1

A racist writer's journey from academia to extremism.  A18

SHOW OF GRATITUDE
Oklahoma City celebrated the Fourth of July with a resounding "thank you" to
rescuers who came from around the nation to help in the bombing's aftermath.
A19

NEW ABORTION ISSUE
A new debate has flared in the long-smoldering fight over abortion, focusing on
a rarely used method to end pregnancies after more than 20 weeks of gestation.
A10

A REPLY TO THE UNABOMBER
A California professor contacted by a serial bomber says in an open letter that
he agrees with some beliefs expressed by the self-described anarchist but not
with his violent actions.  A10

PARTING COMPANY IN SPACE
Crews of the American space shuttle and the Russian space station separated
their vehicles after five days of orbiting together as the world's largest
spacecraft.  A10

DEFENDING ENVIRONMENTAL LAWS
Sensing public support for strong environmental protection, the Clinton
Administration is taking a combative stance against Congressional proposals to
weaken several major environmental laws.  A11

A REPUBLICAN FOURTH
While Americans elsewhere spent the Fourth of July in leisurely pursuits, a few
hundred conservative Republicans gathered in New Hampshire to sound out the
party's Presidential hopefuls.  A12

AIDS MONEY IS TARGET
Senator Jesse Helms wants to cut Federal money for people with AIDS because, he
says, their "deliberate, disgusting, revolting conduct" is responsible for their
having got the disease.  A12

Education D10

Metro Digest B1

JUST THE USUAL TRAFFIC JAMS
With toll collectors on strike and hundreds of thousands of motorists on the
road, chaos was widely expected on New Jersey's busiest highways, but in the end
traffic problems were no greater than on any other holiday weekend. A1

BENEFITS FOR BIG BUSINESS
At the same time that city and state governments cut sharply into spending for
schools and social services, they are providing hundreds of millions of dollars
in tax breaks and other benefits to big businesses, including some of the
nation's largest corporations. A1

Business Digest D1

Arts/Entertainment C11-20

Why CD's cost so much.  C11
Portuguese group gives the fado a new twist.  C12
Film: "Carmen Miranda." C11
Dance: Compagnie Schmid-Pernette.  C11
Books: "The Next American Nation," by Michael Lind.  C14
Television: "Time-Life's Lost Civilizations." C20
"The Wonderful, Horrible Life of Leni Riefenstahl." C20

The Living Section C1-8

The secret lives of storage bins.  C1
The power of fresh spices.  C1
Encountering a medium, and others.  C1
On the road with Mike Nelson: All roads are straight in Mexico.  C1

Health Page C9

Personal Health: An unexplained surge in brain tumors.
An expensive machine focuses gamma rays on brain tumors.

Sports B5-10

Baseball: Yanks' Rivera is superb.  B5
Mets lose fourth straight.  B7
Columns: Vescey on Wimbledon.  B5
Berkow on the Indians.  B7
Hockey: Islanders to name Milbury.  B8
Racing: Bailey rides four winners.  B9
Special Olympics: Basketball player overcomes obstacles.  B5
Sports People.  B9
Tennis: Martinez gets past Sabatini.  B5

Obituaries D9

Richard (Pancho) Gonzalez, tennis champion.
Eva Gabor, actress.

Editorials/Op-Ed A20-21

Editorials

Jockeying for block grants.
Dangerous nuclear tests.
A breach in the church-state wall.

Letters

Thomas L. Friedman: Half a loaf.
Frank Rich: The lost frontier.
Fred Graham: The ground glass of reality.
Sherwood Boehlert: Clean water -- a midstream approach.

Chronicle A19

Crossword C20

LOAD-DATE: July 5, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              13 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 5, 1995, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

THE GUN NETWORK: McVeigh's World -- A special report.;
Bomb Suspect Felt at Home Riding the Gun-Show Circuit

BYLINE: By JOHN KIFNER

SECTION: Section A;   Page 1;   Column 2;   National Desk

LENGTH: 3215 words

DATELINE: SPRINGDALE, Ark., July 1


The Mossberg shotguns, the Ruger Mini-14 semiautomatic rifles with fiberglass
folding stocks, the stubby Mac-10's, and the Beretta and Glock 9-millimeter
pistols were laid out in neat rows in the hall of the Holiday Inn here this
weekend.

There were piles of holsters, camouflage clothes, shells for reloading and, as
at gun shows around the country, a booth with the latest issue of The Spotlight,
the newspaper of the extremist anti-Semitic group Liberty Lobby -- its banner
headline warning "Clinton Plans for Mideast War" -- and stacks of defiant bumper
stickers, including one depicting a red, horned President and the words,
"Clinton is the Anti-Christ."

Timothy J. McVeigh spent most of the last two years before the bombing of the
Oklahoma City Federal Building wandering through gun shows like this across the
country, investigators and acquaintances say, his belongings in duffel bags
piled in a rattletrap car, his camouflage fatigues clean and pressed, his only
constant companion a well-thumbed copy of a venomous apocalyptic novel, "The
Turner Diaries."

"He carried that book all the time," said a gun collector who encountered Mr.
McVeigh along the circuit. "He sold it at the shows. He'd have a few copies in
the cargo pocket of his cammies. They were supposed to be $10, but he'd sell
them for $5. It was like he was looking for converts."

It is "The Turner Diaries," an underground bible and handbook for the far right
depicting a bloody race war against Jews and "other nonwhites," that provides
the clearest insight yet into the mind and world of Mr. McVeigh, who has been
charged as the prime suspect in the April 19 bombing, which killed 167 people.

Investigators speculate that Mr. McVeigh, a 27-year-old veteran of the Persian
Gulf war, had come to see himself as a soldier in his own strange war against
the United States. But, frustrated as hundreds of leads and dozens of suspects
have not panned out, they are so far finding less a conspiracy than a culture, a
milieu of militia literature, far-right computer networks and gun-toting,
tax-refusing white supremacists, among whom Mr. McVeigh could pass almost
unnoticed and, perhaps, hoped to find shelter after the bombing.

The Book
Venom, Violence And Inspiration

During his Army service at Fort Riley, Kan., from 1988 to 1991, Mr. McVeigh was
known not only as an obsessive spit-and-polish soldier who made sergeant when
the men he enlisted with were still privates, but also as a lover of guns who
kept his own arsenal of nearly a dozen weapons that he spent many of his
off-hours cleaning and firing. His fellow soldiers have described him as an avid
reader, who constantly studied Army manuals in his ambition to join the elite
Special Forces. He also subscribed to Soldier of Fortune, the magazine of
would-be mercenaries and adventurers, and gun publications. His taste in fiction
ran to a genre of paperback novels like "Death Lands," featuring survivalists
and fighters in the aftermath of World War III or a nuclear holocaust.

Among the novels, recalled Roger L. Barnett, who drove the Bradley fighting
vehicle on which Mr. McVeigh served as gunner, was "The Turner Diaries."

Written under the pseudonym Andrew Macdonald by William L. Pierce, a former
physics professor who has been a member of the American Nazi Party, the novel is
cast in the future as the newly discovered diary of one Earl Turner, a fighter
in the Organization, an underground group of militant white supremacists. After
the passage of a law called the Cohen Act makes gun ownership a crime, the
Organization rises up against "the Jewish-liberal-democratic-equalitarian
plague," slaughtering Jews and blacks wholesale to establish an all-white "New
Era" at the end of the 20th century.

Almost indescribably violent and vicious in its racial descriptions, the
narrative builds to the Day of the Rope, in which tens of thousand of whites
wearing placards reading "I defiled my race" or "I betrayed my race" are hanged
from lampposts and trees in the Organization's takeover of California. Some are
women who lived with "Jews or other nonwhite males," others are "the
politicians, the lawyers, the businessmen, the TV newscasters, the newspaper
reporters and editors, the judges, the teachers, the school officials, the
'civic leaders,' the bureaucrats, the preachers," or, simply, Jews.

Blacks are expelled to Government-held areas in hopes of hastening the
Government's collapse. People who are not sufficiently Aryan in appearance are
herded into canyons and killed.

Mr. Pierce warns in a catalogue of his National Vanguard publications that his
novel "will be too strong a dish for any reader who has not thoroughly prepared
himself for it." As preliminary readings, he recommends more than a score of
other books, including Hitler's "Mein Kampf."

"The Turner Diaries," first published in 1978, has become a kind of
inspirational classic and guide for the underground extremist right. In the
early 1980's, for example, a group called The Order consciously modeled itself
on the secret inner circle of the Organization, and new members who had not
already read the book were given copies before initiation. The Order robbed
armored cars, set up a counterfeiting ring and assassinated a Jewish radio
talk-show host in Denver, Alan Berg, before the group's leader, Robert Mathews,
died in a fire during a shootout with agents of the Federal Bureau of
Investigation on an island in Puget Sound in 1984.

"This book is a constant," said a Federal agent who has spent much of the past
decade investigating the far right. "Its everywhere you turn."

The Soldier
A Growing Anger At Government

The literature with which Mr. McVeigh seemed obsessed disturbed an old friend,
Staff Sgt. Albert Warnement, the former commander of his Bradley fighting
vehicle, when the two corresponded beginning in 1992 after Sergeant Warnement
was transferred to Germany.

"He sent me a lot of newsletters and stuff from those groups he was involved
in," said the sergeant, who, worried that the literature might get him in
trouble, threw most of it away. "There were newsletters from Bo Gritz's group,
some other odd newsletters, some from the Patriots; then he sent that videotape
'The Big Lie' about Waco.

"He seemed quite a bit different after the war than he'd been before."

Mr. McVeigh was angry, Sergeant Warnement said, not only about the deadly
Federal raid against the Branch Davidian sect near Waco, Tex., two years to the
day before the Oklahoma City bombing, but also about the involvement of an Army
unit, Joint Task Force 6, in drug enforcement along the United States-Mexico
border. Mr. McVeigh wrote, too, the sergeant said, of his anger over the
deployment of the Seventh Light Infantry during the Los Angeles riots in 1992
and United Nations command over American soldiers in Somalia.

"He thought the Federal Government was getting too much power," Sergeant
Warnement said. "He thought the A.T.F. was out of control. Then, of course, when
Waco happened, he really felt the A.T.F. was out of control." The A.T.F., or
Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms, conducted the initial raid on the
Branch Davidian headquarters in February 1993. That event led to a 51-day
standoff, which ended with the F.B.I. raid.

"He wasn't happy about Somalia, that if we could put the United States under
basically U.N. command and send them to Somalia to disarm their citizens, then
why couldn't they come do the same thing in the United States?" Sergeant
Warnement said. "It had a kind of logic to it, but it really didn't take into
account the flip side of things.

"I kind of had the feeling that he might be headed for trouble because he was
never the type of person to back down."

The sergeant, who used to go shooting with Mr. McVeigh on weekends, got the
feeling that his friend was trying to convert him, noting that after the Federal
siege against a white supremacist, Randall C. Weaver, at a remote cabin in
Idaho, Mr. McVeigh wrote, "I should get out and go up to Montana."

The period after the gulf war in 1991 was hard for Mr. McVeigh, his comrades
remembered, because he had washed out of his tryout for the Special Forces.

"Anyone who puts all that effort into something and doesn't get it would be
mentally crushed," said his barracks mate, Mr. Barnett, the Bradley driver. "He
wasn't the same McVeigh. He didn't go at things the way he normally did. It used
to be, a superior commanding soldier would tell him to do something and he'd do
it 110 percent. He didn't have the same drive. He didn't have his heart in the
military anymore."

Back at Fort Riley and before taking an "early out" from his second enlistment
at the end of 1991, Mr. McVeigh lived off base, for a while sharing a house in
Herington, Kan., with two other soldiers from his company, John Kelso and
Richard Cerney. He would spend his first free half-hour in the afternoon
spit-shining his shoes and ironing his uniform for the next day; the others
devoted the time to their first beer.

Without the authority of his stripes, it was an uneasy existence.

"Back at the house, everyone took his uniform off and now we're people," Mr.
Kelso recalled. "Me and Cerney just climbed all over him. We'd like to josh with
him. If he was in a good mood, we'd try to put him in a bad mood.

"It was so easy to put him over the edge. He was so gullible, so vulnerable. He
was so unbalanced about being tough. He was just kind of a nerd."

The Network
Shared Feelings Of Alienation

But Mr. McVeigh's growing political anger put him in the center of an alienated
current in American life, encompassing survivalist bunkers in Montana and Idaho,
Arizona "desert rats" fearful that the Government would take their guns away,
Michigan militiamen, and compounds of white supremacists and religious cultists
tucked into the remote forested mountains here in northern Arkansas and southern
Missouri.

Its avatars, in addition to Mr. Pierce, include the Rev. Richard Butler, who
heads the Aryan Nation compound near Hayden Lake, Idaho, which has been the site
of notable gatherings of white supremacists, and Louis Beam, a former Ku Klux
Klan grand dragon who advocates what he calls "leaderless resistance" to the
Federal Government.

There is a common religious thread, called Christian Identity, running through
many of the groups, including Posse Comitatus, Mr. Butler's Church of Jesus
Christ Christian, Mr. Pierce's Cosmotheist Church and the Order, according to
studies by the Anti-Defamation League of B'nai B'rith and others. Christian
Identity holds that Anglo-Saxons are God's true "chosen people," that Jews are
the spawn of Satan and that nonwhites are "mud people" on the level of animals.

"All of these groups, if you put them in a bag and shook them out, you couldn't
tell one from the other," said a Federal investigator who has long experience
with these organizations.

"It's not a conspiracy so much as a network," the investigator said. "These
people are in touch. There's now a national computer network. There are lists of
trusted members, safe houses, places where a fugitive would have a sympathetic
ear. We know this from previous cases.

"The gun-show circuit is part of this network," he added, echoing an observation
made by several other law-enforcement officials. "When they want a message
delivered across the country, they could relay it along, all by word of mouth so
there's no trace. We can't even work the gun shows anymore, because these people
are so suspicious."

The gun shows, whose schedules are advertised in gun magazines, are also part of
a mutant militaristic culture, like popular paintball games simulating combat,
that James William Gibson described in his study "Warrior Dreams" (Hill & Wang,
1994). Mr. Gibson dates the phenomenon from the American failure in Vietnam and
the founding of Soldier of Fortune magazine in 1975.

Mr. Gibson notes, along with the growth of rightist militias, a striking change
in popular culture in that time. The traditional heroic war movie, one that is
frequently mentioned in the memoirs of Vietnam veterans, centers on a disparate,
fractious group of raw recruits, whipped into shape by a tough sergeant to fight
an evil enemy in a just national cause. In the new, post-Vietnam model --
typified by the "Rambo" movies and the paperbacks favored by Mr. McVeigh -- the
hero has been betrayed and turned into a renegade by his own government.

Mr. Beam, the former Klan grand dragon, for example, served as a helicopter door
gunner in Vietnam and returned to the United States disgusted with anti-war
demonstrators, Vietnamese refugee shrimpers in Galveston Bay (against whom he
led an intimidation campaign) and the Government in general. Writing a year and
a half ago in an Illinois publication called "The War Eagle: A Voice and Forum
for Revolutionary Pan-Aryanism," he warned that traditional forms of
organization could be easily defeated by "state tyranny," and he counseled a
"leaderless resistance" of tiny, independent cells acting on their own.

"Organs of information distribution such as newspapers, leaflets, computers,
etc., which are widely available to all, keep each person informed of events,
allowing for a planned response that will take many variations," Mr. Beam wrote.
"No one need issue an order to anyone. Those idealists truly committed to the
cause of freedom will act when they feel the time is ripe, or will take their
cue from others who proceed them."

The Gun Show
Selling Weapons And Extremism

The rugged Ozark Mountains of northern Arkansas and southern Missouri are home,
state police officials and local sheriffs say, to numerous anti-government
groups and individuals, among them George Eaton of Uniontown, Ark., publisher of
the Patriot Report newsletter. The current issue of the report suggests that the
Oklahoma City bombing was a Government excuse for the "real hate groups," the
F.B.I. and A.T.F., to crack down on far-right paramilitary organizations. Copies
of the Patriot Report were found in searches of a truck belonging to Mr.
McVeigh's sister Jennifer and of the home of the second bombing suspect, Terry
L. Nichols.

Local officials in this region are bedeviled by people refusing to put license
plates on their cars or pinning on badges and serving "legal papers" from
"people's courts" on county judges. But sometimes events are more serious.

Gordon Kahl, a tax-refusing hero of the far right who had already killed two
United States marshals trying to arrest him in North Dakota, was killed in a
1983 shootout in the Ozarks, in which a sheriff was also killed. In 1985, some
200 F.B.I. agents raided the compound of a paramilitary Christian Identity group
called the Covenant, the Sword and the Arm of the Lord on the Missouri-Arkansas
border, seizing hundreds of weapons and bombs.

Col. Fred M. Mills, head of the Missouri Highway Patrol, said that in the last
decade three of his officers had been killed by extremist groups and one
wounded.

In the latest incident, Cpl. Bobbie J. Harper was in the kitchen of his home in
McDonald County, Mo., bordering Arkansas, opening a can of pineapple to top off
some birthday ice cream on the evening of Sept. 16, 1994, when a sniper shot him
in the chest, causing extensive internal damage that forced his retirement.

Three months earlier, Corporal Harper and other officers had arrested a man
named Robert N. Joos on charges of "simulating legal process" for serving
"people's court" papers. He wound up with resisting-arrest and weapons charges
as well.

Investigator Miles Parks of the highway patrol said that when he went to Mr.
Joos's remote farmhouse after the sniper incident he was greeted by a man with a
rifle who identified himself as James Wilson of Arkansas, an "ambassador" from
the Citizens for the Kingdom of Christ.

"He explained the hierarchy of his church and that they had trained assassins,"
Mr. Parks said.

Checking with Arkansas officials, Missouri officers they found that the man was
really Timothy Coombs of Witt Springs, painfully well known to the local sheriff
because he kept going on hunger strikes while in jail for refusing to recognize
the government's power to issue a driver's license. Mr. Coombs had recently
winged a neighbor's horse while shooting target practice, and the slug and shell
casings found at his house matched those from the Chinese-made SKS rifle used to
shoot Corporal Harper.

But by the time the officers learned all that, Mr. Coombs was gone, and the
police believe he simply disappeared into a network of sympathizers in the
hills.

At the gun show here in this northwestern Arkansas town, armed Christian
survivalist compounds were a major topic at the literature booth, which featured
Army manuals on survival, urban warfare, and hand-to-hand fighting, along with
"Creating Covenant Communities," instructions for those who would "reject the
mark of the beast" by the "internationally acclaimed patriot author" Robert K.
Spear. Mr. Spear, whose previous work includes "Surviving Global Slavery --
Living Under the New World Order," says he has trained 3,500 people "how to
defend themselves against knife and gun attacks."

This was the world through which Mr. McVeigh moved in the last two years,
ranging along the highways from Kingman, Ariz., where he seemed to have spent
much of his time, to gun show after gun show. Sometimes he rented a table to
sell canteens, duffel bags, military trinkets -- and "The Turner Diaries."
Sometimes he just seemed to wander through.

"He lived in his car; whatever he owned it was in that car," recalled the gun
collector, who spoke on condition of anonymity. He remembered encountering Mr.
McVeigh at a gun show in South Florida, at another in Tulsa, Okla., around the
time of the Branch Davidian siege and at the annual Soldier of Fortune
convention in Las Vegas, Nev., in September 1993.

"He drove like a wild man," the gun collector said. "He never drove under the
speed limit; he drove over it. And he always carried that big pistol."

Mr. McVeigh slept with the gun under his pillow, the collector said.

"At the S.O.F. convention he was kind of wandering around, like he was trying to
meet people, maybe make converts," the man said. "He could make 10 friends at a
show, just by his manner and demeanor.  He's polite, he doesn't interrupt."

At a gun show in Phoenix in the fall of 1993, an undercover detective reported
that Mr. McVeigh was selling a flare gun that he said could be converted into a
rocket launcher, was handing out photocopies of the name and address of the
F.B.I. sniper who had shot the wife of Mr. Weaver, the white supremacist, in
Idaho, and was selling baseball caps with the letters ATF surrounded by black
dots simulating bullet holes.

Bill Fitzgerald, a spokesman for the Maricopa County Attorney's office in
Phoenix who reviewed the report, said Mr. McVeigh demonstrated what could be
done with the flare gun. "He took a shell apart and showed that the interior
could be removed and another package put in that could shoot down an A.T.F.
helicopter," Mr. Fitzgerald said.

"McVeigh was just talking," the spokesman said. "He was fairly calm, like he was
in his element and amongst his people."


NAME: Timothy J. McVeigh

LOAD-DATE: July 5, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Gun shows have become a frequent venue for right-wing extremist
groups. Visitors to the gun show at the Springdale, Ark., Holiday Inn checked
its wares on Saturday. (Tom Ewart for The New York Times) (pg. 18); Timothy J.
McVeigh, photographed on June 20 at the El Reno Federal Correctional Institute
near Oklahoma City. (Kathy Roberts) (pg. 19)

TYPE: Biography; Special Report

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              14 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 6, 1995, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

PENTAGON DIVIDED BY RADAR JAMMER

BYLINE: By ERIC SCHMITT

SECTION: Section A;   Page 1;   Column 1;   Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 887 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 5


For nearly three years, 102 electronic radar-jamming devices have gathered dust
in a Navy warehouse in Indiana while Pentagon officials argued about what to do
with them after testers concluded the devices were not fit for use.

Now the Navy has found a solution: send some to Marine Corps pilots patrolling
the skies over Bosnia, who asked for the devices because they believe the
jammers have to be better than what they have -- Vietnam-era issue.

The decision has set off a new fight over the $2 billion jamming-device program
that was canceled in 1992 after the system flunked crucial flight tests.

The story of the airborne jammer illustrates a broader everyday struggle between
the military's weapons-users, who want every advantage they can get, and the
more circumspect weapons-testers, whose job is to insure planes, ships and tanks
work as advertised.

Senior Navy and Marine Corps aviators have always insisted the test results were
flawed, and unfairly maligned a device that pilots say outperforms the existing
radar-jammers in defending their FA-18's against missiles like the SA-6 that
shot down Capt. Scott O'Grady of the Air Force last month.

These pilots say the Airborne Self-Protection Jammer is not going to hurt the
aviators now flying over Bosnia and can only help. Because of the urgent need
there, the pilots say, the jammers should be given a chance to show how
effective they can be.

"We think this system will make those Hornets better protected, and there's
certainly no evidence that they'd be less protected," said Comdr. Steve
Pietropaoli, a Navy spokesman.

But critics of the device -- including the General Accounting Office -- say
sending 24 jammers to the 12 Marine Corps FA-18's at Aviano Air Base in northern
Italy, which is scheduled to happen on Thursday barring a last-minute hold by
Defense Secretary William J. Perry, could endanger pilots.

"This jammer was canceled because its defects would have given our pilots a
false sense of security," said Senator David Pryor, an Arkansas Democrat who is
the system's most vocal critic in Congress. "That's not the kind of problem we
want our pilots to face when flying over Bosnia."

The jammers are designed to identify dozens of incoming radars, distinguish
which are the most threatening to the plane, then emit electronic signals to
block or confuse the enemy air defenses that aim deadly antiaircraft missiles.
The system was designed to handle more enemy radars more efficiently than
existing jammers.

After the downing of Captain O'Grady last month on a routine patrol, NATO and
American air commanders took several steps to protect aircraft enforcing a
no-flight zone over Bosnia.

Fighter jets will fly more patrols off the Bosnian coast looking in over land
with their long-range radar.  When fighters fly over land, radar-jamming planes
armed with HARM missiles will always accompany them to defend against
surface-to-air missiles.

And at Marine Fighter-Attack Squadron 533 at Aviano, Lieut. Col. Martin Post,
the squadron commander, sent an urgent plea to his naval bosses in Europe and
Washington for a better jamming device for his FA-18's.

Colonel Post's superiors would normally handle a request for such a piece of
equipment quietly and quickly within Navy channels. The jammer, a box that
weighs about 250 pounds, is installed inside the aircraft.

But this is a jammer with a history. After a decade in development, the Pentagon
by 1990 had spent $1 billion on the project but it was five years behind
schedule and engineers had yet to make a prototype that worked. The Air Force,
which was to have been the largest customer for the device, dropped out of the
project because it was too costly.

The Pentagon gave the Navy and the device's manufacturers, divisions of the ITT
Corporation and the Westinghouse Electric Corporation, one last chance in 1992.
It failed its final flight tests and the Defense Department canceled the
program.

The jammer "is not operationally effective and not operationally suitable," the
Pentagon's chief of operational and test evaluation, Robert C. Duncan, said in a
1992 memo, shortly after the jammer failed its final tests.

But the Navy was still trying to find a solution for the 102 jammers it bought
before the program was canceled. Navy officials had hoped to install some of the
devices on F-14D Tomcats, which senior pilots say are especially vulnerable.

Then came the call from the Marines at Aviano. In response, Navy officials and
the contractors tested FA-18's equipped with the jammer against simulated SA-6
missiles at a Navy test range in China Lake, Calif.

Even Navy and Pentagon weapons testers, who still insist the jammer has not
passed all its flight tests, grudgingly conceded that the device performed
better against SA-6's than the FA-18's existing jammer.

But the Pentagon's acquisition czar, Paul Kaminski, is still wary.  Mr. Kaminski
has ordered his staff to examine all the alternatives before Mr. Perry orders
the jammers to Italy.

Moreover, Mr. Kaminski emphasized today through a spokesman that sending the
jammers to the Marine squadron in Italy was a temporary fix until the Navy and
Marine Corps can devise a better solution.

"We know its capabilities, why not send it?" said Commander Pietroapoali.


LOAD-DATE: July 6, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH



GRAPHIC:  The AN/ALQ-165 radar jammer throws enemy missiles off course by
altering radar signals.

WHAT IT IS -- The Airborne Self Protection Jammer (ASPJ) protects fighter
aircraft from radar-guided air-to-air and surface-to-air missiles.

WHAT IT DOES -- Reads enemy radar signals, alters signals and sends them back in
order to send missile off course. Can jam several signals at same time. Range
classified.

HISTORY -- AN/ALQ-165 model ordered by Pentagon in 1987 for such aircraft as
F-16 and F/A-18 from Consolidated Electronic Countermeasures, joint venture set
up by ITT Avionics and Westinghouse. Cancelled in 1992 after it failed tests,
Finland and Switzerland conducted own tests and ordered units for F/A-18's.
South Korea currently testing it for F-16's.

DESIGN -- Box about 22 cubic feet weighing between 200 and 330 pounds, fits in
external pod just under pilot.

PRICE -- Has varied with orders ($38 million for 12 units, $51 million for 25
units)

(Sources: ITT Corporation; Jane's Radar and Electronic Warfare Handbook) (pg.
A6)
Chart: "A CLOSER LOOK: Jamming Enemy Radar Systems"

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              15 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 6, 1995, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Russian Press Free, Free to Go Broke

BYLINE: By STEVEN ERLANGER

SECTION: Section A;   Page 8;   Column 1;   Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1082 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW, July 5


The arc of Vitaly Tretyakov's career sparked high in the electric days of
perestroika and the new press freedoms that followed the demise of the Soviet
Union.

But in the marketplace of a new Russia that is more interested in commerce than
in big ideas, that is turning away from liberal democratic notions back toward
corrupt bureaucratic management, Mr. Tretyakov and his newspaper, Nezavisimaya
Gazeta -- which was once as important to the intellectual and political elite as
harsh cigarettes and thick black coffee -- have had a mighty tumble.

Nezavisimaya Gazeta means Independent Newspaper, and Mr. Tretyakov based it on
the London newspaper The Independent, which created such waves at its birth in
the late 1980's. But even The Independent is not independent any longer, having
had to join up with the tabloid Mirror Group and other investors as the boom
years ended, and it is doubtful that Nezavisimaya Gazeta can stay independent
either -- if it survives.

In late May, Nezavisimaya Gazeta, which was born in December 1990 in a revolt
against an increasingly establishmentarian Moscow News, suspended publication. A
fuzzy legal entity originally set up with a loan from the Moscow City Council,
the paper is in essence owned by its staff of 200.

But Mr. Tretyakov has been the finance director as well as editor and chief
columnist, and with circulation hovering below 50,000, down from 240,000, he
simply ran out of money. His best journalists have been poached by other papers
with richer backers.

Mr. Tretyakov has now been approached by Prime Minister Viktor S. Chernomyrdin,
who promised to help the paper survive. Mr. Tretyakov, who is aware of the
dangers of supping with the devil, is sorely tempted anyway.

A thin man of 42, Mr. Tretyakov is flattered by Mr. Chernomyrdin's attentions.
In a long conversation, he spoke proudly of his powerful readers in the
Government and the military, saying without irony, "Throughout history, it's
difficult to get into the nomenklatura but it's more difficult to leave."

In their meeting, "Chernomyrdin said one shouldn't allow the death of a paper
that is 'an achievement of our democracy,' " Mr. Tretyakov said, puffing his
chest out slightly.

Doesn't he worry that Mr. Chernomyrdin, who is to lead a slate in parliamentary
elections in December, wants to co-opt Nezavisimaya Gazeta? Mr. Tretyakov shook
his head, saying: "I liked him when I talked to him. He wasn't playing; he was
quite sincere. He was behaving like an equal, not like President Yeltsin, who
presents himself to you like some monument."

Mr. Tretyakov insists the paper will not be beholden to anyone. Others are more
skeptical.

"To start a newspaper you have to be rich or find a sponsor," said Vitaly A.
Korotich, a star of perestroika himself and the former editor of Ogonyok, which
has been revamped with money from the German populist magazine Bunte
Illustrierte. "Tretyakov is independent enough, but he can't understand that
there's no free lunch. He wants independence, and the Prime Minister says he'll
support him, but I don't know what kind of independence is guaranteed by state
money."

"It's impossible to be a virgin and dance in this nightclub," Mr. Korotich
added. "Tretyakov wants to fight Yeltsin and have Yeltsin pay for it. Yeltsin
may be an idiot but he's not this stupid."

Aleksei Pushkov, a columnist for Moscow News, until recently had the deputy
editor's job there, the same post Mr. Tretyakov had before starting Nezavisimaya
Gazeta.

"The paper filled a vacuum," Mr. Pushkov said. "It was a sort of reflective
newsletter read by the political and intellectual elite of Moscow, and it
printed both pro- and anti-Yeltsin views. It opposed the use of force against
the Parliament in October 1993, for instance, supporting the victim and not the
power, a sort of Russian Christian approach."

Mr. Tretyakov sighs and says: "We probably spoiled it all ourselves when we
started to criticize Yeltsin so much. We lost a lot of readers then."

Nezavisimaya Gazeta also helped keep alive the philosophical and analytical
tradition in Russian newspapers, which far more than American papers, respect
opinion over fact. But unlike most Russian papers, Nezavisimaya Gazeta did not
line up with one political movement. Even before 1917, Russian newspapers had a
kind of belletrist tradition, Mr. Pushkov said, constantly examining the Russian
psyche and picking at ancient sores like "What is Russia?"

Moscow News, like most publications in Russia, is in financial trouble but has
refused to take subsidies from the state. Independence is still valued in the
new Russia, but it may not be economically viable when paper, printing and
transport costs have soared and when daily circulation has fallen from 96
million copies to 8 million. Only the populist Moskovsky Komsomolets is thought
to be making money.

All the rest would go bankrupt without state subsidies.

Sevodnya, Nezavisimaya's rival in the intellectual set, has a circulation of
about 100,000 but loses at least $7 million a year, partly offset by profits
from NTV, Russia's most successful private network.

But Mr. Tretyakov does not want a single patron. He is trying to raise $10
million, he says, from a variety of sources to insure that no one has majority
control. He says he hopes to use Mr. Chernomyrdin's offer of help to leverage
banks, who want to keep close ties to a Prime Minister who may end up President.

Mr. Tretyakov recognizes that Nezavisimaya Gazeta will probably never make
money. So what he appears to want are big investors willing to lose it for the
greater glory of Russian journalism, but without controlling the paper.

This is a form of fantasy, Mr. Korotich suggested, matched by Mr. Tretyakov's
lack of interest in his readers. "He has a Soviet style: he wants to teach his
readers but never work with them and find out what they want," Mr. Korotich
said. "And now he's finished his money."

In a way, Mr. Korotich said, Mr. Tretyakov is "trying to fight Communism and
capitalism at the same time."

Nezavisimaya Gazeta has become a newspaper without news, with only Op-Ed pieces.
Still, Mr. Tretyakov is valued as a well-connected and often trenchant political
analyst.

He is like a post-Vietnam American writer of the left, Mr. Pushkov suggested:
"Tretyakov helped start a revolution, then got disgusted with its fruits, and
still pursues an idealistic vision of what the society should be. And we still
need such people."

LOAD-DATE: July 6, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Vitaly Tretyakov, the editor, in the increasingly barren
newsroom of the bankrupt Nezavisamaya Gazeta. He says he is ready to accept
financial help from the Prime Minister, but many say this will taint his paper.
(Otto Pohl for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              16 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   July 7, 1995, Friday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 910 words



International A2-10

U.S. MAY BE NEAR VIETNAM TIES
Twenty years after the war in Vietnam ended, President Clinton has concluded
that the time has come to establish full diplomatic relations and may announce
the decision as early as next week, senior U.S. officials said. A1

ISRAELI LEADER'S AMBIVALENCE
Reflecting on his three years in office, Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin is
sometimes as ambivalent as his critics over Israel's peace efforts. That
skepticism may be his greatest strength. A1

RWANDA CLERGY STANDS ACCUSED
When the Rwanda Hutu embarked on their killing frenzy in April 1994, tens of
thousands of Tutsi sought shelter in Roman Catholic churches. But now more than
a score of clerics have been accused of complicity in atrocities. A3

SCANDAL HITS NEW FRENCH LEADER
President Jacques Chirac and his conservative Government are embroiled in a
scandal about his largesse in doling out city-owned luxury apartments to
political cronies while he was Mayor of Paris. A3

U.N. PROMISES TOUGHER FORCE
Senior U.N. military officers said that a new rapid reaction force in Bosnia
would operate forcefully and streamline its command structure to avoid excessive
interference by civilian officials. A10

Bosnian Serbs bombarded the U.N. "safe area" of Srebrenica. A10

News analysis: John Major still faces a tough election fight. A2

U.S. envoys press the I.R.A. to move toward peace. A2

Careiro da Varzea Journal: In the Amazon, Avon is calling. A4

National A12-16

INTEREST RATES ARE CUT
The Federal Reserve reduced short-term interest rates by a quarter of a
percentage point, its first rate cut since 1992. The move may mean lower
borrowing costs for consumers and businesses.  A1

CLINTON WANTS QUIETER DEBATE
President Clinton called for "more conversation and less combat" in political
debates.  A1

SIMPSON PROSECUTION RESTS
After 92 days, prosecutors in the O.J. Simpson murder trial finished presenting
their case A1

ATTACKING BROADCAST VIOLENCE
Congress and Federal regulators said they hoped to clamp down on broadcast
violence. A1

AMERASIANS' DIMINISHED DREAM
The Amerasian children of American servicemen in Vietnam have found much less in
the United States than they had hoped.  A12

SAYING 'NO' TO ORGAN REQUESTS
A new study has found that families are reluctant to donate organs of deceased
relatives. A13

IMPOTENCE DRUG APPROVED
The Federal Food and Drug Administration approved the marketing of the first
prescription drug for the treatment of impotence.  A13

BASE FIGURES DISPUTED
A proposal under review at the White House would preserve about 800 jobs -- not
several thousand -- at an Air Force base.  A14

A NEW INDEPENDENT PROSECUTOR
A Miami lawyer, Daniel Pearson, was appointed to investigate the personal
finances of Commerce Secretary Ronald H. Brown.  A14

GINGRICH ON BOOK CIRCUIT
Speaker Newt Gingrich showed himself a master of the book-promotion circuit at a
stop in New York City yesterday.  A16

The District of Columbia got a curfew for teen-agers.  A16

Law A17

RISE IN SMALL-TOWN LAWYERS
Small towns have become more attractive to lawyers, as seen by a couple of
practitioners in Georgia.

MAKING THE LAW REVIEW
A law school has made it harder to determine the degree to which race and
ethnicity determine admission to the law review.

Metro Digest B1

SETTLEMENT IN HAPPY LAND FIRE
More than five years after the arson fire at the Happy Land social club killed
87 people, lawyers for families of the victims agreed to a $15.8 million
settlement of all claims stemming from the fire in the packed Bronx nightclub.
A1

Business Digest D1

Weekend C1-26

Dining out under the sky.  C1
A spa weekend.  C1
Midnight movies.  C1
Gordon Parks's archives.  C2
Skepticism about "Sleepers," by Lorenzo Carcaterra.  C3
For Children C21
Theater: If you want to be a star, insist on a staircase.  C2
Film: "Species." C3
"First Knight." C10
"The Crude Oasis." C10
Dance: Inspired by Ukraine.  C26
Restaurants C23
Art: "Views From Abroad" at the Whitney Museum. C16
"Philip Guston's PoemPictures." C12
"The Golden Age of Danish Art" at the Frick Collection.  C14
Inside Art C18
Art in Review C24
Books: "Therapy," by David Lodge.  C26
Television: TV Weekend B15
Home Video B15

Sports B6-14

Basketball: Knicks name Don Nelson coach.  B7
Baseball: Early power from Rangers is enough to beat Yankees.  B9
Mets self-destruct against Cubs at Shea.  B9
Columns: Berkow on the Knicks' new hire B7
TV Sports B9
Vecsey on Wimbledon B13
Hockey: Islanders in good position for draft.  B12
Tennis: Steffi Graf and Arantxa Sanchez Vicario gain final.  B7

Obituaries A18-19

Bert Hardy, British photographer.  A18
Aziz Nesin, Turkish writer attacked for translating Rushdie. A19

Editorials/Op-Ed A24-25

Editorials

Baghdad's biological arsenal.
Overkill in revising regulation.
The law school cartel.
Raising college sports standards.

Letters

Bob Herbert: Bad meat and politics.
Anthony Lewis: Mr. Clinton's betrayal.
Ken Gormley: Your gerrymander or mine?
Miriam Shuchman and Michael S. Wilkes: Medical successes, on line.
Jeff DeBonis: Buffaloed by the land-use bullies.

Chronicle B4

Crossword C26

LOAD-DATE: July 7, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              17 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   July 7, 1995, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Once Lost in Vietnam, Now Lost in America

BYLINE: By SETH MYDANS

SECTION: Section A;  Page 12;  Column 1;  National Desk

LENGTH: 1092 words

DATELINE: WESTMINSTER, Calif., July 5


Tam Ly dresses in the image of the father he never knew, in camouflage clothing
and combat boots and, for good measure, a rakish pair of black sunglasses.

Born out of wedlock, nursed in a Buddhist temple in Vietnam, reared on the
streets where he sold honey cakes outside the central cathedral in Ho Chi Minh
City, Mr. Tam, now 23, came to the United States two years ago as part of a
belated Government program to accept the offspring of American servicemen
abandoned by their fathers in South Vietnam.

That six-year-old program, under the Amerasian Homecoming Act, has allowed
20,000 young people who are half-American, half-Vietnamese into the country,
along with about 60,000 of their Vietnamese family members. The wave of
immigrants has now essentially run its course, officials said, because the
backlog of applicants is nearly exhausted.

Intended to close old wounds, the program has in many cases only made them more
painful. Designed to pay a debt of paternity, it has only demonstrated to many
children of the war that they are truly fatherless.

Like many other Amerasian refugees, whose average age is now 24, Mr. Tam has
failed to find in the United States the success or the solace that he was hoping
for. A street urchin in Vietnam, he became a homeless man in this country. The
closest he came to finding the father or the identity he sought was the recent
night he shared with two Vietnam veterans at a homeless shelter.

"No money, no job, no home -- homeless," he said in his broken English, as he
waited in line to enter the shelter near Westminster. "I wanted new life here,
but I didn't go up. I went down."

Two months ago, he gave up.  Scrounging for the money, he paid a $70 processing
fee and soon, he said, will return to the country he now realizes is his
homeland, Vietnam.

The waning of the Amerasian program helps close out a 20-year exodus from
Vietnam since the fall of Saigon in 1975. Some 800,000 Vietnamese refugees have
now made their way to the United States, from the generals and Government
officials who fled by helicopter, to the desperate flood of boat people, to a
final, recent wave of labor camp survivors.

Social workers who try to help Amerasian refugees say that although there are
many success stories, many more of the stories are sad. Poorly educated and
often abandoned because of discrimination in Vietnam, many Amerasians arrived
here without the skills to adapt to a new society or to settle down with jobs or
families. Most came hoping to find their fathers; few succeeded.

"They are at a high risk for social problems," said Marianne Blank, executive
director of St. Anselm's Cross-Cultural Community Center here, one of 60
"cluster sites" around the country that received Federal money to help the
Amerasians adjust. "In some cases, they are doing O.K., but their futures are
extremely limited."

The Homecoming Act, which took effect in March 1989, offered entry to any
Vietnamese who could demonstrate American parentage either through documents or
through showing an immigration official the "passport" of blue eyes or black
skin. The law also permitted Amerasians to bring immediate family members. It
provided a small cash allotment for the first six months here and, through the
cluster sites, help with the language, job training, health care and the usually
futile search for a father.

Over the last two years, financing for the cluster sites has all but evaporated.
Once they arrive, the Amerasians are now mostly on their own. At St. Anselm's,
in the Vietnamese community here 30 miles south of Los Angeles, Ms. Blank said
she had watched Mr. Tam and other Amerasians with a growing sense of despair.

"My sense is that they are stuck, they are all stuck," she said. "To the extent
that they find an identity here, the identity is: unwanted."

The stories told by some of the Amerasians at her center were variations on this
theme.

Pham Ngoc Hieu, 25, who slept on the streets in Vietnam, said he had often
experienced a recurring dream that he was reunited with his father. When he
arrived here four years ago, his dream was realized, but his story is as sad as
any.

"In Vietnam, many people told me, 'You get out of our country. You are dirty,' "
he said. "I tell them, 'How do you know that? I am somebody. I have my dream
father.' "

But when he came to the United States and found him, Mr. Hieu said, "My father
said, 'No. Don't take my number. Don't call me. I have a family here. I am too
old for this.' "

Another refugee, Thanh Tran, 22, arrived in America filled with bitterness for
his father, who abandoned his mother, a housemaid, when she became pregnant. Mr.
Thanh said he had faced particularly harsh discrimination in Vietnam because his
father was black. Barred from attending school because of his background, Mr.
Thanh said, he worked in the rice fields and learned to read and write by
watching others.

"I don't want to look for him," Mr. Thanh said of his father. "He's forgotten
it, and I don't want to make him run. If he said bye-bye, that's O.K. If he
doesn't know my name, that's O.K. As far as I'm concerned, I don't have a
father; I only have a mother. My father died."

In the United States, Mr. Thanh married another black Amerasian who also does
not know her father, and they have a small son. As Mr. Thanh talked, a beeper at
his belt sounded repeatedly. "That's my wife," he said happily. "Maybe my baby
is crying for me."

Holly Nguyen, 26, has adjusted so well to life here that Ms. Blank gave her a
job as a case manager at St. Anselm's. In America six years now, she lives with
her mother and brother and recently returned to Vietnam for a visit. Her English
is excellent. Yet, despite her apparent adjustment here, she cries when she
tells her story.

Her whole life, she said, has been lived in anticipation of seeing her father
again. "I tried so hard to learn English so that when he sees me one day, he can
speak to me.  That was my reason to go on and go on."

Ms. Nguyen said her mother remembered everything about her father, a military
driver at the United States Army's Vietnam headquarters in Long Binh. "Only his
name, she doesn't remember. Sergeant Fut or Foot or Fruit or Fert," she said.

"I wish some day my father would come looking for me because there is no way I
can look for him," she said.  "I just dream it. You never know. It could
happen," she said. "I wish some day I will be sitting right here, and he will
come by looking for me.  He is looking for his daughter. 'I'm right here, Dad!'
"


LOAD-DATE: July 7, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: A homecoming program for Amerasian children of American
servicemen who served in the Vietnam War was intended to heal wounds, but it has
often had the opposite effect. Many of the young people come to the United
States with false hopes of being reunited with their fathers and discovering a
family, only to be rudely awakened to how alone they are. Gathered recently at
St. Anselm's Cross-Cultural Community Center in Westminster, Calif., were, from
left, Thanh Tran, Tam Ly, Trang Nguyen, Pham Ngoc Hieu and Holly Nguyen. (Seth
Mydans/The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              18 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   July 7, 1995, Friday, Late Edition - Final

U.S. TO ESTABLISH FULL HANOI LINKS, TOP OFFICIALS SAY

BYLINE: By ELAINE SCIOLINO

SECTION: Section A;  Page 1;  Column 4;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1237 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 6


Twenty years after the war in Vietnam ended, President Clinton has concluded
that the time has come to establish full diplomatic relations with the former
enemy and may announce the decision as early as next week, senior Administration
officials said today.

The President has not yet signed a formal order granting Vietnam full diplomatic
recognition, which would be the United States' most important step towards
burying the bitterness of the Vietnam War. But Anthony Lake, the President's
national security adviser, is completing a draft order recommending the policy
change, which is expected to be presented to the President within the next few
days.

In preparation for the announcement, the White House has drawn up a list of
leading lawmakers and foreign leaders who will be informed as soon as the
President makes his formal decision. White House officials have also begun to
prepare arguments that can be used to explain why the move is a necessary step
in a four-year process begun by the Bush Administration to provide the fullest
possible accounting of Americans missing in the Vietnam War.

The Vietnamese Government has not yet been informed of the President's
intentions, a senior Administration official said. Nor has the White House
chosen a candidate to become the first United States Ambassador to Hanoi.

The move to establish full diplomatic relations, which has been endorsed by Mr.
Clinton's senior diplomatic, military, economic and political advisers, comes
after more than a year of debate within the Administration on whether Vietnam
has cooperated fully in determining the fate of 1,619 United States service
personnel who are still listed officially as missing in the war.

Indeed, The Administration has been steadily moving toward the decision for
months, approving quiet visits aimed at resolving problems and broadening ties
between Washington and Hanoi.

Diplomatic relations between the two countries will have a direct effect on
American companies by allowing them to receive United States-sponsored financing
and insurance that will help them do business in Vietnam.

Administration officials acknowledge that establishing full diplomatic relations
with Vietnam would be a reward for its cooperation with the United States in
releasing documents about missing servicemen and returning the remains of
servicemen killed in Vietnam.

Moreover, they said, they hope increased contact with the Hanoi Government may
make the Vietnamese even more forthcoming.

"We see this as the most effective way to meet our priority of getting the
fullest possible accounting of those Americans missing from the Vietnam era,"
said one Administration official involved in the process.  "Our experience shows
that when you cooperate with Vietnam, you get more concrete results than if you
just hold them at arm's length."

In establishing relations with Vietnam, Mr. Clinton will inevitably face intense
opposition from conservatives and veterans groups, who contend that such a move
would betray his past promises to the families of missing servicemen and Vietnam
veterans.

Mr. Clinton also faced criticism when he decided in February 1994 to lift the
19-year-old trade embargo on Vietnam. But that response proved politically
manageable and quickly died down -- particularly because the move was widely
seen as advancing United States business interests in Southeast Asia.

There was even less political fallout when Mr. Clinton opened low-level
diplomatic relations with Vietnam shortly afterward, allowing an official
representative of Hanoi to open an office in Washington.

There continue to be political risks for a President who agonized 26 years ago
over avoiding service in a war he said he "opposed and despised." In recent
weeks, however, White House aides have concluded that these risks are outweighed
by the fact that there may be a higher political price to pay if he refuses to
establish relations.

Mr. Clinton has received support on the issue from three decorated war veterans
in the Senate -- John Kerry, the Massachusetts Democrat; John McCain, the
Arizona Republican, and Bob Kerrey, the Nebraska Democrat.

The three senators are poised to introduce an amendment to the State Department
Authorization Bill next week urging that the United States grant Vietnam full
diplomatic recognition, a nonbinding resolution that is expected to pass. A
McCain-Kerry resolution calling for an end to the trade embargo was approved in
a bipartisan 62-to-38 vote in January 1994, paving the way for Mr. Clinton to
lift the embargo the following month.

On the other hand, two Republicans -- Senator Bob Dole of Kansas, the majority
leader, and Senator Robert Smith of New Hampshire -- plan to introduce an
amendment to the same legislation that would withhold financing for an Embassy
in Vietnam.

Senator Dole, the leading Republican candidate for the Republican Presidential
nomination, is scheduled to be the main speaker later this summer at the annual
meeting of the National League of Families of American Prisoners and Missing in
Southeast Asia, a group that rejects the Administration's assertions that
Vietnam is cooperating on the issue.

As a candidate for President, Mr. Clinton told the national convention of the
American Legion in 1992 that he would not move toward establishing relations
until he received the fullest possible accounting of Americans missing in
action.

When he formally announces his decision, the President is likely to praise
Vietnam's increasing cooperation over the years. He gave a preview in remarks on
Memorial Day while presenting a new postage stamp commemorating prisoners of war
and those missing in action in Vietnam. At that time he said Hanoi had been more
cooperative "than ever before." Of the effort to account for the missing, he
said, "There is nothing like it in all the history of warfare."

Setting up ties wit Vietnam may make it possible for Secretary of State Warren
Christopher to visit Vietnam when he travels to Asia at the end of the month to
meet with foreign ministers of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations.
Vietnam is to join the group at this meeting, and Mr. Christopher wants to have
the matter settled by then.

If Mr. Christopher then travels to Vietnam, he will be the first Secretary of
State to visit the country since the American-backed Government in Saigon fell
to Communist forces in 1975.

Publicly, Administration officials emphasized that Mr. Clinton had still not
decided whether to establish relations, but was poised to make a decision soon.
There is a reluctance to make such an announcement until veterans' groups and
others opposed to the decision have been briefed.

"This is now a question that will shortly be before the President," the State
Department spokesman, Nicholas Burns, said today.

Mr. Burns said the Administration was still assessing new documents handed over
recently by Hanoi concerning missing American servicemen. Last week the Defense
Department called the recent case of documents the most informative to date on
the outstanding cases.
 But those who advocate recognition have pushed Mr. Clinton to announce it as
soon as possible, and not wait until the 1996 Presidential campaign gets any
closer. Some of these advisers have also argued that Mr. Clinton should get
ahead of the issue by acting before the Senate takes up the issue on the floor
next week.

LOAD-DATE: July 7, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              19 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 8, 1995, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Downing of U.S. Fighter Over Bosnia Is Tied to Shortcoming of NATO Plane

BYLINE: By ERIC SCHMITT

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 5;  Column 2;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 661 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 7


American military officials knew a hostile missile radar was tracking Capt.
Scott F. O'Grady's F-16 fighter jet several minutes before he was shot down over
Bosnia last month, but could not alert him because of a technical shortcoming on
a NATO early-warning plane, military officials said today.

A Pentagon report on the causes of the downing concludes that the NATO Awacs,
which would have relayed the warning to the pilot, did not have equipment to
transmit and receive highly classified electronic messages from American
intelligence officials.

By the time military officials finally relayed the warning to the Awacs plane
through an unclassified radio transmission, a Bosnian Serb SA-6 missile had
split the Air Force F-16 Fighting Falcon in two.

Defense Secretary William J. Perry and John M. Deutch, the Director of Central
Intelligence, have both said military officials did well in collecting and
analyzing the intelligence on the SA-6 missile, but a poor job in getting that
information to the pilots.

Gen. John Shalikashvili, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, is to
outline the military's report on the downing of the plane on Tuesday at a
hearing of the House National Security Committee.

Military and industry officials said today that the investigation would also
conclude that a Bosnian Serb radar, which did not show up on Captain O'Grady's
radar, fed his location to the SA-6 missile, allowing its operators to aim and
shoot before the pilot could detect the radar.

Senior Pentagon officials say that about 12 minutes before the plane was shot
down on June 2, a U-2 spy plane flying high over Bosnia detected the Serb radar
tracking Captain O'Grady and another F-16 pilot.

The U-2 automatically relayed that information to officials at the National
Security Agency, which analyzes electronic transmissions. Agency officials
confirmed the radar's location, and tried repeatedly to transmit that
information to the NATO Awacs, using the Tactical Information Broadcast Service.

But the NATO plane was not equipped with a terminal to receive the classified
communications, military and industry officials said. Right now, only United
States Awacs and some other American planes have the equipment, they added.

About eight minutes before the downing, military officials desperately tried
relaying the warning over an open transmission, but it garbled. By the time the
Awacs plane received the alert, it was too late.

In addition to satellites and fighter jets' built-in radars, commanders of
American missions over Bosnia also rely on a special reconnaissance aircraft, an
RC-135 Rivet Joint, to help pick up and analyze electronic and radio
transmissions.

Air Force officials said an RC-135, a military version of a Boeing 707 filled
with sophisticated recording equipment, would have been able to quickly locate
the SA-6 and warn the F-16 pilots directly. But only a couple were available to
assist NATO flights over Bosnia.

A few hours before Captain O'Grady was shot down, officials said, an RC-135
finished its eight-hour flight near Bosnia and returned to its base in England.
Military officials said that since the downing, commanders have increased the
RC-135's Bosnia missions to 10 hours.


                             --------------------


Jammers to Be Sent to Marines

WASHINGTON, July 7 (AP) -- Electronic radar jammers that the Pentagon had
rejected three years ago were approved today for use on Marine Corps fighter
planes patrolling in Bosnia. Defense Secretary William J. Perry approved
installation on about a dozen F-A-18 Hornets at Aviano Air Base in Italy.

More than 100 of the jammers have been sitting in a Navy warehouse since 1992
when the Pentagon determined that the devices were unfit and ended a $1 billion
project for developing them. But Navy officials have concluded the jammers are
still more effective in countering the Serb missiles than the older, Vietnam-era
models now used.

LOAD-DATE: July 8, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              20 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 8, 1995, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

T-Shirts and Politics Mix on Mall

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 7;  Column 1;  National Desk

LOAD-DATE: July 8, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: T-shirt sales displays are now a less frequent sight on The Mall
in Washington after a Federal District Court ruled last month that only those
shirts that support a political cause may be sold. Above, the silhouette of a
man with a military-style flat-top haircut, contrasted with a display of shirts
related to prisoner of war-missing in action issues near the Lincoln Memorial
and Vietnam Veterans Memorial. (Stephen Crowley/The New York Times)

TYPE: Caption

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              21 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   July 9, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

BEST SELLERS: July 9, 1995

SECTION: Section 7; Page 22; Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1465 words



          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Fiction

 1      2  152  THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner,
                $17.95.) A photographer and a farmer's lonely wife in Iowa.

 2      3   2   ROSE MADDER, by Stephen King. (Viking, $25.95.) Fleeing an
                abusive husband, a woman seeks happiness in a strange city by
                creating her own myth.

 3      1  11   THE RAINMAKER, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $25.95.) A young
                man barely out of law school tries to expose a corporation's
                multibillion-dollar scam.

 4      4   6   THE APOCALYPSE WATCH, by Robert Ludlum. (Bantam, $24.95.)
                Tracking a neo-Nazi movement with designs on American and
                European officials.

 5      5  71   THE CELESTINE PROPHECY, by James Redfield. (Warner, $17.95.) An
                ancient manuscript, found in Peru, provides insights into
                achieving a fulfilling life.

 6      6   9   LET ME CALL YOU SWEETHEART, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Simon &
                Schuster, $24.) An unusual murder case haunts a prosecutor's
                career and her private life.

 7     14   2   THE WITNESS, by Sandra Brown. (Warner, $21.95.) A seemingly
                happy public defender and wife is plunged into a morass of
                bigotry and hate.

 8      7  55   POLITICALLY CORRECT BEDTIME STORIES, by James Finn Garner.
                (Macmillan, $8.95.) Classic tales respun to avoid offending
                current sensibilities.

 9      9   8   ONCE UPON A MORE ENLIGHTENED TIME, by James Finn Garner.
                (Macmillan, $9.95.) Eight more "politically correct bedtime
                stories."

 10    11  11   LADDER OF YEARS, by Anne Tyler. (Knopf, $24.) At 40, a woman
                leaves her physician husband and children to start a new life
                in a strange town.

 11     8  146  OH, THE PLACES YOU'LL GO! by Dr. Seuss. (Random House, $15.)
                The problems of finding your way through life; in verse and
                pictures.

 12    12   2   REDEMPTION, by Leon Uris. (HarperCollins, $25.) In a sequel to
                "Trinity," the Larkin family continues to fight for Irish
                independence.

 13    10   5   STRANGE HIGHWAYS, by Dean Koontz. (Tartikoff/Warner, $23.95.) A
                collection of suspense tales, including novels, novellas and
                short stories.

 14        13   MOO, by Jane Smiley. (Knopf, $24.) Intrigues and machinations
                on the campus of a Midwestern state university.

 15    13   7   MIND PREY, by John Sandford. (Putnam, $23.95.) Lucas Davenport
                pursues the kidnapper of a psychiatrist and her two daughters.

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Nonfiction

 1      3  39   THE HOT ZONE, by Richard Preston. (Random House, $23.) The
                discovery of the deadly Ebola virus in Virginia and the efforts
                to keep it from spreading.

 2*     5  70   MIDNIGHT IN THE GARDEN OF GOOD AND EVIL, by John Berendt.
                (Random House, $23.) The mysterious death of a young man in
                Savannah, Ga.

 3     10   3   NEW PASSAGES, by Gail Sheehy. (Random House, $25.) How changing
                social conditions and longer life expectancies are affecting
                our lives.

 4      2   6   DAVE BARRY'S COMPLETE GUIDE TO GUYS, by Dave Barry. (Random
                House, $21.) A humorist describes the strange ways of a species
                of males called "guys."

 5      4   6   SPONTANEOUS HEALING, by Andrew Weil. (Knopf, $23.) A physician
                explains the ways in which the body heals itself.

 6      1   3   A GOOD WALK SPOILED, by John Feinstein. (Little, Brown,
                $23.95.) A sportswriter reports on the P.G.A. Tour in 1993 and
                1994.

 7      6  28   SISTERS, by Carol Saline. Photographs by Sharon J. Wohlmuth.
                (Running Press, $27.50.) The relationships of 36 sets of
                sisters, reported in words and pictures.

 8      8  21   THE DEATH OF COMMON SENSE, by Philip K. Howard. (Random House,
                $18.) How governmental rules and regulations are fettering the
                lives of all Americans.

 9     12   5   KATO KAELIN, by Marc Eliot. (Harper Paperbacks, $20.) A friend
                of O.J. Simpson's on events surrounding the murders of Nicole
                Simpson and Ron Goldman.

 10         4   SLEEPING AT THE STARLITE MOTEL, by Bailey White.
                (Addison-Wesley, $20.) A Georgia schoolteacher tells about her
                adventures while traveling and at home.

 11     7  11   IN RETROSPECT, by Robert S. McNamara with Brian VanDeMark.
                (Times Books/Random House, $27.50.) The author recalls his role
                in the Vietnam War.

 12     9  81   THE BOOK OF VIRTUES, by William J. Bennett. (Simon & Schuster,
                $30.) Moral stories adapted from the Greeks, the Bible,
                folklore and elsewhere.

 13    13  12   FROM BEGINNING TO END, by Robert Fulghum. (Villard, $20.) The
                rituals we practice and the spiritual journeys we take, from
                childhood to old age.

 14        15   THE DISCIPLINE OF MARKET LEADERS, by Michael Treacy and Fred
                Wiersema. (Addison-Wesley, $25.) A discussion of competitive
                business strategies.

 15         7   PAULA, by Isabel Allende. (HarperCollins, $24.) The novelist
                tells stories of her family's life as she tends her fatally ill
                daughter.

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous

 1      1  111  MEN ARE FROM MARS, WOMEN ARE FROM VENUS, by John Gray.
                (HarperCollins, $23.) Communicating.

 2      2  16   THE SEVEN SPIRITUAL LAWS OF SUCCESS, by Deepak Chopra.
                (Amber-Allen/New World Library, $12.95.) How to "generate
                wealth in all its forms."

 3      3   8   HOW TO ARGUE AND WIN EVERY TIME, by Gerry Spence. (St.
                Martin's, $22.95.) A lawyer describes ways to win arguments at
                home and at work.

 4         56   IN THE KITCHEN WITH ROSIE, by Rosie Daley. (Knopf, $14.95.)
                Recipes by Oprah Winfrey's cook.


Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending June 24, at 3,050 bookstores
plus wholesalers serving 28,000 other retailers (gift shops, department stores,
newsstands, supermarkets), statistically weighted to represent sales in all such
outlets nationwide. An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely
distinguishable from those of the book above.
And Bear in Mind
(Editor's Choices of other recent books of particular interest)

AND WHEN DID YOU LAST SEE YOUR FATHER? by Blake Morrison. (Picador USA, $21.) An
English poet's perfectly convincing memoir of his father, a man both overbearing
and engagingly quirky, whose death comes to the reader as a surprise.

BETRAYAL: The Story of Aldrich Ames, an American Spy, by Tim Weiner, David
Johnston and Neil A. Lewis. (Random House, $25.) How a turncoat C.I.A. officer
sold his agency to the Soviets and got away with it for nine years without even
being careful; lucid narration by three correspondents of The New York Times.

THE CITY OF FLORENCE: Historical Vistas and Personal Sightings, by R.W.B. Lewis.
(Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $27.50.) An autobiographical, anecdotal, historical
memoir, filled with love and learning, about a distinguished scholar's affair
with a miraculous city.

COLD SNAP: Stories, by Thom Jones. (Little, Brown, $19.95.) A collection that
turns a merciless, ironic gaze on the organic trap called life, in which
spiritual beings -- humans -- are forever in jeopardy of mere chemical accidents
or biological insults.

THE LOVE LETTER, by Cathleen Schine. (Houghton Mifflin, $19.95.) Helen is 42,
capable and loves Edith Wharton. Johnny is 20, acne-spotted and -- like,
excellent! -- a big Tom Robbins fan. In this comic novel they fall in love.

A MAN'S WORLD: How Real Is Male Privilege -- And How High Is Its Price? by Ellis
Cose. (HarperCollins, $22.) A skilled analyst of gripes finds that most men
(including so-called angry whites) are more confused than angry and more subdued
than privileged; to his argument he brings persuasive numbers and moderate
tones.

MOVING VIOLATIONS: War Zones, Wheelchairs, and Declarations of Independence, by
John Hockenberry. (Hyperion, $24.95.) Swaggering in a wheelchair isn't easy, but
this candidly aggressive National Public Radio correspondent is up to the job
(or any other).

THE NEXT AMERICAN NATION: The New Nationalism and the Fourth American
Revolution, by Michael Lind. (Free Press, $25.) An intelligent, industrious, not
very cheerful look at possible futures. Balkanization through identity politics?
Stratification, Brazilian style?

NIGHTMOVER: How Aldrich Ames Sold the CIA to the KGB for $4.6 Million, by David
Wise. (HarperCollins, $25.) Same Ames, same story, somewhat gentler on the
agency; enhanced by the authority of a veteran espionage writer.

THE PRICE OF A CHILD, by Lorene Cary. (Knopf, $23.) A sensual, funny first novel
that transposes to pre-Civil War Philadelphia the theme of the author's 1991
memoir, "Black Ice": the duty of an escapee toward the oppressed she leaves
behind.

VENICE REDISCOVERED, by John Pemble. (Oxford University, $25.) A historian's
fresh, fascinating account of the potent symbolic resurrection of Venice in the
European imagination after its political death in 1815.

LOAD-DATE: July 9, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              22 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   July 9, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

ON THE TOWNS

SECTION: Section 13NJ;  Page 10;  Column 1;  New Jersey Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 5441 words



MUSIC

ALBERT MUSIC HALL The Pinelands Cultural Society presents "Sounds of the Jersey
Pines," a series of Saturday night concerts through the end of the year. The
program features live presentations of bluegrass, country and Pinelands music.
Show time, 8 P.M. Admission: $4, or $1 for children under 12. 139 Wells Mill
Road (Route 532), Waretown. (609) 971-1593.

ALLAN P. KIRBY ARTS CENTER The 1995 Opera Festival of New Jersey continues.
"Turn of the Screw." Today at 3 P.M., Thursday at 8 P.M. and Saturday at 8 P.M.
"Rigoletto." Friday at 8 P.M. "Elixir of Love." Next Sunday at 3 P.M. Tickets:
$18-$135. The Lawrenceville School, Route 26 in Lawrenceville. (609) 936-1500.

BRIDGETON'S RIVERFRONT In a series of free Sunday night concerts, Walter Wagner
and the Serenaders perform today at 7 P.M. The Pitman Hobo Band plays next
Sunday at 7 P.M. Routes 49 and 77 in Bridgeton.
(609) 451-9208.

DUKE ISLAND PARK, BRIDGEWATER The Somerset County Park Commission continues its
free summer concert series with Johnny Youth and the Verdict. Today at 7 P.M.
(908) 722-1200, extension 221.

GARDEN STATE ARTS CENTER James Taylor with the Pittsburgh Symphony Pops and
Marvin Hamlisch. Thursday at 8:30 P.M. Tickets: $25-$75. Van Halen. Saturday and
next Sunday at 8 P.M. Tickets: $26 and $35. Exit 116 on the Garden State
Parkway, Holmdel.
(908) 888-5011.

FAIR LAWN SUMMER MUSIC FESTIVAL The Sunday evening concerts continue. The
Symphony Orchestra, conducted by Murray Colosimo, performs today at 8:30 P.M.
Saxophone and clarinet quartets perform music from Mozart to Glenn Miller next
Sunday at 8:30 P.M. Free, but bring your own chairs. Memorial Park and Berdan
Avenue, Fair Lawn. (201) 796-6746.

FLOOD'S HILL, MEADOWLAND PARK Arts in the Park presents John Gorka and Hugh
Blumenfeld in the first of a series of four free summer concerts. Wednesday at
7:30 P.M. Ridgewood Road and Meadowbrook Lane, South Orange. (201) 378-7754.

KASSCHAU MEMORIAL SHELL The Ridgewood Village Band, conducted by Roger Guccione
and Deborah Venezia, continues its free concerts throughout July. Thursday at
8:30 P.M. Veterans Field on North Maple Avenue, Ridgewood. (201) 670-3924.

MIDDLESEX COUNTY CONCERTS The Garden State Brass Sextet. Next Sunday at 3 P.M.
Johnson Park, River Road in Piscataway. Chris Pedersen and the Garden State
Symphonic Band. Next Sunday at 6 P.M. Warren Park, Florida Grove Road in
Woodbridge. George Krauss Memorial Concert Band, conducted by Barbara Santoro.
Next Sunday at 7 P.M. Spring Lake Park, Maple Park and South Plainfield. (908)
745-3936.

NEWARK MUSEUM The "Noontime Jazz in the Garden" series continues with Charged
Particles featuring Caleb Hutslar, Mike Rak and Jon Krosnick. Thursday at 12:30
P.M. Free. Through Aug. 10. Dreyfuss Memorial Garden, 49 Washington Street,
Newark. (201) 596-6550.

NEW JERSEY SYMPHONY ORCHESTRA Zdenek Macal, artistic director and conductor,
leads the orchestra in "Amadeus Festival," a new summer series. Friday at 8 P.M.
at the Richardson Auditorium at Princeton University. Saturday at 8 P.M. and
next Sundat at 7 P.M. at Temple B'nai Jeshurun in Short Hills. Tickets: $15-$35.
(201) 624-8203.

PAPER MILL PLAYHOUSE In the summer concert series, the Glenn Miller Orchestra,
directed by Larry O'Brien, will perform on Tuesday at 8 P.M. Tickets: $25 and
$30. Brookside Drive, Millburn. (201) 379-3636,
extension 2644.

RAMAPO COLLEGE The Minolta Summer Music Fest free Thursday night concerts
continues with Jim Furgeson and a night of country music. Thursday at 8 P.M. The
Bandshell, 505 Ramapo Valley Road. Off Route 17 and 202 in Mahwah. (201)
529-7612.

CHOIR COLLEGE CONCERTS The Westminster Choir College Summer Concert Series.
Deborah Ford-Bigger, soprano, and Peter Wright, pianist, perform in a recital.
Next Sunday at 4 P.M. Free. Westminster Choir College of Rider University,
Bristol Chapel, Hamilton Avenue and Walnut Lane, Princeton.
(609) 921-2663.

RIVERSIDE GARDENS PARK, RED BANK Comcast Cablevision and the Borough of Red Bank
continue their series of free Thursday outdoor jazz concerts with the Al Wright
Unit. Thursday at 7:30 P.M. West Front Street in downtown Red Bank. (908)
851-8849.

RUTGERS ARTS CENTER The Rutgers Summerfest is in full swing. The Ted Dunbar
Quartet. Today at 2 P.M. Tickets: $16. "Music of the 20th-Century." Tuesday at 8
P.M. Tickets: $16. Dance and Film. Wednesday at 8 P.M. Tickets: $18. The World
of Henry Purcell. Thursday at 8 P.M. Tickets: $16. Shanghai String Quartet with
Arnold Steinhardt on violin. Friday at 8 P.M. Tickets: $22. The Rutgers Festival
Orchestra, conducted by Neal Stulberg. Saturday at 8 P.M. Tickets: $22. Ralph
Bowen Quartet. Next Sunday at 2 P.M. Tickets: $16. George Street at Route 18,
New Brunswick. (908) 932-7511.

SOCLAIR BROOKS FARM In the Soclair Music Festival, the Colorado String Quartet
performs the works of Haydn and Brahms. Today at 4 P.M. Tickets: $15, or $12 for
students and the elderly. 19 Haytown Road, Lebanon. (908) 236-6476.

SOVEREL PARK, EAST ORANGE "Jazz at the Plaza" with Charles Earland and Tilva
Donna Comerbach. Tuesday at 6 P.M. Free. Springdale Avenue, East Orange. (201)
266-5147.

STOCKTON PERFORMING ARTS CENTER The Summer Jazz Festival kicks off with Tania
Maria, a Latin jazz pianist. Friday at 8 P.M. Tickets: $20. Jim Leeds Road,
Pomona. (609) 652-4607.

SUMMERFEST '95 CONCERTS The Morris County Park Commission presents the
Partners. Today at 3 P.M. Schooleys
Mountain Park, West Springtown Road,
Washington Township. Libby Richman.
Wednesday at 6:30 P.M. Mahlon Dickerson Reservation, Weldon Road, Jefferon
Township. Over the Edge. Next Sunday at 3 P.M. Silas Condict Park, Kinnelon
Road, Kinnelon. (201) 326-7600.

SUMMER STARS MUSIC FESTIVAL Classical music with the Boehm Quintette, an oboe,
flute, clarinet, bassoon and French horn ensemble. Thursday at 8 P.M. Tickets:
$10. The Great Auditorium, Pilgram Pathway, Ocean Grove. (908) 775-0035.

TENAFLY PUBLIC LIBRARY The Steamboat Stompers, with Betty Comora, vocalist,
presents an outdoor Dixieland jazz concert. Today at 3:30 P.M. Free. 401 Tenafly
Road, Tenafly. (201) 568-8680.

VILLAGERS THEATER The Garden State Opry, a monthly country music revue, presents
the Fox Hill Bluegrass Band; Carol Selick and Robin Foss, country singers; Ed
Krizni and Billy Phillips, singers and
guitarists; Liz Klosowki, a country folk
singer, and the Men's Quartet of the
Somerset Community Baptist Church.
Saturday at 8 P.M. Tickets: $7.50, or
$5 for children. 475 DeMott Lane,
Somerset. (908) 274-2748.

WATCHUNG ARTS CENTER A concert with Derek Smith, jazz pianist. Today at 2 P.M.
Grover Kemble, a guitarist, blends blues, jazz and original works in an
"Emerging Artists Concert." Friday at 8 P.M. Carrie Jackson, blues singer,
performs Saturday at 8 P.M. Tickets: $10. 18 Stirling Road, Watchung. (908)
753-0190.

WATERLOO VILLAGE CONCERTS "Afternoon Folk Music," with Gregg Cagno, Bill Kelly
and the House of Cards, Margo Hennebach and the Amazing Incredibles. Today at 1
P.M. Druha Trava/Second Grass, a Czech pop and country group. Saturday at 2 P.M.
Tickets: $8, or $7 for the elderly and $6 for children.
Joanne Shenandoah, a recording artist,
presents traditional Iroquois songs and
Indian folk ballads. Next Sunday at 7:30 P.M.
Tickets: $10. Waterloo Village, Stanhope.
(201) 347-0900.

WOOD PARK, LEONIA The Players' Guild of Leonia presents "The Music Man."
Thursday through next Sunday at 8:30 P.M. Tickets: $12, or $11 for students and
the elderly. Wood Park, Leonia. (201) 947-9606.

THEATER

BICKFORD THEATER, MORRIS MUSEUM In "Love Letters," a relationship is revealed
through a lifetime of correspondence. Today at 2 P.M.; Friday and Saturday at 8
P.M.; next Sunday at 2 P.M. and July 20-23. Tickets: $17.50. 6 Normandy Heights
Road, Morristown. (201) 538-0454.

BLACK RIVER PLAYHOUSE The Chester Theater Group presents "Nunsense II: The
Second Coming," by Dan Goggin. Starts Saturday. Through Aug. 5. Friday and
Saturday at 8 P.M. Tickets: $15. Grove Street, Chester. (908) 879-7304.

COUNT BASIE THEATER Phoenix Productions presents "Hair." Friday and Saturday at
8 P.M. and July 22 and 23. Tickets: $14 and $18. 99 Monmouth Street, Red Bank.
(908) 747-0014.

COUNTY COLLEGE OF MORRIS "A Funny Thing Happened on the Way to the Forum."
Thursday, Friday and Saturday at 8 P.M. Through July 22. Tickets: $10.
Dragonetti Auditorium, 214 Center Grove, Randolph. (201) 328-5225.

FOUNDATION THEATER "Nunsense." Today at 2 and 8 P.M. "Sleuth," by Anthony
Shaffer, begins next Wednesday. Through Aug. 6. Tickets: $15, or $13 for
students and the elderly. Burlington County College, Route 530, Pemberton. (609)
894-2138.

GUGGENHEIM SUMMER THEATER "I Hate Hamlet." Today at 7:30 P.M. "Light Up the
Sky," by Moss Hart. Thursday, Friday and Saturday at 8:30 and Sunday at 7:30.
Through July 23. Tickets: $17 or $15 for students and the elderly. Monmouth
University, West Long Branch. (908) 571-3475.

HUNTERDON COUNTY COURTHOUSE Century Productions presents "Lindbergh and
Hauptmann: The Trial of the Century." Friday and Saturday at 8 P.M. and Sunday
at 2 P.M. Through Aug. 13. Tickets: $17. Main Street, Flemington. (908)
782-2610.
NEW JERSEY SHAKESPEARE FESTIVAL "Julius Caesar." Wednesday at 2 and 8 P.M.,
Thursday and Friday at 8 P.M., Saturday at 2 and 8 P.M. and next Sunday at 2 and
7 P.M. Through July 22. Tickets: $16 to $30. Bowne Theater, Drew University, 36
Madison Avenue, Madison. (201) 408-5600.

PAPER MILL PLAYHOUSE "The Secret Garden," a musical by Marsha Norman and Lucy
Simon, based on the novel by Frances Hodgson Burnett. Wednesday and Friday at 8
P.M., Thursday at 2 and 8 P.M. and Saturday and Sunday at 3 and 8 P.M. Through
July 23. Tickets: $29 to $44. Brookside Drive, Millburn. (201) 376-4343.

RAMAPO COLLEGE The summer season of Shakespeare in the Garden continues with
"Romeo and Juliet." Saturday and next Sunday at 6 P.M. and July 21-23 and 28-30.
Free, but bring your own chairs or blankets. 505 Ramapo Valley Road, Mahwah.
(201) 529-7368.

RITZ THEATER "Oliver!," a musical. Friday and Saturday at 8 P.M and Sunday at 2
P.M. Through Aug. 5. Tickets: $12 and $14. 915 White Horse Pike, Oaklyn. (609)
858-5230.

ROOSEVELT PARK AMPHITHEATER The Middlesex County Department of Parks and
Recreation presents Plays-in-the-Park 1995. "The Sound of Music." Starts
Wednesday. Through July 22. All showtimes at 8:30 P.M. No performances on
Sundays. Tickets: $3. Edison. (609) 548-2884.

SOMERSET VALLEY PLAYHOUSE "You Can't Take It With You," by Moss Hart and George
S. Kaufman, directed by Richard Dobrowolski. Friday and Saturday at 8:30 P.M.
and Sunday at 7 P.M. Tickets: $10; $12 on Saturdays. Through July 30. Route 514
and Amwell Road, Hillsborough. (908) 369-7469.

THEATERFEST "On Golden Pond." Today at 3 and 8 P.M. "A Chorus Line." Starts
Wednesday. Through July 30. Tuesday at 8 P.M., Wednesday at 2 and 8 P.M.,
Thursday, Friday and Saturday at 8 P.M. and Sunday at 2 and 8 P.M. Tickets: $23
and $25, or $12.50 for the elderly. Montclair State University, Valley Road and
Normal Avenue, Upper Montclair. (201) 655-5112.

TOWNSQUARE PLAYHOUSE The Townsquare Players present "Snow White Goes West," a
musical. Today at 3 P.M. Tickets: $12, or $9 for students and the elderly.
Church and Wall Streets, Rockaway. (201) 361-5235.

WASHINGTON CROSSING STATE PARK The Open Air Theater series continues with
"Camelot" by the Princeton Opera Association. Wednesday through Saturday at 8:30
P.M. Tickets: $6.50 on Wednesday and Thursday; $7.50 on Friday and Saturday.
"Nunsense" begins July 20. Hopewell Township, Mercer County. (609) 737-1826.

WEISS ARTS CENTER Summerfun Theater presents "I'll Be Back Before Midnight," by
Peter Colley. Tuesday and Wednesday at 8 P.M., Thursday at 2 and 8 P.M. and
Friday and Saturday at 8 P.M. Tickets: $10-$22. "The Sisters Rosensweig" begins
July 18. Lloyd Road off Bloomfield Avenue, Montclair. (201) 256-0576.

MUSEUMS AND GALLERIES

ART CENTER OF NORTHERN NEW JERSEY Salute to Women in the Arts presents
"Summerfest V," an annual juried members show. Starts today with a reception
from 2 to 4 P.M. Through July 30. Monday through Friday, 10 A.M. to 5:30 P.M.,
and Saturday, 10 A.M. to 3 P.M. The Marcella Geltman Gallery. 250 Center Street,
New Milford. (201) 599-2992.

ART FORMS Photography by Jeff Martin, Vincent Servbin, Carter Farmer, Joseph
Paduano and others. Through July 29. Tuesday through Friday, 10 A.M. to 6 P.M.,
and Saturday, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M. 16 Monmouth Street, Red Bank. (908) 530-4330.

ART MUSEUM, PRINCETON UNIVERSITY "Collaborative Landscape Photographs by Laura
McPhee, Class of 1980, and Virginia Beahan," an exhibition of 20 color
photographs. Through Aug. 20. Free. Tuesday through Saturday, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.,
and Sunday, 1 to 5 P.M. Princeton. (609) 258-3788.

BERGEN MUSEUM OF ART AND SCIENCE "Edward Walsh Sculpture," nine abstract and
traditional sculptures created from stainless steel, granite and bronze. Through
next Monday. "John Schettino: Drawings and Paintings," through July 30.
"Photographic Drawings" by David Horton. Through July 30. Tuesday through
Saturday, 9:30 A.M. to 4:30 P.M.; Sunday, 1 to 5 P.M. Suggested admission:
adults, $2.50; children, $1. 327 East Ridgewood Avenue, Paramus. (201) 265-1248.


BERLEX LABORATORIES GALLERY "Moments in Time," original photographs by Janet
Engeman and Dwight Hiscano. Monday and Friday, 9 A.M. to 5 P.M.; Tuesday through
Thursday, 9 A.M. to 6 P.M., and Saturday, 9:30 to 5 P.M. Through Aug. 10. 300
Fairfield Road, Wayne. (201) 540-1195.

BLACKWELL STREET CENTER FOR THE ARTS "Summer Daze," an exhibition of works by
all members of the center. Through Aug. 20. Thursday through Sunday, noon to 4
P.M. 32-34 West Blackwell Street, Dover.
(201) 328-9628.

BRODSKY GALLERY, CHAUNCEY CONFERENCE CENTER Color photographs taken from around
the world by Nanci Ori. Through July 28. Monday through Friday, 9 A.M. to 9 P.M.
Rosedale Road, Princeton. (609) 921-3600.

CS SCHULTE GALLERIES "Duet: Dan Christensen -- 30 Years of Paintings; Elaine
Grove -- Recent Sculpture." Tuesday through Friday, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M. 340
Millburn Avenue, Millburn. (201) 376-6900.

EVERHART GALLERY "Summer Group Show" with architectural renderings by Lauren V.
Walling and photographs by Bill Vandever. Starts Saturday with a reception from
2 to 5 P.M. Though Aug. 30. Tuesday through Saturday, 11 A.M. to 6 P.M. 117
South Maple Avenue, Basking Ridge. (908) 221-9007.

GALLERY AT GENERAL PUBLIC UTILITIES Color photographs by H. Lisa Solon and
sculptures and paintings by David A. Angelini. Through July 30. Free. Monday
through Friday, 8:30 A.M. to 5 P.M. 100 Interpace Parkway, Parsippany. (201)
263-6684.

GUILD OF CREATIVE ART Third Annual Juried Ooen State Show. Starts today with a
reception from 3 to 5 P.M. Through July 28. Tuesday through Saturday, noon to
4:30 P.M. 620 Broad Street, Route 35, Shrewsbury. (908) 741-1441.

HUNTERDON ART CENTER "NYC Underground," 17 oil canvas paintings of New York
City's subway system and tunnels by Alexandra Dell'amore. Through Aug. 27.
Tuesday through Sunday, 11 A.M. to 5 P.M. 7 Lower Center Street, Clinton. (908)
735-8415.

JAZZ 88 GALLERY Paintings and collages by Amy Kool and photographs by Cynthia
Carris with text by Jose Luis Alonso. Monday through Friday, 10 A.M. to 4 P.M.
Through July 23. 54 Park Place, Newark.
(201) 624-8880.

JERSEY CITY MUSEUM "Albizu Lives," a visual commemoration. Through Sept. 16.
"The Nation Is Its People: Body and Soul of Lolita Lebron." Through Aug. 18.
"Joan Fine: Wall Reliefs." Through Aug. 18. Tuesday, Thursday, Friday, 10:30
A.M. to 5 P.M. and Wednesday, 10:30 A.M. to 8 P.M. 472 Jersey Avenue, Jersey
City. (201) 547-4514.

LONG BEACH ISLAND FOUNDATION OF ARTS AND SCIENCE "Abstract Watercolors,"
featuring selected artists from the New Jersey Watercolor Society.
"Mobiles/Stabiles Installation," featuring works by Myron Wasserman. Through
July 19. Monday through Saturday, 9 A.M. to 5 P.M. and Sunday, noon to 4 P.M.
Free. 120 Long Beach Boulevard, Loveladies. (609) 494-3169.

MEADOWLANDS CENTER FOR THE ARTS "Images, Dreams, Words and Marks," a solo show
of paintings and drawings by Lisa Pressman. Through Aug. 4. Monday through
Friday, 9 A.M. to 6 P.M., and Saturday and Sunday, 10 A.M. to 6 P.M. 1 Williams
Plaza, Rutherford. (201) 939-6969.

MONMOUTH COUNTY HISTORICAL ASSOCIATION MUSEUM AND LIBRARY "Optical Delights:
Stereographic Views of Monmouth County" presents images of Victorian life.
Through February 1996. Tuesday through Saturday, 10 A.M. to 4 P.M., and Sunday,
1 to 4 P.M. Admission: $2 for adults, $1 for children and $1.50 for the elderly.
70 Court Street, Freehold. (908) 462-1466.

MONMOUTH MUSEUM "Artists With Physical Disabilities" includes paintings,
photography, printmaking and sculpture. Through Aug. 17. Tuesday through
Saturday, 10 A.M. to 4:30 P.M., and Sunday, 1 to 5 P.M. Brookdale Community
College campus, Lincroft.
(908) 747-2266.

MONTCLAIR ART MUSEUM "Still Life Works From the Collection" offers 13 paintings
by American artists ranging in style from 19th-century realism to 20th-century
modernism. Through September. "Elizabeth Berdann," a self-titled installation
featuring portraits of elderly women in a nursing home. Through Oct. 1.
"Affinities and Influences: Native American Art and American Modernism" begins
next Sunday. Through Oct. 1. Tuesday, Wednesday, Friday and Saturday, 11 A.M. to
5 P.M.; Sunday and Thursday, 1 P.M. to 5 P.M. Admission: $4, or $3 for the
elderly and students with ID. 3 South Mountain Avenue, Montclair. (201)
746-5555.

MORRIS COUNTY HISTORICAL SOCIETY "A Bouquet of Brides" features more than a
dozen wedding gowns dating to 1750 and reflecting a variety of styles and
histories. Opens next Sunday. Through October. Admission: $3. Thursday, 11 A.M.
to 3 P.M., and Sunday, 1:30 to 4 P.M. 68 Morris Avenue, Morristown. (201)
267-3465.

NABISCO GALLERY "Crossing Over," an exhibition of 80 mixed-media works by 20
contemporary Russian artists. Through Sept. 7. Daily, noon to 4 P.M. River Road
and DeForest Avenue, East Hanover. (201) 503-3238.

NEWARK MUSEUM "New Jersey Arts Annual: Celebrating Diversity in Crafts" takes a
look at traditional and modern crafts in New Jersey. Through Oct. 15. "American
Art Pottery: An Uneasy Evolution, 1880-1930." Through Oct. 22. "Astronauts: The
Star Travelers" features photographs of the Apollo XI flight. Through Dec. 31.
Wednesday through Sunday, noon to 5 P.M. 49 Washington Street, Newark. (201)
596-6550.

NEW JERSEY HISTORICAL SOCIETY "Moving Through Memory: Caribbean Folk Arts in New
Jersey." Through April 1996. Tuesday through Friday, 10 A.M. to 4 P.M. 230
Broadway, Newark. (201) 483-3939.

NEW JERSEY STATE MUSEUM "Echizen: 800 Years of Japanese Stoneware," an
exhibition celebrating the history and art of potters. Through Aug. 7. "Baseball
in New Jersey: The Game of History." Through Aug. 27. Tuesday through Saturday,
9 A.M. to 4:45 P.M., and Sunday, noon to 5 P.M. 205 West State Street, Trenton.
(609) 292-6308.

NOYES MUSEUM "Looking Due South: Paintings of South Jersey by Glenn Rudderow."
Through today. "Drawing Outside the Lines: Works on Paper by Outsider Artists,"
presents a selction of drawing in pencil, crayon, and other media with work by
Eddie Arning, Minnie Evans, Bill Traylor and Martin Ramirez. Through Sept. 17.
Wednesday through Sunday, 11 A.M. to 4 P.M. Admission, $3; the elderly, $1.50;
students and children under 18, 50 cents. Free admission on Fridays. Lily Lake
Road, Oceanville. (609) 652-8848.

PAPER MILL PLAYHOUSE The Renee Foosaner Art Gallery holds its sixth annual
Juried Exhibition of Miniature Art. Through July 30. Wednesday, Thursday,
Saturday and Sunday, 7 to 8 P.M. and Friday, noon to 3 P.M. and 7 to 8 P.M.
Brookside Drive, Millburn. (201) 379-3636, extension 2272.

PASSAIC COUNTY COMMUNITY COLLEGE The Passaic County Cultural and Heritage
Council presents paintings and collages by Arnold Brown. Through July 20. Monday
through Friday, 9 A.M. to 9 P.M.; Saturday, 9 A.M. to 5 P.M. Broadway and
Memorial Drive, Paterson. (201) 684-5448.

PATERSON MUSEUM "Pencilworks: The Drawings of Jerry Winick" displays pencil
drawings noted for their details and photo-like realism. Through today. Tuesday
through Friday, 10 A.M. to 4 P.M.; Saturday and Sunday, 12:30 to 4:30 P.M. 2
Market Street, Paterson. (201) 881-3874.

PETERS VALLEY CRAFT CENTER "Artists in Residence," featuring works with wood,
fiber, ceramics, fine metals, blacksmithing and metals, and photography. Through
Dec. 31. Sunday through Thursday, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M., and Friday and Saturday, 10
A.M. to 9 P.M. 19 Kuhn Road, Route 615, Layton. (201) 948-5200.

PRINTMAKING COUNCIL OF NEW JERSEY "Manny Haller Retrospective," through July 26.
"Three Landscape Printers," through July 22. Wednesday through Friday, 11 A.M.
to 4 P.M., and Saturday, 1 to 4 P.M. 440 River Road, Somerville. (908) 725-2110.


RINGWOOD MANOR STATE PARK "50 Years Retrospective Art Exhibition" features the
works of Arthur J. Barbour in the Barn Gallery. Through today. Wednesday,
Saturday and Sunday, 1 to 4:30 P.M. Sloatsburg Road, Ringwood. (201) 962-7031.

RIVERRUN GALLERY "Myth in Modern Times," an exhibition of contemporary European,
Eastern European and American art inspired by mythology. Starts Saturday with a
reception from 6 to 9 P.M. Through Aug. 28. Monday and Wednesday through
Saturday, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.; Sunday, noon to 5 P.M. 287 South Main Street,
Lambertville.
(609) 397-3349.

RUTGERS ARTS CENTER "Multiple Exposures: Ukrainian Photography Today." In the
May Duff Walters Gallery through July 29. Wednesday through Saturday, 6:30 to
9:30 P.M., and Sunday, 12:30 to 3:30 P.M. Chapel Drive, New Brunswick. (908)
932-7511.

STEAMROLLER GALLERY "Implied Dissent," paintings and assemblages by Michelle
Henkin Bader. Starts Friday. Through Aug. 20. Tuesday, noon to 2 P.M.; Friday
and Saturday, noon to 9 P.M. and Sunday, noon to 7 P.M. 52 Bridge Street,
Frenchtown. (908) 996-7279.

STONY BROOK-MILLSTONE WATERSHED ASSOCIATION "Naturescape," an exhibition of
paintings by Christina Allen, Sarah Antin and Guy Ciarcia. Through July 22.
Wednesday through Friday, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.; Saturday, 10 A.M. to 4 P.M. Titus
Mill Road, Hopewell Township. (609) 737-7592.

SWAIN GALLERIES "Recent Works," oils by Brian Townsend. Through July 20. Tuesday
through Friday, 9:30 A.M. to 5:30 P.M., and Saturday, 9:30 A.M. to 4 P.M. 703
Watchung Avenue, Plainfield. (908) 756-1707.

WATCHUNG ARTS CENTER The New Jersey Photo Forum sponsors a show of photographic
prints in the upstairs gallery. "Vietnam: 20 Years After the Fall" features the
silkscreen photography of Richard Gerstner in the downstairs gallery. Free.
Through July 29. Monday through Saturday, 1 to 4 P.M. 18 Stirling Road,
Watchung. (908) 753-0190.

ZIMMERLI ART MUSEUM The Kusakabe-Griffs Japonisme Gallery showcases Western art
from the late 19th and early 20th centuries, documenting the Japanese influence
on Western art. Free. Tuesday through Friday, 10 A.M. to 4:30 P.M.; Saturday and
Sunday, noon to 5 P.M. Rutgers, corner of George and Hamilton Streets, New
Brunswick. (908) 932-7237.

SPOKEN WORD

BROOKDALE COMMUNITY COLLEGE Alan Richman, a magazine editor, freelance writer
and adjunct at New York University presents a three-session workshop, "Writing
for Magazines." Tomorrow, July 24 and Aug. 7. Fee: $28. James Connolly, a
photographer for The Asbury Park Press, offers a six-session workshop,
"Introduction to Lighting: Making the Most of Your Pictures." Mondays through
Aug. 14. Fee: $60. 765 Newman Springs Road, Lincroft. (908) 224-2880.

DELAWARE VALLEY POETS Leslie Bannon, Henry Beechhold and Dennis Lee read
selected works. Tomorrow at 8 P.M. Free. The Princeton Market Fair, Route 1
South, Princeton. (908) 874-3480.

OCEAN CITY ARTS CENTER A. R. Ammons, a professor at Cornell University, will
read a selection of his poems. Today at 1 P.M. Tickets: $3. 17th Street and
Simpson Avenue, Ocean City. (609) 525-9300.

SOMERSET MEDICAL CENTER Dorothy L. Zufall, director of community health
education, presents "Don't Forget," Tomorrow at 7 P.M. and "Remember This,"
Thursday at 7 P.M. Free, but advance registration is required. 110 Rehill
Avenue, Somerville. (908) 685-2827.

SOUTHERN OCEAN COUNTY HOSPITAL Jackie Rohan, director of health resources,
presents "Don't Forget: Increase Your Memory." Tuesday at 1:30 P.M. Carol
Schoenberger, director of community health education, presents "Get a Grip on
Stress!" Thursday at 7:30 P.M. Free. The Conference Center, 1140 Route 72 West,
Manahawkin. (609) 978-8999.

ST. BARNABAS MEDICAL CENTER Seton Hall University's Department of Continuing
Education and St. Barnabas Medical Center's Senior Health program co-sponsor two
lectures on American art for the elderly. Professor Robert J. Koenig will speak
on "The American Way: Portraits, Landscapes and Still Lifes, 1760 to 1860," and
"American Art Comes of Age: Painting and Sculpture, 1860 to 1995." Wednesday and
Thursday, noon to 2 P.M. Fee: $25 for both lectures. Old Short Hills Road,
Livingston. (201) 325-6503.

FOR CHILDREN

MEADOW THEATER The Meadow Kids' Summer Clubhouse offers a new show every week
with audience participation, songs, games, dancing, improvisations and short
plays. Saturday at 11 A.M. Through Aug. 26. Tickets: $5. Galleria Atrium, Bridge
Avenue and West Front, Red Bank. (908) 758-0099.

BERGEN MUSEUM OF ART AND SCIENCE Muriel Ray presents a morning art workshop that
includes making finger puppets for a puppet theater. Saturday at 11 A.M. Fee:
$4. Reservations are suggested. 327 Ridgewood Avenue, Paramus. (201) 265-1248.

BICKFORD THEATER, MORRIS MUSEUM The Saturn Summer Theater Series for Children, a
selection of plays, musicals and variety shows, continues with "Snow White," by
the Yates Musical Theater. Tuesday at 11 A.M. and 1:30 P.M. Tickets: $6.25. 6
Normandy Heights Road, Morristown. (201) 538-0454.

ENGLEWOOD PUBLIC LIBRARY Bob Messano (Guitar Bob) presents a concert of
children's songs. Monday at nooon. Free. 31 Engle Street, Englewood. (201)
568-2215.

FORUM THEATER The Yates Musical Theater and the Forum Theater Group present
"Snow White." Thursday at 10 A.M. Tickets: $8. 314 Main Street, Metuchen.(908)
548-4670.

LONG BEACH ISLAND FOUNDATION OF ARTS AND SCIENCE Children's Theater presents
"Underneath the Deep Blue Sea," a series of songs of sea creatures and water
with an environmental focus. Tuesday at 7:30 P.M. Tickets: $5. 120 Long Beach
Boulevard, Loveladies. (609) 494-3169.

MONTCLAIR STATE UNIVERSITY Theaterfest for Kids and the Pushcart Players present
"Stone Soup and Other Stories," a musical collection of folk tales from around
the world. Thursday at 11 A.M. Tickets: $7.50. Valley Road, Upper Montclair.
(201) 655-5112.

NEWARK MUSEUM Mr. Hustler shares the power of knowledge as he teaches about
galaxies, stars and nebulae in "The Power." Wednesday through Friday at 2:30
P.M. and Saturday and Sunday at 1 and 3 P.M. Learn African myths and legends
behind the constellations in "African Skies." Wednesday through Friday at 1:30
P.M. and Saturday and Sunday at 2 and 4 P.M. Adults, $2; children under 12, $1.
49 Washington Street, Newark. (201) 596-6550.

NEW JERSEY CENTER FOR VISUAL ARTS "Pee-Wee Prodigies," for ages 2 and 3, allows
children to paint, print and make puppets and masks and offers many other
hands-on art activities for preschoolers and their adult companions. Tuesday and
Thursday, 12:45 to 1:45 P.M. Materials fee: $4. 68 Elm Street, Summit. (908)
273-9121.

NEW JERSEY STATE MUSEUM Join Sandy, a golden retriever, in teaching Pepper, a
beagle, about lunar and solar eclipses. Saturday and Sunday at 1 and 3 P.M.
Travel to mysterious worlds of our solar system and beyond with Patrick Stewart
in "To Worlds Beyond." Saturday and Sunday at 2 P.M. Tickets: $1. 205 West State
Street, Trenton. (609) 292-6308.

RARITAN VALLEY COMMUNITY COLLEGE The college's planetarium offers "Mystery! Who
Stole the Night," a show that is part
legend, fairy tale, science documentary
and classic mystery yarn, for the entire
family. Monday and Wednesday at 2 P.M.
Through Aug. 16. Admission: $4.50. Route
28 and Lamington Road, North Branch.
(908) 231-8805.

RITZ THEATER "Puss N' Boots" meets Ritzy the Wolf. Wednesday at 10 A.M. and
Thursday at 10 A.M. and 1 P.M. Tickets: $4. 915 White Horse Pike, Oaklyn. (609)
858-5230.

SOVEREL PARK, EAST ORANGE "The Circus Is Coming." Saturday at 11 A.M. Free.
Springdale Avenue, East Orange. (201) 266-5147.

STOCKTON PERFORMING ARTS CENTER "Marvelous Mostly Midday Matinees" features a
different professional children's theater company each Wednesday in July. The
Child's Play Touring Theater presents "Wunzapona Time," a series of fairy tales
with music and audience participation that will take children from the Old West
to outer space. Wednesday at 10:30 A.M., 2 P.M. and 6 P.M. Jim Leeds Road,
Pomona. (609) 652-4607.

THEATER IN THE PARK Duet Productions presents "Robin Hood." Wednesday at 7 P.M.
Free. Next week, Touchstone Productions performs "By the Light of the Silvery
Moon." The Donald Rainear Ampitheater, Sunset Lake. (609) 451-9208.

ZIMMERLI ART MUSEUM The Rutgers Collection of Original Illustrations for
Children's Literature: "Riders Up! Preparing for a Pony Race," an exhibition of
photographs and other materials by Barbara Beirne for her book about a young
girl and her pony as they prepare for their first race. Through July 31. Tuesday
through Friday, 10 A.M. to 4:30 P.M.; Saturday and Sunday, noon to 5 P.M. Free.
Rutgers, corner of George and Hamilton Streets, New Brunswick. (908) 932-7237.

ETC.

DINNER AND THEATER The $42 ticket price includes a four-course meal and "Deep
Space Noir," an interactive and futuristic detective story. Saturdays, 8 P.M. Il
Giardino Restaurant. 41 Ridgedale Avenue, Cedar Knolls. (201) 301-0562.

FLEA MARKET The Chester Lions Club Flea Market offers craft items, linens,
books, children's clothing, housewares, plants and produce, makeup, jewelry,
scarves, handbags and other accessories. Sundays, 9 A.M. to 5 P.M, through Dec.
19. Beginning today. Free. West Blackwell Street, Morris and Sussex Streets in
downtown Dover. (201) 442-1494.

LEARN ABOUT SAILING Brookdale Community College is offering landlubbers an easy
introduction to sailing and an afternoon aboard a 30-foot sloop on Raritan Bay.
Licensed United States Coast Guard captains will teach basic sailing terminology
and provide instructions on how to sail. Today. The sloop leaves the Sandy Hook
Bay Marina at 1 P.M. and returns at 9 P.M. Fee: $75, and advance registration is
required. (908) 224-2880.

NEW JERSEY FILM FESTIVAL "Before the Rain," Friday, "Ivan and Abraham,"
Saturday, "Man of Aran," July 21, "The
Grapes of Wrath," July 22, and "The
Learning Tree," July 28. Show times, 7 P.M.
Tickets: $4. Rutgers University in New
Brunswick, College Avenue campus,
Milledoler Hall, George Street and Seminary Place. (908) 932-8482.

SPIOTTA PARK, SOUTH ORANGE Main Street South Orange sponsors a family night of
games, entertainment and a children's scavenger hunt. Friday from 7 to 11 P.M.
Entertainment includes a professional ice sculpturing contest, a performance by
the Next Generation Jazz Quartet and a dance demonstration by the Maria Priadka
School. Downtown South Orange. (201) 763-6899.

STONY BROOK-MILLSTONE WATERSHED ASSOCIATION The public is invited to take a
leisurely stroll on the watershed trails and investigate various aspects of
summer ecology. Today at 1 P.M. Free, but registration is required. Titus Mill
Road, Hopewell Township. (609) 737-7592.

Sounds of Summer
Liza Minnelli and Billy Stritch perform tomorrow and Anita Baker appears
Wednesday as part of the Summer Sounds '95 concert series.
GARDEN STATE ARTS CENTER Tickets: $22.50-$50. Showtimes at 8 P.M. Exit 116 on
the Garden State Parkway, Holmdel. (908) 888-5011.

Russian Revival
The George Riabov Collection features urban scenes, medieval icons, 19th-century
landscapes and 20th-century costume and stage designs.
ZIMMERLI ART MUSEUM Call for times. Free. Rutgers, corner of George and Hamilton
Streets, New Brunswick. (908) 932-7237.

LOAD-DATE: July 9, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Schedule

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              23 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 11, 1995, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

We Can't Re-establish Vietnam Relations

SECTION: Section A;  Page 18;  Column 4;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 254 words


To the Editor:

The United States has never had diplomatic relations with the Socialist Republic
of Vietnam or its antecedents. It is therefore incorrect to state as you do that
"President Clinton has concluded that the time has come to re-establish full
diplomatic relations with the former enemy" (front page, July 7).

The United States did not recognize the Government of the Democratic Republic of
Vietnam when it was established by Ho Chi Minh in Hanoi in September 1945. When
the Soviet Union and China recognized this government in February 1950,
President Truman recognized the Government of the State of Vietnam headed by
former Emperor Bao Dai.

The United States continued to maintain its consulate in Hanoi when the
Democratic Republic of Vietnam occupied Hanoi in accordance with the Geneva
armistice of 1954, but this consulate was accredited to the municipality of
Hanoi, not the Democratic Republic of Vietnam.

It was closed in December 1955, when the authorities forbade the use of radio to
communicate out, according to the oral history of the last consul, Thomas
Corcoran, which is kept at Georgetown University.

Diplomatic relations were maintained with the State of Vietnam at successively
higher levels of legation and embassy in Saigon, and then with the Republic of
Vietnam, which succeeded it, until April 30, 1975, when the United States
embassy was evacuated.

ARTHUR J. DOMMEN
Bethesda, Md., July 7, 1995

The writer covered Indochina for U.P.I. and The Los Angeles Times.

LOAD-DATE: July 11, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              24 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 11, 1995, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 873 words



International   A3-13

SERBS BATTLE PEACEKEEPERS
Bosnian Serbs clashed with peacekeepers protecting a Bosnian enclave and ordered
them and the civilians they were protecting to leave. NATO air protection was
requested, but called off.  A1
DOLE REBUFFS CLINTON ON BOSNIA
Senator Bob Dole refused an invitation to meet with President Clinton, who is
trying to maintain support for his Bosnia policy, and said he plans to seek
legislation to lift the Bosnia arms embargo.  A10
BURMESE DISSIDENT LEADER FREED
Burmese officials released the Nobel Prize-winning opposition leader from house
arrest after six years, apparently without their previous requirements that she
leave the country for several years.  A1
CHINA ALLOWS JAIL INTERVIEW
China allowed an American envoy to interview the Chinese-American human rights
advocate it had arrested three weeks ago, but little was revealed about charges
against him or his prospects.  A8
Despite posturing, Taiwan and China are expanding ties.  A8
NUCLEAR TESTS TO PROCEED
France brushed aside international concerns over its seizure of a ship that was
protesting its plans for nuclear testing and said that it will proceed with the
tests.  A12
IN BOLIVIA, COCA QUANDARY
Bolivia is under pressure from the United States to cut its coca production, but
with many subsistence farmers there depending on the coca crop, there are many
political and economic obstacles.  A3
MEXICAN VIOLENCE RAISES FEARS
A resurgence of violence in a Mexican state with a history of such problems has
both shaken its residents and raised new questions about the country's
stability.  A3

Pope backs women's rights, but diverse roles.  A11
Protestant marchers fought with police in Northern Ireland.  A11
Managua Journal: A national hero on the pitcher's mound.  A4

National   A14-17

CLINTON ATTACKS TV VIOLENCE
The President, on a visit to Tennessee, endorsed Congressional proposals to
require television makers to install a computer chip that could screen out
programs that broadcasters had coded as violent.  A1
SIMPSON DEFENSE BEGINS
O.J. Simpson's family gathered around him in court and his elder daughter
described his demeanor when told of the killing of his former wife.  A1
SUSAN SMITH IS CALLED COMPETENT
As jury selection began in the trial of Susan Smith, a state expert said she was
legally competent to stand trial on murder charges for drowning her two sons.
A14
DISPUTE OVER 'WANTED' POSTER
A Republican fund-raising letter features a "Wanted" poster that calls for
unseating 28 liberal Democrats, 22 of whom are black, Hispanic, female or
Jewish; Democrats criticized the poster as inflaming racial and ethnic hatred.
A16
G.O.P. MEDICARE PLAN ASSAILED
A large hospital association said Congressional Republicans were moving too fast
in their effort to overhaul Medicare.  A16
PACKWOOD HEARINGS ARE SOUGHT
Five of the eight women in the Senate have called for public hearings into the
accusations of sexual and official misconduct against Senator Bob Packwood of
Oregon.  A16
MAIL BOMB INSURES 2 IN OFFICE
A bomb in a paper package exploded at the headquarters of a long-distance
telephone company, injuring two women.  A17
DOOR FALLS OFF PLANE
Passengers clutched a flight attendant to keep her from being swept out of an
commuter plane after the cabin door blew off minutes after taking off in
Chicago.  A17

Buena Vista Journal: Flood after flood, a small town copes.  A14


Metro Digest   B1

CITY DEBT RATING IS LOWERED
A major credit agency lowered its rating of New York City's long-term debt,
blaming the sluggish economy but rebuking Mayor Giuliani for what it called
financial gimmickry in balancing the budget.  A1
RULING UPHELD ON CHILD SUPPORT
Upholding New Jersey's child-support guidelines, the state Supreme Court
rejected a divorced father's arguments that his support payments should be
reduced so he can spend the money as he sees fit when he is caring for his
children. A1
BUSINESSMAN OR MOB LEADER?
A Federal indictment depicts Paul H. K. Lai, a well-known businessman, as a top
leader of an organized crime group. But many in Chinatown, and Mr. Lai himself
in an unusual two-hour interview, paint a different portrait.  A1
Business Digest D1
Arts/Entertainment C13-16
Some hits and misses among the summer's movies.  C13
Music: "Turn of the Screw." C15
Dance: Israel's Batsheva company at Jacob's Pillow.  C13
Art: "Video Spaces," at the Museum of Modern Art.  C13
Books: "The Female Thermometer," by Terry Castle.  C16
Television: Roger Corman's "Suspect Device," on Showtime.  C16
Fashion B6-7
Science C1-11 The prairie dog throws his weight around his ecological niche.  C1

Galileo ready to drop probe into the atmosphere of Jupiter.  C1
Sports B8-13
Obituaries D19
Helene Johnson, poet.
Editorials/Op-Ed A18-19 Editorials
Free Harry Wu.
The Gephardt tax plan.
Power tennis.
Representative Johnson's task.
Letters
Russell Baker: Six feet high and rising.
Anders Aslund: Russia's sleaze sector.
Vu-Duc Vuong: Hello, Vietnam.
James K. Galbraith: Greenspan's error.
Chronicle B2
Chess C7
Crossword C16

LOAD-DATE: July 11, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              25 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 12, 1995, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

OPENING TO VIETNAM;
Clinton on Recognition: A Move 'to Common Ground'

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A;  Page 8;  Column 5;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 527 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 11


Following are excerpts of President Clinton's announcement today establishing
full diplomatic relations between the United States and Vietnam:

Today, I am announcing the normalization of diplomatic relationships with
Vietnam.

From the beginning of this Administration, any improvement in relationships
between America and Vietnam has depended upon making progress on the issue of
Americans who were missing in action or held as prisoners of war. Last year, I
lifted the trade embargo on Vietnam in response to their cooperation and to
enhance our efforts to secure the remains of lost Americans and to determine the
fate of those whose remains had not been found.

It has worked. In 17 months Hanoi has taken important steps to help us resolve
many cases. Twenty-nine families have received the remains of their loved ones,
and at last have been able to give them the proper burial. Hanoi has delivered
to us hundreds of pages of documents shedding light on what happened to
Americans in Vietnam, and Hanoi has stepped up its cooperation with Laos, where
many Americans were lost. We have reduced the number of so-called "discrepancy
cases," in which we have had reason to believe that Americans were still alive
after they were lost, to 55, and we will continue to work to resolve more cases.
. . .

Our strategy is working. Normalization of relations is the next appropriate
step. With this new relationship, we will be able to make more progress. To that
end, I will send another delegation to Vietnam this year. Vietnam has pledged it
will continue to help us find answers. We will hold them to that pledge.

By helping to bring Vietnam into the community of nations, normalization also
serves our interest in working for a free and peaceful Vietnam in a stable and
peaceful Asia . . .

Our policy will be to implement the appropriate United States government
programs to develop trade with Vietnam, consistent with United States law. As
you know, many of these programs require certifications regarding human rights
and labor rights before they can proceed. . . . The Secretary of State will go
to Vietnam in August where he will discuss all of these issues, beginning with
our P.O.W. and M.I.A. concerns.

I believe normalization and increased contact between Americans and Vietnamese
will advance the cause of freedom in Vietnam just as it did Eastern Europe and
the former Soviet Union. I strongly believe that engaging the Vietnamese on the
broad economic front of economic reform, and the broad front of democratic
reform, will help to honor the sacrifice of those who fought for freedom's sake
in Vietnam. . . .

This step will also help our own country to move forward on an issue that has
separated Americans from one another for too long now. Let the future be our
destination. We have so much work ahead of us. This moment offers us the
opportunity to bind up our own wounds. They have resisted time for too long. We
can now move on to common ground. Whatever divided us before, let us consign to
the past. Let this moment in the words of Scripture, "Be a time to heal, and a
time to build." Thank you all. And God bless America.

LOAD-DATE: July 12, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Text

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              26 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 12, 1995, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

OPENING TO VIETNAM: IN CALIFORNIA;
For Many of Those Who Fled Vietnam, a Day of Sadness, Anger and Hope

BYLINE: By SETH MYDANS

SECTION: Section A;  Page 9;  Column 1;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1053 words

DATELINE: WESTMINSTER, Calif., July 11


For Yen Do, editor of the largest Vietnamese-language daily in America, the
establishment today of diplomatic relations between Hanoi and Washington marks
the end of a half century of war that has tortured his nation and scattered two
million of its people around the world.

It welcomes Vietnam into the community of nations, opens new possibilities for
its economic development and may help efforts to foster democracy and human
rights after 20 years of Communist rule, said Mr. Yen, who edits Nguoi Viet
Daily News here in the community known as Little Saigon, 30 miles south of Los
Angeles.

But for Mr. Yen and many of his fellow refugees, the day was nevertheless
colored by sadness, symbolically laying to rest the homeland they fought for,
whose yellow-and-red flag is still flown by overseas Vietnamese groups.

"It is something like a pair of lovers who know it is time to leave each other,"
he said. "Reasonably, rationally, they know the time has come, but emotionally
it is hard to accept."

Among many overseas Vietnamese, the sadness found expression in angry words.

"I feel very angry and bitter, but then, it's very clear that business interests
have been put in front of human rights," said Diem Do, who has been a leading
opponent of normalized relations in the highly fragmented emigre community.

Tran Van Ngoc, past president of the Vietnamese Air Force Veterans Association,
said he saw the move as a cynical attempt to use Vietnam once again as a
geopolitical pawn against Chinese expansion.

Mai Cong, who heads the Vietnamese Community of Orange County, a private social
and cultural agency here, issued a statement saying, "It is as if a decisive
step has been taken to sever us from the past, or from any lingering attachment
with the past, even though the past only means war and misery for many of us."

She added: "There may be joy in Hanoi, but there certainly will be no
celebrations in Little Saigon."

And on Little Saigon Radio, which interrupted its Vietnamese-language broadcasts
to carry President Clinton's announcement live this morning, the news was
immediately followed by interviews with non-Vietnamese opponents of
normalization, who said things like, "I truly believe that this is one of the
blackest days in the history of America."

In the three hours following the announcement, 32 callers to an open line at the
radio station opposed the reestablishment of relations, while just 13 supported
it, said Trang Nguyen, president of Little Saigon TV and Radio.

Since the fall of Saigon in April 1975, some 800,000 refugees have fled to the
United States, many clustering in Vietnamese communities like this one where the
question of whether to open business and diplomatic contacts with Hanoi created
sometimes violent divisions but also helped to define emigre politics and
discourse.

For years, right-wing groups collected donations for a fantasy guerrilla war
that would succeed where the Americans had failed. Journalists and others who
advocated improved relations with Vietnam were attacked and, on a handful of
occasions, were killed.

Opposition to improved relations with Hanoi has been kept alive by the recent
arrival of about 10,000 former labor camp prisoners, mostly elderly men whose
lives have been consumed by the war and its harsh aftermath and who could be
counted on to join anti-Communist demonstrations here.

But in recent years, particularly after President Clinton lifted a trade embargo
in February 1994, an increasing flood of emigre Vietnamese tourists and
entrepreneurs has visited Vietnam, crossing paths with the final trickle of
postwar refugees.

Twenty years after Saigon's fall -- and 50 years after the start of the war
against the colonial French government that preceded Washington's involvement --
many Vietnamese here say the passage of history has made the debate over
normalization as anachronistic as the continuing departure of refugees.

"I think it is good that we finally can put everything behind us and move ahead,
and for the community to concentrate on the problems at hand," said Le Kim Dinh,
a journalist and writer.

There are signs that that might be happening. On Monday, on the eve of Mr.
Clinton's announcement, 10 groups from among the many feuding emigre factions
signed a resolution urging Washington to press Hanoi on two substantive issues
that overseas Vietnamese agree on: democratization and human rights.

And in a signal that they might leave their political isolation and join
mainstream politics, the groups also called for strong action on an issue of
greater interest to non-Vietnamese Americans: the search for missing American
servicemen.

"In the past, it was all divisiveness," said Mrs. Nguyen. "People were all
calling each other Communists. Now they can unite on real issues, and from now
on they will have some real doors to knock on.  They can protest directly at the
Vietnamese Embassy and consular offices."

Mr. Yen said he foresaw other benefits from normalized diplomatic relations.
Many former South Vietnamese officials and high-ranking military men who feared
revisiting Vietnam may now feel safe in doing so, given the protection of an
American Embassy.

In addition, he said, today's announcement could result in the freeing of some
political prisoners who have been held because of Hanoi's fears of outside
threats.

Some other Vietnamese-Americans were aggressively eager to move ahead both with
their integration into American society and their business ventures in Vietnam.

Frank Jao, a leading developer who owns much of the property in Little Saigon
and is exploring business opportunities in Vietnam, rejected any talk of the
past.

"Speaking in the context of being an American businessman -- nothing to do with
Vietnamese-American, because I am no longer a Vietnamese -- it's good for the
United States," he said of today's developments. "It is good for business in the
United States of America."

And T. T. Nhu, a Vietnamese-American who is a columnist for The San Jose Mercury
News, said she was glad to be able to move on to other issues.

"I've almost run out of things to say," she said. "Thank God we are at the end
of the road. This should have happened in 1945. It's all been so unnecessary.
What a waste of life.  What a tragedy it has all been."

LOAD-DATE: July 12, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              27 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 12, 1995, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 893 words



International A3-9

U.S. OFFER TO VIETNAM
President Clinton extended full diplomatic recognition to Vietnam 20 years after
the American withdrawal from the bitter, divisive war. A1

PATH TO A POLICY SHIFT
News analysis: The wonder is not that relations are being established with Hanoi
but how long it took.


For MIA families, worries and a sense of betrayal. A8

In Ho Chi Minh City, high expectations of benefits. A9

Among Vietnamese in America, anger and sadness. A9

SERBS CAPTURE BOSNIAN TOWN
Brushing off NATO air attacks, Bosnian Serb forces overran Srebrenica, the first
United Nations "safe area" to fall. A1

United Nations mission in Bosnia thrown into jeopardy. A6

Russian President is hospitalized with heart pains. A3

Newly freed Burmese opposition leader calls for compromise. A3

Chinese Government displeased over Dalai Lama remarks. A3

Prague Journal: For statues, the city's soul, a wearing time. A4

National A10-15

MIXED MESSAGE ON HORMONES
Just one month after a study found that women who took hormone replacement
therapy after menopause had an increased risk of getting breast cancer, another
major study has found no such effect.  A1

REVEALING A COLD WAR SECRET
Newly declassified documents show how the United States broke Soviet codes in
the late 1940's and learned that its World War II ally was seeking the atomic
bomb.  A10

N.A.A.C.P. RIDICULES RIGHT
At the 86th annual convention of the National Association for the Advancement of
Colored People in Minneapolis, leaders of the American right were ridiculed.
A10

DISPUTING THE SIMPSON TIME LINE
O. J. Simpson's lawyers began chipping away at the prosecution's time line, with
witnesses who said all was calm outside Nicole Brown Simpson's home at the
moment prosecutors say her dog was howling over the bloody corpses.  A10

RULING IN SUSAN SMITH TRIAL
Despite warnings from a psychiatrist that she might try to sabotage her own
defense, Susan Smith was ruled competent to stand trial for drowning her two
sons. A11

CLINTON MEETS BLACK CAUCUS
The President met with the Congressional Black Caucus to hear its concerns on
affirmative action, voting rights and the budget.  A13

COMPROMISE ON RULE OVERHAUL
The Senate took the first steps to weaken legislation that would strictly limit
the ability of agencies to write regulations on health, safety and the
environment.  A12

DEATH SOUGHT FOR BOMB SUSPECT
Federal prosecutors notified lawyers for Timothy J. McVeigh that they had
invoked a procedure to seek the death penalty against him in the Federal
building blast.  A14

HEARING ON PARAMILITARY GROUPS
A group of local, state and Federal officials told a Congressional panel that
right-wing paramilitary groups had assaulted, harassed and threatened them,
members of their families and co-workers.  A14

BATTLE OVER RAID DOCUMENTS
The White House legal counsel met with Republicans about its refusal to turn
over documents on the Government's raid on the Branch Davidians compound in
Texas.  A14

Education B6

Teachers prepare to debunk the latest Hollywood myth: Pocahontas.

Law journals crack down on two-timing contributors.

Metro Digest B1

INQUIRY IN POLICE SPREE
After a two-month investigation into a drunken spree by New York City police
officers through six Washington hotels, police officials said that no more than
7 of the 942 officers in the capital at the time faced serious departmental
charges. A1

NEW DISEASE FROM LYME TICK
A newly identified and sometimes fatal bacterial illness transmitted by the same
tick that carries Lyme disease has stricken at least a dozen people in the
tick-infested suburbs north of New York City. A1

Business Digest D1

Arts/Entertainment C11-18

Amy Kaiser is leaving one life of music for another.  C11
Theater: "The Tempest." C11
Film: "Nine Months." C11
Music: Salsa's new face.  C12
French opera rarities.  C12
Books: Extraterrestrial life.  C17
Book Notes C16

The Living Section C1-9

Fancy this, fancy that: Tidbits at a food exposition.  C1
At work with Dr. Kenneth Cooper: The fit commandment.  C1
Finesse times two.C1

Health Page C10

Personal Health: Heading off strokes with carotid surgery.
Are you really sensitive to milk? A new study casts doubt.
Women raise heart risks with heavy drinking, a study says.

Sports B8-13

Baseball: National All-Stars make it two in a row.  B9
Japan watches Nomo.  B9
Season of unpleasant surprises for Mets.  B10
Mantle promises to make amends.  B10
Columns: Anderson on Mantle.  B9
Cycling: Indurain gives a climbing lesson.  B13
Football: Esiason vows to keep whiners in check.  B9
The Panthers' master builder.  B12
Hockey: Progress in Devils' talks.  B13
Sports People: B8

Obituaries B7

Editorials/Op-Ed A16-17

Editorials

Recognizing reality in Vietnam.
TV power to the parents.
Partners in sleaze.
Abuse of homeless proves costly.

Letters

Frank Rich: The God patrol.
Thomas L. Friedman: Meddling for peace.
Patrick McGrath: New York's Haunted Houses.
Ester R. Fuchs: The bond rating can't be ignored.

Chronicle A13

Crossword C18

LOAD-DATE: July 12, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              28 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 12, 1995, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

OPENING TO VIETNAM: IMPLICATIONS;
Finally, Opening the Door All the Way

BYLINE: By R. W. APPLE Jr.

SECTION: Section A;  Page 1;  Column 3;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1079 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 11


The wonder is not that the United States is establishing normal diplomatic
relations with Hanoi, two full decades after the fall of Saigon; the wonder is
that it took so long.

Presidents have come and gone since those final apocalyptic scenes of a long,
wretched war -- the American Ambassador fleeing from Saigon with the embassy's
flag folded under his arm, the fevered scramble for the last seats on the last
helicopter out. Neither Gerald R. Ford nor Jimmy Carter nor Ronald Reagan nor
George Bush could bring himself to recognize the government that Washington had
demonized for so long, though Bush started down the path.

Instead, fate chose an unlikely pair of men: Bill Clinton, liberal Democrat, who
like many thousands of his contemporaries managed to avoid fighting in a war
that never won the full-hearted support of the American people, and John McCain,
conservative Republican, son and grandson of admirals, who not only fought as a
Navy pilot, but, shot down, spent more than five years in an enemy prison camp.

President Clinton provided the political impetus, Senator McCain of Arizona the
political cover without which Mr. Clinton might have feared to act.

There were other key players as well, notably American business, eager for its
share of the riches that Vietnam, its talented people and its offshore waters
seem to promise, and American diplomats, who see friendship with Vietnam as an
important asset for the United States as it seeks to counter Chinese influence
in Asia.

The conventional explanation for the delay was the difficulty in accounting for
the Americans still carried on military rolls as missing in action. According to
the Pentagon, there are 2,202 of them if you count all of Southeast Asia, 1,618
if you count only Vietnam. Of that total, only 55, by official tally, are known
to have been seen alive in captivity at some stage.

But the real reason lay much deeper within the national consciousness.

Far, far more Americans are listed as missing in the Korean War (8,170) and in
World War II (78,750).  Yet no one ever suggested it would be possible to
account for more than a handful of them -- not to mention the hundreds of
thousands of north and south Vietnamese whose fate remains unknown.

A few years after World War II, the United States was engaged in huge rebuilding
efforts in Germany and Japan, even though Germans had killed millions of Jews
and Japanese had tortured prisoners on a vast scale.

The difference, of course, is that the United States lost in Vietnam. It is
never easy for the big guy to shake hands after losing the fight to the little
guy, especially when he has never lost before, and so it was after the Vietnam
War. The open wound of defeat was salved, for some Americans, by continuing to
regard the Hanoi Government as an evil, outlaw, untouchable regime.

The resentment over the loss of so many American lives and the stunting of so
many others, combined with the unresolved confusion and controversy over the
purpose of the war itself, made it possible for the relatives and friends of
some of the missing Americans to delay, but not ultimately to prevent, this last
acknowledgment that the war is truly over, that it is time, as President Clinton
suggested today, to move beyond "the haunting and painful past."

Not everyone will agree, of course.  A group called "The Last Firebase,"
composed of veterans and relatives of the missing, said that "today will forever
be known by America's veterans as Black Tuesday." The American Legion opposed
the decision, and so did Senator Bob Dole of Kansas, the leading contender for
the Republican Presidential nomination next year.

It was "a strategic, diplomatic and moral mistake to grant Vietnam the stamp of
approval from the U.S. Government," Senator Dole asserted.

But the most recent survey of American opinion suggests strongly that he and
other critics of the President are in a distinct minority. A new CNN/USA
Today/Gallup poll shows 61 percent of the public backing recognition and only 27
percent opposing it.

Mr. McCain's support is invaluable to Mr. Clinton, because he is by far the best
known of the survivors of the infamous "Hanoi Hilton." He not only endorsed the
President's action but said "it required some courage."

So is the backing of Jan Scruggs, who was wounded in Vietnam and later sparked
the creation of the black granite Vietnam Veterans Memorial wall here. His
comment was laconic: "The war is over, so let's be friends." And so is the
backing of some veterans' groups, like the Veterans of Foreign Wars.

It may be that many Republican primary voters, a more conservative subset of the
more conservative party, are more opposed to Mr. Clinton's action than are
Americans as a whole. Mr. Dole's stance may play well with them.

But the steps along this road that Mr. Bush and Mr. Clinton took earlier,
including the lifting last year of a 19-year embargo on trade with Vietnam,
failed to produce the groundswell of protest that the die-hards predicted. And
Vietnam is now clearly a land of opportunities, which will inevitably draw much
more American investment and many more visits by American tourists.

As a web of everyday political and economic links grows between the United
States and Vietnam, as more and more Americans come to know Vietnam at peace,
the old passions, already nearly spent for most Americans, will seem
increasingly irrelevant. Normality is the enemy of grudges and hatreds.

At any rate, the deed is done. Congressional threats to withhold money for an
American embassy in Hanoi are likely to come to nothing. Mr. Clinton acted just
as the question of full diplomatic ties was beginning to be sucked into the
vortex of the 1996 campaign. He could not have waited much longer, and by moving
now, he may benefit from looking resolute on a tough issue.

Reminiscing this morning with a reporter he has known since the days of air
raids over Hanoi and ground combat in the Central Highlands, Senator McCain
commented that he was determined that his generation not leave a legacy of anger
and vindictiveness.

"I got over the war about 45 minutes after the plane bringing me home took off
from Hanoi," he said.  "But not everyone feels that way.  Some people hate me
for backing this, call me the Manchurian Candidate, say I'm a collaborator, the
most awful stuff. There will always be people like that, but fewer and fewer.
Not many people talk about the dirty Japs anymore."

LOAD-DATE: July 12, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: News Analysis

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              29 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 12, 1995, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

BUSINESS DIGEST

SECTION: Section D; Page 1; Column 1; Business/Financial Desk

LENGTH: 517 words



Executives Praise Recognition of Vietnam
American business executives hailed the Clinton Administration's decision to
extend full diplomatic recognition to Vietnam as a step toward putting them on
equal footing with foreign competitors there. But they said that the diplomatic
move alone would not unleash an investment boom because a foundation for normal
trade relations between the two countries does not now exist. One trade group
urged the Clinton Administration to move quickly to negotiate a trade agreement
with Hanoi. [Page A9.]

Market Drifts to a Loss
In what analysts called a drifting market, stocks pulled back as many traders
sold issues that have had strong run-ups this year. The Dow fell 21.79 points,
to 4,680.60. [D8.]

The dollar climbed against leading currencies on expectations that the German
central bank would cut interest rates. The dollar rose to 1.4065 marks and to
87.54 yen. [D15.]

Consumer Borrowing Rises
The Federal Reserve said consumer borrowing increased to $11.51 billion in May,
the 24th consecutive month it has risen, led by strong credit-card use. [D3.]

Marketer to Head Cordiant
Cordiant, the agency holding company, named Robert L. Seelert, who has led
companies that market brands like Maxwell House and No Nonsense, as chief
executive. Stuart Elliott: Advertising. [D7.]

Motorola Earnings Up 31%
Motorola said that its net income rose 31 percent in the second quarter, to $481
million, and that it had resolved a nagging problem of bulging cellular
telephone inventories. [D3.]

Russia's First Hostile Bid
Bank Menatep, one of Russia's largest banks, made an unprecedented hostile offer
for a controlling interest in the Red October candy company, arguably Russia's
favorite chocolatier. [D4.]

U.P.S. Pact With J. C. Penney
United Parcel Service has agreed to a five-year, $1 billion contract to become
the preferred carrier for J. C. Penney's small-package air deliveries. [D3.]

New Chief for Burger King
Grand Metropolitan reached within its own executive ranks and named Robert C.
Lowes as chief executive of Burger King. Mr. Lowes had been the Paris-based
chief executive of the European food operations of Grand Met, which is Burger
King's parent. [D2.]

AT&T in Internet Deal
AT&T is expected to announce today that it will spend $8 million to buy a stake
in the BBN Planet Corporation, one of the largest corporate Internet access
providers. [D3.]

Contractor Charged in Fraud
A New York City contractor, whose company was a subsidiary of American Express,
has been charged with bilking major corporations out of more than $7 million.
[B3.]

Venezuelan Gold-Mining Boom
Harnessing free-market policies and looser environmental rules, and driven by
recession, Venezuela is among the leaders of a Latin American boom in mining
investment. [D4.]

Report on Travel Crime
A recent report shows that the crime rate against adult American travelers is 40
percent less than the rate for Americans in general. Edwin McDowell: Business
Travel. [D5.]

LOAD-DATE: July 12, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Chart: "YESTERDAY"
Dow Industrials -- 4,680.60 down 21.79
30-yr. Treasury yield -- 6.58% up 0.06
The Dollar -- 87.54 up 0.66

Graph: "TODAY" shows stock earnings for Abbott Laboratories for the last four
quarters.

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              30 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 12, 1995, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

A Range of Emotions About Closer Ties

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 105 words


President Clinton's announcement that the United States would establish
relations with Vietnam provoked emotions as divided as feelings about the
Vietnam War itself.

Among families of servicemen still classified as missing in action, there was a
sense of betrayal. For many Vietnamese refugees who have begun new lives in
America, it was a day colored with sadness. In Ho Chi Minh City, many Vietnamese
were hopeful that the new status would bring economic benefits.  American
executives hailed the announcement, but cautioned that diplomatic ties alone
would not unleash an investment boom.

Articles, pages A8-9.

LOAD-DATE: July 12, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              31 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 12, 1995, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Executive Undoes Subway Chaos, Wielding Pen or Broom

BYLINE: By VIVIAN S. TOY

SECTION: Section B;  Page 1;  Column 2;  Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1086 words


As Sunday drew to a close after the huge water main break near Times Square,
commuters were told to prepare for the worst: the vital West Side I.R.T. line
would likely have major delays or be shut completely the next day, causing havoc
as the work week began.

While New Yorkers often instinctively brace for the worst, the history of other
recent subway disasters should have told them not to worry. The trains would
instead be back on track, bringing commuters to work despite the previous day's
chaos.

Getting the system quickly back in shape after such disasters has been the
specialty of Joseph E. Hofmann, who has been credited by supervisors and
underlings alike as a master of crisis management, one of the city's supreme
technicians whose work is all but unnoticed by the millions who rely on it.
Demolishing traditional stereotypes of a government bureaucrat, he has been able
to quickly get trains moving after derailments, floods and collisions.

Mr. Hofmann, the Transit Authority's senior vice president in charge of subways,
worked for nearly 23 straight hours this week, arriving at Times Square shortly
after the subway lines were shut down by the flooding just before dawn on
Sunday. He refused to leave until he had ridden the test trains on Monday
morning and declared the lines safe for passengers.

As the subway system's chief executive, Mr. Hofmann, who is 48, has more than
26,000 people working for him in areas that range from train station and car
maintenance to track and electrical operations.

The flood on Sunday was the second major crisis for Mr. Hofmann since taking
responsibility in January for a system that transports 3.5 million New Yorkers
every day. The first occurred last month when a Manhattan-bound J train slammed
into a stopped M train on the Williamsburg Bridge, killing the J train's
conductor and injuring 54 passengers. Under Mr. Hofmann's leadership, the next
day's rush hour went without a hitch.

"He commits himself to an impossible goal, then he tells you about it, and then
he makes it happen," said Michael Lombardi, Mr. Hofmann's chief maintenance
officer, who recalls his boss as one of his subordinates 25 years ago, a young
electrician who would go to the hardware stores on Canal Street to buy switches
with his own money whenever his crew ran out of parts.

The impossible goal this week was just to get the trains running on all Seventh
Avenue subway tracks by 6 A.M. Monday, about 24 hours after they were completely
submerged in water and circuits were covered in muck. Hundreds of signal boxes
had to be rinsed out and hand-dried with rags. Mr. Hofmann shuttled back and
forth between the 42d Street and 14th Street stations all day long to direct the
work, occasionally stopping himself to sweep water into drains or to help roll
up hoses. By midday, service was as regular as it ever gets.

At about 4 A.M., he observed that water still covered the last section of the
northbound local tracks at the 14th Street station. Realizing there would not be
enough time for the water to drain away on its own, he immediately rounded up
about a dozen workers with brooms to clear the tracks and get to the last
control box.

"The water would have gone in an hour, but then I would've been into rush hour,"
he said. "We had to get in to dry that box out so we could get the test trains
through."

His efforts won plaudits from Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani, who singled out Mr.
Hofmann -- who had changed into a well-tailored suit from the blue jeans he wore
in the tunnels -- for special thanks at a City Hall news conference. "It was
superhuman to get the subways back to the shape they're in," Mr. Giuliani said
of Mr. Hofmann and the close to 1,000 transit workers who accomplished the
cleanup.

A Bronx native, Mr. Hofmann started with the Transit Authority as an office
clerk when he was 17. He quit to serve in the Marines during the Vietnam war,
and returned to the authority as an electrician in 1970. Moving steadily up the
ranks, he worked in the mid-1980's as project manager for the subway's
anti-graffiti program and is given credit for the systematic cleanup of the
then-ubiquitous scrawlings inside and outside the city's more than 6,000 subway
cars.

This week, Mr. Hofmann took the Mayor's praise in stride and preferred to divert
attention to the dozens of supervisors and hundreds of transit workers who made
the massive emergency operation a success.

"Every job last night was critical," Mr. Hofmann said. "Right down to the guys
sweeping out the drains. And if just one job was done wrong, we wouldn't have
been back in time for rush hour."

Revealing the imprint of his military training, Mr. Hofmann said, "The only way
to deal with a huge problem like this is to figure out a plan, prepare it and
then execute it."

He has become a fixture at emergencies both large and small. "He's out there
working with everybody else," said Mike Ambrosino, a car inspector who helped
move flooded trains from the 14th Street and 42d Street stations. "With the
flood, he was all over the place, and that inspires the workers. It makes a
difference."

The Transit Authority president, Alan F. Kiepper, describes his subway chief as
a results-oriented and efficient leader.

"By his nature, he's a very good man to have in an emergency because he steps
in, he takes charge, and things happen," Mr. Kiepper said.

He said it also helps that Mr. Hofmann has worked his way up through the system
and personally knows how everything works. His experience has helped earn him
the respect of the thousands of people who now work for him.

"He uses every trick in the book to get you to help him get the job done," Mr.
Lombardi said. "Depending on who you are, he'll say: 'I bet you can't do it,' or
he'll ask you to do it real nice, or he'll tell you. You better do it."

Mr. Hofmann and his wife, Norah, and their two teen-age daughters plan to move
to the Throgs Neck section of the Bronx from their home in New Jersey next week.
Moving back into the city was one of the conditions of his new position.

"We go to him for every crisis, too," Mrs. Hofmann said yesterday. "We can't
plan on when he's going to be home, though. His beeper goes off and he's out the
door."

Mr. Hofmann said that even though he now commutes by car, a day does not pass
without him hopping onto a subway somewhere.

"I ride the subways to get to emergencies," he said. "And at lunch time, if I
got nothing to do, I'll just get on the train and go for a ride."

NAME: Joseph E. Hofmann

LOAD-DATE: July 12, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Joseph E. Hofmann, who is in charge of subways for the Transit
Authority, is credited with getting the system running after a water main break
on Sunday. (Ruby Washington/The New York Times)

Chart: "PROFILE: Joseph E. Hofmann"

Born November 3, 1946; Bronx, N.Y.

Residence Oradell, N.J., and Bronx, N.Y.

Education Cardinal Hayes High School, Bronx, N.Y., 1964.

Career Office clerk, New York City Transit Authority, 1964-67; United States
Marines, Vietnam, 1968-69; Subway car electrician, New York City Transit
Authority, 1970-1974; subway maintenance foreman, 1974-1981; assistant
maintenance supervisor, 1981-1983; general superintendent, 1984-1988; assistant
chief transportation officer, 1988-1990; chief transportation officer,
1990-1991; chief mechanical officer, 1991-1994; senior vice president, 1995.

Previous Transit Crises Williamsburg Bridge subway crash, June 1995; Ninth
Avenue subway crash, Brooklyn, February 1995; Fulton Street subway firebombing,
1994; Eighth Avenue water main break and asbestos contamination, 1989.

Family Married June 27, 1976, to Norah Farrelly; two daughters, Kelly, 18, and
Christie, 15.

Interests Motorcycles and motorboats.

(pg. B4)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              32 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 12, 1995, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

OPENING TO VIETNAM: THE INVESTORS;
For Business, A Decision Aiding Trade

BYLINE: By JULIA PRESTON

SECTION: Section A;  Page 9;  Column 1;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 590 words


American business executives hailed the Clinton Administration's announcement
yesterday that it would extend diplomatic ties to Vietnam, describing it as a
step toward putting them on equal footing with foreign competitors there.

But they said that diplomatic recognition alone would not unleash an investment
boom because a foundation for normal trade relations between the two countries
does not exist. They said that the next step is for a formal trade agreement to
be worked out by both countries, and guidelines set by Washington for
Government-backed investments.

"The war is really over now," said Robert K. Morris, a senior international
trade analyst at the National Association of Manufacturers. "Our law and our
policies are catching up to the direction of the business community."

More than 300 American companies have opened offices in Vietnam since President
Clinton lifted the trade embargo against the country in February 1994, according
to the American Chamber of Commerce. Two separate United States business
chambers have been formed.

But American companies found they were beaten out by competitors from Japan,
Taiwan, Singapore, Australia and other Pacific rim nations because they were not
backed up by Government financing and also faced high tariffs. The Vietnamese
frequently preferred to deal with companies from countries where they would have
the ability to trade Vietnamese products.

The Administration's decision "made it possible for American companies to
compete on a even playing field," said Frances Zwenig, vice-president of the
United States-Vietnam Trade Council, a group which has lobbied for diplomatic
ties. She said the United States was the eighth largest overseas investor in
Vietnam, with projects worth $520 million.

But analysts cautioned that diplomatic recognition, while it sent a strong
political message, did not provide the basis for trade relations. In a statement
today the Coalition for United States-Vietnam Trade, which includes 112 major
corporations based in the United States, urged the Clinton Administration to
move quickly to negotiate a bilateral trade agreement.

"In the short term there won't be any immediate dollar impact," said Willard A.
Workman, vice president for international affairs of the American Chamber.

Under the terms of a 1974 Congressional amendment that still governs United
States trade with Vietnam, a bilateral trade agreement must be concluded before
the Administration can grant most-favored- nation trading status to Vietnam, a
key step in normalization that would eliminate crushing tariffs American
concerns now face when they export goods to Vietnam.

The Administration must also set the terms for the Overseas Private Investment
Corporation and the Export-Import Bank to begin to work with American companies
so they can finance their investments competitively.

American companies are attracted by a large and relatively untapped market in
Vietnam, the world's 13th largest country in terms of population. Vietnam is
just at the beginning of modernizing its agriculture and developing its
telecommunications and its oil reserves.

Researchers at Caterpillar Inc., which opened a dealership in Vietnam in
December 1994, identified over $7 billion in projects in the next five years to
build roads and raise new infrastructure in a country that still has not
recovered from the damage of the war. Caterpillar estimates that demand for its
tractors and construction equipment could amount to as much as $700 million.


LOAD-DATE: July 12, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Billboards over a Hanoi square illustrate the competition
between American, Japanese and South Korean businesses. American business
executives said the Clinton Administration's decision to recognize Vietnam would
help put them on an equal footing with rivals there. (Agence France-Presse)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              33 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 12, 1995, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

OPENING TO VIETNAM: THE FAMILIES;
To Many Relatives of Missing, 'a Pretty Bad Day'

BYLINE: By TAMAR LEWIN

SECTION: Section A;  Page 8;  Column 1;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 880 words


In 1968, Ann Holland learned that her husband, Tech. Sgt. Melvin Holland, was
missing in Laos -- leaving her, at 28, with five young children to raise.

"Since then, I've gotten up every day, and asked God to help me get through the
day, and some days have been worse than others," said Ms. Holland, who lives in
Ocean Park, Wash. "This is a pretty bad one."

What made yesterday bad for Ms. Holland, and thousands of other Americans whose
family members remain unaccounted for in Southeast Asia, was President Clinton's
announcement that the United States would establish full diplomatic relations
with Vietnam.

The Government says that Vietnam is cooperating in the search for remains of
missing Americans, and that it does not believe any of the missing are still
alive in Southeast Asia. But for Ms. Holland and many others with lingering
questions about the fate of their husbands, fathers, or sons, yesterday's
announcement brought both a sense of betrayal and new worries.

"If there are any prisoners left alive, and I believe there are, they will
probably be killed now, because they will no longer be an asset to the
Vietnamese," Ms. Holland said. "President Clinton has sold our men for 30 pieces
of silver. He doesn't have a brother or a father missing over there, or even a
friend, because he never served. But for people like me, it's something that
will never go away."

The fate of the more than 2,000 servicemen whose whereabouts remain uncertain
has been a touchy issue since the war ended, as family members joined together
in groups like the National Alliance of Families for the Return of America's
Missing Servicemen and the National League of Families of American Prisoners and
Missing in Southeast Asia, to win public sympathy and Government support for
their quest.

Just how many Americans remain to be found is a matter of dispute. Of the 2,202
people unaccounted for, about 1,600 are missing inside Vietnam, and the rest in
Laos, Cambodia or China. Most experts believe that very few of those who
disappeared -- perhaps 55 in Vietnam, and 100 more in the other countries -- had
any chance of surviving the incident in which they disappeared.

All groups opposed rapprochement with Vietnam. But their reactions to the
announcement varied from resigned to bitterly resentful.

Colleen Shine, a member of the board of the National League of Families, took
pains to stress the signs of hope that she observed at the Clinton
Administration briefing on the normalization.

"The families have been realistic from the get-go, and it won't do much good to
cry over spilt milk," said Ms. Shine, whose father, Lieut. Col. Anthony Shine,
disappeared in 1972 on the border between Vietnam and Laos. "We've got to work
with what we've got. I was most impressed with the acknowledgment that there are
more things that can be done, that the Clinton Administration is committed to
the fullest possible accounting. The Vietnamese could unilaterally account for
hundreds of Americans. The answers to our questions do not go away because of
this decision, and hopefully the President is right and the Vietnamese will
cooperate more fully."

Dolores Alfond, of the National Alliance of Families, and sister of an Air Force
pilot shot down over North Vietnam in 1967, was not invited to the briefing --
and was far more caustic about the new policy.

"This is a betrayal," she said. "Clinton promised in 1992 that he would never
normalize relations with any country that withheld information." She said the
Administration "is more interested in helping big business than in finding these
men."

She and others were scornful of the Administration view that normalization might
mean more cooperation from Vietnam in locating missing servicemen, given that
few sets of remains were returned since President Clinton lifted the trade
embargo last year.

Many of the children of missing servicemen said they felt a special betrayal
because they had been brought up to believe in the military.

"I was raised military, and I know these are America's fighting men, the best in
the country," said Elizabeth Stewart, whose father, Col. Peter J. Stewart, was
shot down over Dien Bien Phu on March 15, 1966, when she was 11. "What Clinton
has done is to betray these men, and every man and woman who ever wore a
uniform. It's pure politics, pure lies. President Clinton says we've reached a
new level of cooperation, but I say sure, a new low. The Vietnamese are
warehousing bodies, and they won't give us access to the prisons."

Ms. Stewart said she expected normalization to produce less cooperation, not
more: "Before the embargo went up, we had a letter saying we could go anywhere
we wanted in Vietnam and stay as long as we wanted, but one week after the
embargo was lifted, they threw me out of the country because I wanted to go to
the underground prison in Vinh Phu province, a military security zone, where we
have reports from multiple sources that there are American prisoners."

Many families said the decision was precipitous.

"I really feel it was premature," said Trudy Terla of Silver Spring, Md., whose
husband, Capt. Frank Terla, has been missing since 1969. "The Vietnamese could
be more forthcoming unilaterally with what they know."


LOAD-DATE: July 12, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Wearing her husband's M.I.A. bracelet, Ann Holland held a
portrait of Tech. Sgt. Melvin Holland in her home yesterday in Ocean Park, Wash.
(Don Ryan or The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              34 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 12, 1995, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

OPENING TO VIETNAM: THE OVERVIEW;
U.S. GRANTS VIETNAM FULL TIES; TIME FOR HEALING, CLINTON SAYS

BYLINE: By ALISON MITCHELL

SECTION: Section A;  Page 1;  Column 6;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1404 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 11


Saying the time was at hand to "bind up our own wounds," President Clinton today
extended full diplomatic recognition to Vietnam 22 years after the American
withdrawal from a bitterly divisive war that still scars the national psyche.

Mr. Clinton, the one-time student protester who avoided serving in a war he once
said he "opposed and despised," announced the normalization of relations in a
brief ceremony in the East Room attended by military figures, the families of
those still missing in action and members of Congress who were veterans of the
war and prisoners of the Vietnamese.

"This moment offers us the opportunity to bind up our own wounds," the President
said, evoking words used by Lincoln at the end of the Civil War. "They have
resisted time for too long. We can now move onto common ground."

"Let this moment," he said, "in the words of the Scripture, be a time to heal
and a time to build." [Excerpts, page A9.]

But the decision drew criticism as well as support from legislators, veterans'
groups and families of missing servicemen.

Mr. Clinton said the United States would continue to press Vietnam for a full
accounting for the 2,202 United States service personnel officially listed as
missing in Southeast Asia. He said that in the months since he lifted the United
States trade embargo on Vietnam in February 1994, the remains of 29 more missing
Americans had been identified and Hanoi had turned over hundreds of pages of
documents.

"We will keep working until we get all the answers we can," Mr. Clinton said.
"Our strategy is working."

Vietnam's Prime Minister, Vo Van Kiet, responded positively to Mr. Clinton's
decision in a statement broadcast Wednesday morning, Hanoi time. He pledged to
continue Vietnam's cooperation in helping to account for missing Americans.

Mr. Clinton's announcement of full diplomatic relations completed a process
begun by the Bush Administration in 1991 when Washington and Hanoi agreed on a
detailed series of steps that would lead to recognition. Recognition was sought
as eagerly by American business groups as it was bitterly opposed by the
American Legion and some relatives of Americans missing in the war.

But the move was particularly risky for a President whose efforts as a young man
to avoid military service in Vietnam became a campaign issue in 1992, and who
faces an electorate still sharply divided over the unpopular war that took
58,000 American lives.

The often loquacious Mr. Clinton spoke somberly for just under 10 minutes,
ending with "God bless America." Several Congressional veterans of the war stood
by his side as he made his announcement; Senator John McCain, the Arizona
Republican who spent more than five years as a Vietnamese prisoner of war, was
closest. Afterward, Mr. McCain praised Mr. Clinton for an "act that required
some courage."

Yet 20 years after the last helicopter rising from the roof of the United States
Embassy in Saigon became an indelible image of American defeat, Congress was as
bitterly divided over Mr. Clinton's move as it once was over the war itself.

Senator Bob Dole, a veteran of World War II whose right arm remains withered
from his wounds, denounced Mr. Clinton's decision from the Senate floor, saying
the President had not addressed the "central question" of whether Vietnam is
continuing to withhold information and remains that could be easily provided.

"The President ignored this question in announcing his decision for the very
good reason that all signs point to Vietnam willfully withholding information
which could resolve the fate of many Americans lost in the war," said Mr. Dole,
the Senate majority leader and the leading contender for the Republican
Presidential nomination.

Mr. Dole said the lawmakers would monitor the progress of relations with
Vietnam, and he warned that Congress must approve funds for any diplomatic
operations in Vietnam and that the Senate must confirm any ambassador.

Senator Trent Lott, the majority whip from Mississippi, said he would support
efforts to amend appropriations legislation to stop the opening of a United
States Embassy in Vietnam. "What's the reason for doing this?" he asked. "How do
you justify recognizing Vietnam and not recognizing Taiwan?"

But Senator Bob Kerrey, a Nebraska Democrat who attended the White House
ceremony, vowed to fight efforts to block embassy funding. "It's a total
mistake," he said. "It's wallowing in the past." Mr. Kerrey, who lost part of
one leg and won the Medal of Honor in Vietnam, added that if Mr. Dole or others
tried to make political gain by blocking embassy funding, they would "face
people like me who say, 'Shame on you."'

Veterans were also divided. John Sommer, the executive director of the more than
3 million member American Legion -- the nation's largest veterans group --
condemned the move, saying that normalization of relations left the
Administration with little leverage to extract more information about the
missing. But a group calling itself the Vietnam Veterans for Reconciliation
handed out leaflets supporting the President on the White House lawn after the
ceremony.

Mr. Clinton's decision to recognize Vietnam had been endorsed by all of his
senior advisers, according to Anthony Lake, the national security adviser. Mr.
Lake said Gen. John Shalikashvili had polled the Joint Chiefs of Staff over the
weekend and had found unanimous support.

Aides said the President's decision stemmed, in part, from a desire to act now,
before the 1996 campaign moves into full gear. It was also partly dictated by
Secretary of State Warren M. Christopher's trip to Asia at the end of this month
to meet with foreign ministers of the Association of Southeast Asian nations.

The President announced that Mr. Christopher will now visit Vietnam early next
month, which will make him the first Secretary of State to visit the country
since the American-backed Government in Saigon fell to Communist forces in 1975.

While in Hanoi, Mr. Christopher will negotiate the details of the restoration of
diplomatic relations.

Resumed ties to Vietnam could give the Administration an important Asian ally at
a time when relations with China have become more tense, although officials
denied today that the policy change was in any way related to China.

In Beijing, a Chinese Government spokesman welcomed the news. "The Chinese
Government has always stood for improvement of relations between the United
States and Vietnam," said a Foreign Ministry spokesman, Shen Guofang.

In his broadcast statement, Mr. Kiet said Vietnam would negotiate with the
United States "to set up a new framework for the relationship between the two
countries on the basis of respect, independence, and mutual benefit of the two
countries in harmony with the rule of international law."

The Administration was silent today on who would become the ambassador to
Vietnam, an appointment that could be fraught with symbolism. Officials said the
Administration wanted a distinguished appointee, perhaps a veteran, who would
face no trouble in a confirmation hearing. Among names under discussion are
Under Secretary of State Peter Tarnoff; Frank G. Wisner, the Ambassador to
India, or Mr. Lake himself. All three made their names in Vietnam.

Administration officials said they had now set up interagency groups to examine
such questions as trade, investment and tax treaties, all of which are of
interest to American companies that were allowed to begin doing business in
Vietnam in February 1994, when the President lifted the trade embargo.

By some estimates, Vietnam will spend $7 billion during the next seven years on
roads, ports and a modern telecommunications system.

Willard A. Workman, vice president of the international division of the United
States Chamber of Commerce, said businesses hoped that the announcement would
clear the way for crucial United States agencies, including the Export-Import
Bank and the Overseas Private Investment Corporation, to help American companies
in Vietnam.

Businesses are also eager for Vietnam to receive most favored nation trade
status, which would drastically reduce tariffs between the two nations. Such
status must be negotiated and approved by Congress. In addition, in order to
normalize trade with Vietnam fully President Clinton must issue a finding that
Vietnam allows free and open emigration or issue a waiver of that requirement.


LOAD-DATE: July 12, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: President Clinton announced at the White House the extension of
full diplomatic recognition to Vietnam.  Looking on, from left, Senators John
Kerry, John McCain and Charles Robb and retired Gen. John Vessey. (Associated
Press) (pg. A1); Lauren Musso, 11, in foreground, and her sister Cara, 14, of
Moreno Valley, Calif., read a letter they found at the Vietnam War memorial in
Washington yesterday, the day formal ties to Vietnam were established. (Greg
Gibson/Associated Press) (pg. A8)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              35 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 12, 1995, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Recognizing Reality in Vietnam

SECTION: Section A;  Page 16;  Column 1;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 464 words


America is well served by President Clinton's decision to normalize relations
with Vietnam. From commercial competition to the defense of human rights in
Vietnam, from the search for American remains to Pacific defense strategy,
United States interests can only benefit.

So can America itself. The rancorous divisions of the Vietnam War still ripple
through the political life of the country 20 years after Saigon fell and the
last American helicopters lifted off the embassy roof with desperate Vietnamese
clinging to them. Washington's motives for fighting in Vietnam were terribly
flawed, and 58,000 Americans paid for the arrogance and ignorance with their
lives.

Some political leaders, like the Senate majority leader, Bob Dole, still seem
eager to fight old battles, threatening to do whatever they can to block Mr.
Clinton's decision. Others, most notably Senator John McCain, who spent five
hellish years as a prisoner of war, have joined with Mr. Clinton to move America
beyond the war.

Getting to normalization has been difficult. For many years, the country was
simply not ready to accept the defeat, America's first in a foreign war. Early
efforts during the Carter Administration were thwarted by Vietnamese dogmatism,
fears of antagonizing China and finally, Vietnam's 1978 invasion and occupation
of Cambodia.

When those occupation troops withdrew a decade later, normalization had become
further entangled in domestic politics. The families of the 2,202 Americans
listed as missing in action in the Vietnam War insisted that Vietnam provide an
accounting of each case. Most of those listed disappeared in combat and were
unlikely to have survived. The Pentagon lists a much smaller number of
"discrepancy cases" -- servicemen last seen alive and on the ground, but still
not accounted for. Vietnamese cooperation has helped reduce this number from
around 200 in the late 1980's to 55 today.

Vietnam's human rights record remains poor, but normalized relations can
potentially be a lever for progress. Secretary of State Warren Christopher
should insist on improvement when he visits Vietnam next month.

There is already an effort to discredit Mr. Clinton's decision by suggesting
that someone who avoided the draft is unfit to make a final peace with Vietnam.
That is wrong. Mr. Clinton dissembled about his draft record during the 1992
campaign, but that is not the issue here. Opposition to the war was an honorable
cause, shared by millions of Mr. Clinton's countrymen. Those who stood against
the war are no less suited than those who served in Vietnam to establish
diplomatic ties with Hanoi.

Thanks to Mr. Clinton's action yesterday, the pain of America's past in Vietnam
no longer bars the way to a productive relationship with Hanoi.


LOAD-DATE: July 12, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              36 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 12, 1995, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Executive Undoes Subway Chaos, Wielding Pen or Broom

BYLINE: By VIVIAN S. TOY

SECTION: Section B; Page 1; Column 2; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1056 words


As Sunday drew to a close after the huge water main break near Times Square,
commuters were told to prepare for the worst: the vital West Side I.R.T. line
would likely have major delays or be shut completely the next day, causing havoc
as the work week began.

While New Yorkers often instinctively brace for the worst, the history of other
recent subway disasters should have told them not to worry. The trains would
instead be back on track, bringing commuters to work despite the previous day's
chaos.

Getting the system quickly back in shape after such disasters has been the
specialty of Joseph E. Hofmann, who has been credited by supervisors and
underlings alike as a master of crisis management, one of the city's supreme
technicians whose work is all but unnoticed by the millions who rely on it.
Demolishing traditional stereotypes of a government bureaucrat, he has been able
to quickly get trains moving after derailments, floods and collisions.

Mr. Hofmann, the Transit Authority's senior vice president in charge of subways,
worked for nearly 23 straight hours this week, arriving at Times Square shortly
after the subway lines were shut down by the flooding just before dawn on
Sunday. He refused to leave until he had ridden the test trains on Monday
morning and declared the lines safe for passengers.

As the subway system's chief executive, Mr. Hofmann, who is 48, has more than
26,000 people working for him in areas that range from train station and car
maintenance to track and electrical operations.

The flood on Sunday was the second major crisis for Mr. Hofmann since taking
responsibility in January for a system that transports 3.5 million New Yorkers
every day. The first occurred last month when a Manhattan-bound J train slammed
into a stopped M train on the Williamsburg Bridge, killing the J train's
conductor and injuring 54 passengers. Under Mr. Hofmann's leadership, the next
day's rush hour went without a hitch.

"He commits himself to an impossible goal, then he tells you about it, and then
he makes it happen," said Michael Lombardi, Mr. Hofmann's chief maintenance
officer, who recalls his boss as one of his subordinates 25 years ago, a young
electrician who would go to the hardware stores on Canal Street to buy switches
with his own money whenever his crew ran out of parts.

The impossible goal this week was just to get the trains running on all Seventh
Avenue subway tracks by 6 A.M. Monday, about 24 hours after they were completely
submerged in water and circuits were covered in muck. Hundreds of signal boxes
had to be rinsed out and hand-dried with rags. Mr. Hofmann shuttled back and
forth between the 42d Street and 14th Street stations all day long to direct the
work, occasionally stopping himself to sweep water into drains or to help roll
up hoses. By midday, service was as regular as it ever gets.

At about 4 A.M., he observed that water still covered the last section of the
northbound local tracks at the 14th Street station. Realizing there would not be
enough time for the water to drain away on its own, he immediately rounded up
about a dozen workers with brooms to clear the tracks and get to the last
control box.

"The water would have gone in an hour, but then I would've been into rush hour,"
he said. "We had to get in to dry that box out so we could get the test trains
through."

His efforts won plaudits from Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani, who singled out Mr.
Hofmann -- who had changed into a well-tailored suit from the blue jeans he wore
in the tunnels -- for special thanks at a City Hall news conference. "It was
superhuman to get the subways back to the shape they're in," Mr. Giuliani said
of Mr. Hofmann and the close to 1,000 transit workers who accomplished the
cleanup.

A Bronx native, Mr. Hofmann started with the Transit Authority as an office
clerk when he was 17. He quit to serve in the Marines during the Vietnam war,
and returned to the authority as an electrician in 1970. Moving steadily up the
ranks, he worked in the mid-1980's as project manager for the subway's
anti-graffiti program and is given credit for the systematic cleanup of the
then-ubiquitous scrawlings inside and outside the city's more than 6,000 subway
cars.

This week, Mr. Hofmann took the Mayor's praise in stride and preferred to divert
attention to the dozens of supervisors and hundreds of transit workers who made
the massive emergency operation a success.

"Every job last night was critical," Mr. Hofmann said. "Right down to the guys
sweeping out the drains. And if just one job was done wrong, we wouldn't have
been back in time for rush hour."

He has become a fixture at emergencies both large and small. "He's out there
working with everybody else," said Mike Ambrosino, a car inspector who helped
move flooded trains from the 14th Street and 42d Street stations. "With the
flood, he was all over the place, and that inspires the workers. It makes a
difference."

The Transit Authority president, Alan F. Kiepper, describes his subway chief as
a results-oriented and efficient leader.

"By his nature, he's a very good man to have in an emergency because he steps
in, he takes charge, and things happen," Mr. Kiepper said.

He said it also helps that Mr. Hofmann has worked his way up through the system
and personally knows how everything works. His experience has helped earn him
the respect of the thousands of people who now work for him.

"He uses every trick in the book to get you to help him get the job done," Mr.
Lombardi said. "Depending on who you are, he'll say: 'I bet you can't do it,' or
he'll ask you to do it real nice, or he'll tell you. You better do it."

Mr. Hofmann and his wife, Norah, and their two teen-age daughters plan to move
to the Throgs Neck section of the Bronx from their home in New Jersey next week.
Moving back into the city was one of the conditions of his new position.

"We go to him for every crisis, too," Mrs. Hofmann said yesterday. "We can't
plan on when he's going to be home, though. His beeper goes off and he's out the
door."

Mr. Hofmann said that even though he now commutes by car, a day does not pass
without him hopping onto a subway somewhere.

"I ride the subways to get to emergencies," he said. "And at lunch time, if I
got nothing to do, I'll just get on the train and go for a ride."

NAME: Joseph E. Hofmann

LOAD-DATE: July 13, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Joseph E. Hofmann, who is in charge of subways for the Transit
Authority, is credited with getting the system running after a water main break
on Sunday. (Ruby Washington/The New York Times)

Chart: "PROFILE: Joseph E. Hofmann"

Born November 3, 1946; Bronx, N.Y.

Residence Oradell, N.J., and Bronx, N.Y.

Education Cardinal Hayes High School, Bronx, N.Y., 1964.

Career Office clerk, New York City Transit Authority, 1964-67; United States
Marines, Vietnam, 1968-69; Subway car electrician, New York City Transit
Authority, 1970-1974; subway maintenance foreman, 1974-1981; assistant
maintenance supervisor, 1981-1983; general superintendent, 1984-1988; assistant
chief transportation officer, 1988-1990; chief transportation officer,
1990-1991; chief mechanical officer, 1991-1994; senior vice president, 1995.

Previous Transit Crises Williamsburg Bridge subway crash, June 1995; Ninth
Avenue subway crash, Brooklyn, February 1995; Fulton Street subway firebombing,
1994; Eighth Avenue water main break and asbestos contamination, 1989.

Family Married June 27, 1976, to Norah Farrelly; two daughters, Kelly, 18, and
Christie, 15.

Interests Motorcycles and motorboats.

(pg. B4)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              37 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 12, 1995, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

OPENING TO VIETNAM: THE OVERVIEW;
U.S. GRANTS VIETNAM FULL TIES; TIME FOR HEALING, CLINTON SAYS

BYLINE: By ALISON MITCHELL

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1340 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 11


Saying the time was at hand to "bind up our own wounds," President Clinton today
extended full diplomatic recognition to Vietnam 22 years after the American
withdrawal from a bitterly divisive war that still scars the national psyche.

Mr. Clinton, the one-time student protester who avoided serving in a war he once
said he "opposed and despised," announced the normalization of relations in a
brief ceremony in the East Room attended by military figures, the families of
those still missing in action and members of Congress who were veterans of the
war and prisoners of the Vietnamese.

"This moment offers us the opportunity to bind up our own wounds," the President
said, evoking words used by Lincoln at the end of the Civil War. "They have
resisted time for too long. We can now move onto common ground."

"Let this moment," he said, "in the words of the Scripture, be a time to heal
and a time to build." [Excerpts, page A9.]

But the decision drew criticism as well as support from legislators, veterans'
groups and families of missing servicemen.

Mr. Clinton said the United States would continue to press Vietnam for a full
accounting for the 2,202 United States service personnel officially listed as
missing in Southeast Asia. He said that in the months since he lifted the United
States trade embargo on Vietnam in February 1994, the remains of 29 more missing
Americans had been identified and Hanoi had turned over hundreds of pages of
documents.

"We will keep working until we get all the answers we can," Mr. Clinton said.
"Our strategy is working."

Vietnam's Prime Minister, Vo Van Kiet, responded positively to Mr. Clinton's
decision in a statement broadcast Wednesday morning, Hanoi time. He pledged to
continue Vietnam's cooperation in helping to account for missing Americans.

Mr. Clinton's announcement of full diplomatic relations completed a process
begun by the Bush Administration in 1991 when Washington and Hanoi agreed on a
detailed series of steps that would lead to recognition. Recognition was sought
as eagerly by American business groups as it was bitterly opposed by the
American Legion and some relatives of Americans missing in the war.

But the move was particularly risky for a President whose efforts as a young man
to avoid military service in Vietnam became a campaign issue in 1992, and who
faces an electorate still sharply divided over the unpopular war that took
58,000 American lives.

The often loquacious Mr. Clinton spoke somberly for just under 10 minutes,
ending with "God bless America." Several Congressional veterans of the war stood
by his side as he made his announcement; Senator John McCain, the Arizona
Republican who spent more than five years as a Vietnamese prisoner of war, was
closest. Afterward, Mr. McCain praised Mr. Clinton for an "act that required
some courage."

Yet 20 years after the last helicopter rising from the roof of the United States
Embassy in Saigon became an indelible image of American defeat, Congress was as
bitterly divided over Mr. Clinton's move as it once was over the war itself.

Senator Bob Dole, a veteran of World War II whose right arm remains withered
from his wounds, denounced Mr. Clinton's decision from the Senate floor, saying
the President had not addressed the "central question" of whether Vietnam is
continuing to withhold information and remains that could be easily provided.

"The President ignored this question in announcing his decision for the very
good reason that all signs point to Vietnam willfully withholding information
which could resolve the fate of many Americans lost in the war," said Mr. Dole,
the Senate majority leader and the leading contender for the Republican
Presidential nomination.

Mr. Dole said the lawmakers would monitor the progress of relations with
Vietnam, and he warned that Congress must approve funds for any diplomatic
operations in Vietnam and that the Senate must confirm any ambassador.

Senator Trent Lott, the majority whip from Mississippi, said he would support
efforts to amend appropriations legislation to stop the opening of a United
States Embassy in Vietnam. "What's the reason for doing this?" he asked. "How do
you justify recognizing Vietnam and not recognizing Taiwan?"

But Senator Bob Kerrey, a Nebraska Democrat who attended the White House
ceremony, vowed to fight efforts to block embassy funding. "It's a total
mistake," he said. "It's wallowing in the past." Mr. Kerrey, who lost part of
one leg and won the Medal of Honor in Vietnam, added that if Mr. Dole or others
tried to make political gain by blocking embassy funding, they would "face
people like me who say, 'Shame on you."'

Veterans were also divided. John Sommer, the executive director of the more than
3 million member American Legion -- the nation's largest veterans group --
condemned the move, saying that normalization of relations left the
Administration with little leverage to extract more information about the
missing. But a group calling itself the Vietnam Veterans for Reconciliation
handed out leaflets supporting the President on the White House lawn after the
ceremony.

Mr. Clinton's decision to recognize Vietnam had been endorsed by all of his
senior advisers, according to Anthony Lake, the national security adviser. Mr.
Lake said Gen. John Shalikashvili had polled the Joint Chiefs of Staff over the
weekend and had found unanimous support.

Aides said the President's decision stemmed, in part, from a desire to act now,
before the 1996 campaign moves into full gear. It was also partly dictated by
Secretary of State Warren M. Christopher's trip to Asia at the end of this month
to meet with foreign ministers of the Association of Southeast Asian nations.

The President announced that Mr. Christopher will now visit Vietnam early next
month, which will make him the first Secretary of State to visit the country
since the American-backed Government in Saigon fell to Communist forces in 1975.

While in Hanoi, Mr. Christopher will negotiate the details of the restoration of
diplomatic relations.

Resumed ties to Vietnam could give the Administration an important Asian ally at
a time when relations with China have become more tense, although officials
denied today that the policy change was in any way related to China.

In Beijing, a Chinese Government spokesman welcomed the news. "The Chinese
Government has always stood for improvement of relations between the United
States and Vietnam," said a Foreign Ministry spokesman, Shen Guofang.

In his broadcast statement, Mr. Kiet said Vietnam would negotiate with the
United States "to set up a new framework for the relationship between the two
countries on the basis of respect, independence, and mutual benefit of the two
countries in harmony with the rule of international law."

The Administration was silent today on who would become the ambassador to
Vietnam, an appointment that could be fraught with symbolism. Officials said the
Administration wanted a distinguished appointee, perhaps a veteran, who would
face no trouble in a confirmation hearing. Among names under discussion are
Under Secretary of State Peter Tarnoff; Frank G. Wisner, the Ambassador to
India, or Mr. Lake himself. All three made their names in Vietnam.

Administration officials said they had now set up interagency groups to examine
such questions as trade, investment and tax treaties, all of which are of
interest to American companies that were allowed to begin doing business in
Vietnam in February 1994, when the President lifted the trade embargo.

By some estimates, Vietnam will spend $7 billion during the next seven years on
roads, ports and a modern telecommunications system.

Willard A. Workman, vice president of the international division of the United
States Chamber of Commerce, said businesses hoped that the announcement would
clear the way for crucial United States agencies, including the Export-Import
Bank and the Overseas Private Investment Corporation, to help American companies
in Vietnam.


LOAD-DATE: August 31, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: President Clinton announced at the White House the extension of
full diplomatic recognition to Vietnam. Looking on, from left, Senators John
Kerry, John McCain and Charles Robb and retired Gen. John Vessey. (Associated
Press) (pg. A1); Lauren Musso, 11, in foreground, and her sister Cara, 14, of
Moreno Valley, Calif., read a letter they found at the Vietnam War memorial in
Washington yesterday, the day formal ties to Vietnam were established. (Greg
Gibson/Associated Press) (pg. A8)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              38 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 12, 1995, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

OPENING TO VIETNAM: IN CALIFORNIA;
For Many of Those Who Fled Vietnam, a Day of Sadness, Anger and Hope

BYLINE: By SETH MYDANS

SECTION: Section A; Page 9; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 929 words

DATELINE: WESTMINSTER, Calif., July 11


For Yen Do, editor of the largest Vietnamese-language daily in America, the
establishment today of diplomatic relations between Hanoi and Washington marks
the end of a half century of war that has tortured his nation and scattered two
million of its people around the world.

It welcomes Vietnam into the community of nations, opens new possibilities for
its economic development and may help efforts to foster democracy and human
rights after 20 years of Communist rule, said Mr. Yen, who edits Nguoi Viet
Daily News here in the community known as Little Saigon, 30 miles south of Los
Angeles.

But for Mr. Yen and many of his fellow refugees, the day was nevertheless
colored by sadness, symbolically laying to rest the homeland they fought for,
whose yellow-and-red flag is still flown by overseas Vietnamese groups.

"It is something like a pair of lovers who know it is time to leave each other,"
he said. "Reasonably, rationally, they know the time has come, but emotionally
it is hard to accept."

Among many overseas Vietnamese, the sadness found expression in angry words.

"I feel very angry and bitter, but then, it's very clear that business interests
have been put in front of human rights," said Diem Do, who has been a leading
opponent of normalized relations in the highly fragmented emigre community.

Tran Van Ngoc, past president of the Vietnamese Air Force Veterans Association,
said he saw the move as a cynical attempt to use Vietnam once again as a
geopolitical pawn against Chinese expansion.

Mai Cong, who heads the Vietnamese Community of Orange County, a private social
and cultural agency here, issued a statement saying, "It is as if a decisive
step has been taken to sever us from the past, or from any lingering attachment
with the past, even though the past only means war and misery for many of us."

She added: "There may be joy in Hanoi, but there certainly will be no
celebrations in Little Saigon."

And on Little Saigon Radio, which interrupted its Vietnamese-language broadcasts
to carry President Clinton's announcement live this morning, the news was
immediately followed by interviews with non-Vietnamese opponents of
normalization, who said things like, "I truly believe that this is one of the
blackest days in the history of America."

In the three hours following the announcement, 32 callers to an open line at the
radio station opposed the reestablishment of relations, while just 13 supported
it, said Trang Nguyen, president of Little Saigon TV and Radio.

Since the fall of Saigon in April 1975, some 800,000 refugees have fled to the
United States, many clustering in Vietnamese communities like this one where the
question of whether to open business and diplomatic contacts with Hanoi created
sometimes violent divisions but also helped to define emigre politics and
discourse.

For years, right-wing groups collected donations for a fantasy guerrilla war
that would succeed where the Americans had failed. Journalists and others who
advocated improved relations with Vietnam were attacked and, on a handful of
occasions, were killed.

Opposition to improved relations with Hanoi has been kept alive by the recent
arrival of about 10,000 former labor camp prisoners, mostly elderly men whose
lives have been consumed by the war and its harsh aftermath and who could be
counted on to join anti-Communist demonstrations here.

But in recent years, particularly after President Clinton lifted a trade embargo
in February 1994, an increasing flood of emigre Vietnamese tourists and
entrepreneurs has visited Vietnam, crossing paths with the final trickle of
postwar refugees.

Twenty years after Saigon's fall -- and 50 years after the start of the war
against the colonial French government that preceded Washington's involvement --
many Vietnamese here say the passage of history has made the debate over
normalization as anachronistic as the continuing departure of refugees.

"I think it is good that we finally can put everything behind us and move ahead,
and for the community to concentrate on the problems at hand," said Le Kim Dinh,
a journalist and writer.

There are signs that that might be happening. On Monday, on the eve of Mr.
Clinton's announcement, 10 groups from among the many feuding emigre factions
signed a resolution urging Washington to press Hanoi on two substantive issues
that overseas Vietnamese agree on: democratization and human rights.

And in a signal that they might leave their political isolation and join
mainstream politics, the groups also called for strong action on an issue of
greater interest to non-Vietnamese Americans: the search for missing American
servicemen.

Mr. Yen said he foresaw other benefits from normalized diplomatic relations.
Many former South Vietnamese officials and high-ranking military men who feared
revisiting Vietnam may now feel safe in doing so.

In addition, he said, today's announcement could result in the freeing of some
political prisoners who have been held because of Hanoi's fears of outside
threats.

Some other Vietnamese-Americans were aggressively eager to move ahead both with
their integration into American society and their business ventures in Vietnam.

Frank Jao, a leading developer who owns much of the property in Little Saigon
and is exploring business opportunities in Vietnam, rejected any talk of the
past.

"Speaking in the context of being an American businessman -- nothing to do with
Vietnamese-American, because I am no longer a Vietnamese -- it's good for the
United States," he said of today's developments.

LOAD-DATE: August 31, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              39 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 13, 1995, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Good Morning, Vietnam

SECTION: Section A;     Page 10;     Column 4;     Foreign Desk

LOAD-DATE: July 13, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: A party in a Hanoi dance hall to celebrate America's diplomatic
recognition of Vietnam continued into the early hours as Vietnamese, Americans
and others celebrated despite the tropical heat. Their rejoicing contrasted with
some sharp words from the Republicans in Washington critical of the move.
(Associated Press)

TYPE: Caption

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              40 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 13, 1995, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Author of Anthem Is Dead

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A;     Page 10;     Column 2;     Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 146 words

DATELINE: HANOI, Vietnam, July 13


Nguyen Van Cao, whose hymn to the Vietnamese independence struggle became the
national anthem, died on Monday after a long illness, the Vietnam Musicians
Association said on Tuesday. He was 72.

The musicians' group gave no cause of death.

Mr. Cao wrote "Marching Forward" in 1944, when he was 21, to celebrate the
efforts of Ho Chi Minh's guerrillas to win independence from France. The song
was chosen to be the national anthem after Ho declared independence in 1945,
even though the guerrillas did not defeat the French until 1954.

"Our flag, red with the blood of victory, bears the spirit of our country," the
lyrics read. "The path to glory passes over the bodies of our foes."

In the 1970's, after the Communist North took over South Vietnam, the National
Assembly suggested that a new anthem be chosen, but the general public supported
keeping the old one.

LOAD-DATE: July 13, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              41 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 13, 1995, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Vietnam Is Said to Harass American Medical Aid Team

BYLINE: By MALCOLM W. BROWNE

SECTION: Section A;     Page 10;     Column 1;     Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 650 words


Members of a delegation of American scientists and doctors that recently visited
Vietnam to assess health problems say that Vietnamese customs officials
ransacked their belongings and confiscated many of the documents and tissue
specimens they had come to collect.

The nine Americans, an official delegation from the National Institute of
Environmental Health Science, arrived in Vietnam on June 20 for conferences and
investigations aimed at assessing health problems shared by the two countries,
including the possible effects of dioxin, a contaminant of the defoliant spray
dropped over parts of the country during the Vietnam War.

But when team members left Vietnam on June 30 and July 1, they said, the customs
officials confiscated various materials from five of the nine American
delegates. "I was stunned," Dr. Arnold Schecter, a preventive medicine
specialist at the State University of New York Health Services Center in
Binghamton, said in an interview on Monday. "This was my 12th trip to Vietnam
since 1981, and nothing like this had ever happened to me before. It's
astonishing that such a thing could happen on the eve of United States
diplomatic recognition of Vietnam."

Dr. Schecter has long urged the United States Government to help Vietnam
identify and treat the effects of wartime spraying of defoliants on exposed
Vietnamese. In published medical papers he has contended that there is strong
evidence that residual dioxin in the Vietnamese environment has elevated the
risk of liver and breast cancer, and other diseases. His sympathetic attitude
toward Vietnam has made him welcome over the years.

But when the American team arrived in Vietnam last month it was informed that
conversations would be limited to pesticides, and members were requested not to
raise questions about herbicides, notably dioxin and Agent Orange, the defoliant
sprayed by the Air Force to clear parts of South Vietnam of foliage used as
cover by enemy troops.

"I couldn't believe my ears," Dr. Schecter said. "Our group was an official
American delegation. We had a mandate from Congress and the National Institutes
of Health to look into the dioxin question, partly because American war veterans
were also exposed to the chemical."

Dr. Schecter said that Vietnamese customs agents scrutinized and confiscated
every page of the demographic and clinical documents he had been given by
Vietnamese health workers, including obstetrical records, incidences of cancer
and birth deformities, as well as papers published by Vietnamese scientists on
dioxin. They offered no explanation apart from saying that "official" documents
could not be taken out of the country. Dr. Schecter said he could not understand
why the Vietnamese officials acted as they did.

"They also seized 60 or 70 specimens I had obtained of human tissue and various
foods," he said. "Included were blood samples I had collected in Laos."

The nine-member team, headed by Dr. Christopher J. Portier of the National
Institute of Environmental Health Science in Research Triangle Park, N.C.,
included members from the Federal Environmental Protection Agency, the
Department of Veterans Affairs, the New York University Medical School and the
University of Toronto.

Dr. Portier said that some of the documents Vietnamese officials seized from him
were returned, but that the authorities had retained Vietnamese-language health
questionnaires, statistics on cancer rates and maps showing where Agent Orange
had been sprayed. Eight of the nine members of his team were searched, he said,
and five had documents seized.

Dr. Portier said he was trying to recover the seized material by appeals to the
team's host, Vietnam's National Institute of Occupational and Environmental
Health, but had received no response. He said he would also appeal to the World
Health Organization, which helped to organize the American visit.

LOAD-DATE: July 13, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              42 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 13, 1995, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Republicans Attack Clinton on Vietnam

BYLINE: By STEVEN GREENHOUSE

SECTION: Section A;     Page 10;     Column 1;     Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 844 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 12


Republicans in Congress bitterly attacked President Clinton today for extending
full diplomatic recognition to Vietnam and accused him of selling out the
families of Americans missing in Vietnam.

In a first Congressional hearing on the President's decision on Tuesday to
establish relations -- 22 years after the American withdrawal from the war --
Republicans on the House International Affairs Committee spoke with unusual
passion in asserting that President Clinton was in an unseemly rush to recognize
Vietnam even though it has not provided a full accounting of the 1,618 Americans
missing there.

Representative Dan Burton of Indiana called the decision "a blot, a stain on our
Government," while Representative Christopher Smith of New Jersey said it
"dishonors veterans." Representative David Funderburk of North Carolina called
it "tragic" and said it "ignored a clear campaign promise" not to recognize
Vietnam unless it cooperated fully in turning over information about missing
servicemen.

Indeed, some Republicans were so upset that Representative Benjamin Gilman of
New York, chairman of the House committee, threatened to take the highly unusual
move of sponsoring legislation that would bar the use of Federal funds to open
an embassy in Hanoi.

Such a move, Republicans argued, could press Vietnam to provide more information
about missing Americans. But Administration officials said they were confident
that Congress would defeat such a bill out of deference to the executive
branch's traditional prerogatives over establishing diplomatic ties.

As evidence that Vietnam has not cooperated fully, Mr. Gilman said Hanoi had not
returned the remains of at least 94 servicemen who he said Americans know
through documents, photographs and broadcasts were captured during the war.
Other lawmakers noted that the Vietnamese seem to dribble out information every
time a high-level American delegation visits Hanoi, a development they say
indicates the Vietnamese give information only when it suits them.

Despite the criticism, Assistant Secretary of State Winston Lord defended the
decision to recognize Vietnam, telling the committee it "was based on effective
Vietnamese cooperation which has led to progress on P.O.W./M.I.A. accounting."

Mr. Lord said Vietnam has recently turned over hundreds of documents about
missing Americans and has allowed investigators to scour Vietnam's countryside
for the remains of servicemen. He also praised Vietnam for furnishing
information over the last five years enabling Washington to resolve the cases of
141 American soldiers who had disappeared in Vietnam.

"The President determined that further tangible progress could best be promoted
through closer bilateral ties," Mr. Lord said, noting that recognizing Vietnam
had far more support among the public than among Congressional Republicans.

Nonetheless the Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense, James Wold, told the
committee he doubted that Vietnam had furnished every shred of information.

In one of the hearing's emotional high points, Representative Randy Cunningham,
a California Republican whose plane was shot down over Vietnam when he was a
Navy pilot, burst into tears and had to interrupt his testimony as he described
how several of his friends died in his arms in Vietnam. He said it was wrong to
recognize Vietnam, which he accused of killing American prisoners and
systematically withholding records and remains from Pentagon officials
investigating missing Americans.

"This is not a political issue for me," he said. "This is right and wrong."

The Republicans sought to do their best to damage the President on an issue on
which they believe he will be vulnerable in the 1996 election.

Representative Robert Dornan, a California Republican, said Vietnam has not
turned over the remains of up to 400 American prisoners, who he asserted were
being held in a warehouse in Vietnam. But Mr. Lord said that while Vietnam
apparently warehoused some remains during the war and immediately afterward, the
Administration believes all remains that were kept in warehouses have been
handed over.

Although most of the witnesses were against the Administration, several
Congressman applauded the President for establishing relations.

Representative Pete Peterson, a Florida Democrat who was a prisoner of war for
six and a half years in Vietnam, said he was convinced that only through
improved ties with Vietnam could the United States obtain the fullest possible
accounting of those still listed as missing from Vietnam.

The opposite view was taken by Representative Sam Johnson, a Texas Republican
who was a prisoner of war for seven years. He asserted that by establishing
diplomatic ties, the Clinton Administration was forfeiting whatever leverage it
had to press Vietnam to produce more information about missing Americans.

"For the friends and families of American M.I.A.'s yesterday's decision was a
slap in the face," he said. "By taking this action, we are giving away the store
and the Vietnamese are off the hook."

LOAD-DATE: July 13, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              43 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 13, 1995, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Alfonso Zirpoli, Federal Judge, Is Dead at 90

BYLINE: By WOLFGANG SAXON

SECTION: Section B;     Page 11;     Column 1;     National Desk

LENGTH: 441 words


Alfonso J. Zirpoli, a senior Federal district judge in San Francisco who was
known for his commitment to individual rights, died on Monday at his San
Francisco home. He was 90.

President John F. Kennedy named Judge Zirpoli to the bench in the Northern
District of California in 1961. He reached senior status in 1975 and continued
to work with a reduced caseload until his retirement five years ago.

He drew national attention in 1974 in the Zebra murders case, so named because
investigators communicated their information over the police's broadcast band
"Z".

In the Zebra case more than a dozen white victims were slain at random within a
few months. Descriptions supplied by a half-dozen survivors of attacks resulted
in two composite sketches that led the police to stop and question some 600
young blacks, dragnet-style.

Critics complained that the police descriptions were so vague that they would
fit just about any young black male except the very tall and very fat.

On motions filed by the N.A.A.C.P. and the American Civil Liberties Union, Judge
Zirpoli stopped the police from using their "profile of the Zebra killer" as the
sole reason for stopping a man for questioning. He wrote that the police must
have other evidence, which could include conduct that caused suspicion that an
individual had committed a crime or was committing one. Five black men were
eventually convicted in the case.

During the Vietnam War, Judge Zirpoli handed down decisions that broadened the
right of conscientious objectors to refuse induction. That led President Richard
M. Nixon to call him "the worst judge on the Federal bench."

Before he joined the District Court, Judge Zirpoli was a Democratic Party
stalwart. He worked in every Democratic Presidential race from 1928 to the
Kennedy-Johnson ticket of 1960, when he served as Northern California campaign
chairman.

A native of Denver, he graduated from the University of California-Berkeley and,
in 1928, the University of California Boalt Hall School of Jurisprudence. He
went into private practice but over the years also served as an Assistant
District Attorney for the City and County of San Francisco and as an Assistant
United States Attorney for the Northern District.

As a practicing lawyer, he founded an indigent defendant program. Until taking
the bench in 1961, he handled the appeals of death-row inmates without a fee.

Judge Zirpoli is survived by two daughters, Sandra de Saint Phalle and Jane Z.
Felder, both of San Francisco; seven grandchildren, and one great-grandchild.
His wife of more than 50 years, Giselda Campagnoli Zirpoli, died about seven
years ago.

NAME: Alfonso J. Zirpoli

LOAD-DATE: July 13, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Judge Alfonso Zirpoli (The New York Times, 1970)

TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              44 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 13, 1995, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Essay;
The Time Has Come

BYLINE: By WILLIAM SAFIRE

SECTION: Section A;     Page 23;     Column 5;     Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 705 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


On the central moral-military challenge of his Presidency to lead the Western
world in collective defense against bloodstained aggression -- Bill Clinton will
be remembered in history as a man who feared, flinched and failed.

The policy long urged by Senator Bob Dole was to lift the pernicious arms
embargo to Bosnians who want to fight for their country, and to support the
defenders with air strikes at ammo dumps and supply lines of the invading Serbs.
Events have proved the Dole policy right.

But the other-directed Mr. Clinton deferred to Europeans who secretly wanted the
Bosnian victims to surrender. We now see proof that the Clinton policy of
passivity was wrong.

The objective reader will recall the central argument made by the not-my-table
set in the White House: that if "lift-and-strike" was undertaken, fighting would
escalate, U.N. forces would have to be withdrawn, and safe havens would be
overrun by Serbian forces.

So lift-and-strike was never tried. What has happened? Serbian attacks have
escalated, humiliated U.N. forces are preparing to withdraw, and safe havens are
being overrun.

Moreover, Clinton's failure of nerve has led to this: The U.N. is reduced to
huffing resolutions as impotent as the papal bull against the comet; NATO is
revealed to be militarily musclebound, at the mercy of terrorist hostage-takers;
Nazi-style ethnic cleansing is triumphant; and Bosnian civilians are being
driven from their U.N.-guaranteed havens like cattle.

On top of that, Mr. Clinton's message to rogue states who shoot down a U.S. F-16
on patrol: We will not retaliate. We will rescue our downed pilot and celebrate
his return with a White House luncheon, but as for the Serbian missilemen who
shot down our plane: The President turns the other cheek. It then gets slapped
at Srebrenica.

Ah, say Clinton apologists, but we kept our boys out of foreign wars. The truth
is otherwise: By refusing to help the Bosnians fight their own war, Mr. Clinton
has foolishly committed us to provide 25,000 U.S. ground troops to cover a U.N.
retreat. "Clinton's war" risks American lives only when defeat is certain.

The White House is irritated at the attention being given the rape of Bosnia
because this was supposed to be Vietnam reconciliation week.

Consider the march of his "commercial-Communist complex." It began by giving
trade advantages to increasingly repressive China; it moved to conferring
diplomatic recognition on Communist Vietnam; soon it hopes to help Castro
maintain Communist control in Cuba.

Why? Because "the time has come" -- the bored slogan of the irresolute.

Clinton's shock-of-recognition theory is that trade and aid weave a web of
contacts that promotes civilized behavior and democratic reform. But the new
Clinton detente with China is not working any better than the old Nixon detente
with the Soviet Union. Today's pragmatic passivity has emboldened Chinese
hard-liners to crush human rights, to threaten expansion into the South China
Sea, even to snatch a Sakharovian U.S. citizen.

Global sharks can detect blood in the water anywhere: If the U.S. isn't going to
make a fuss about one of its planes being shot down in Bosnia, why should it
complain about the seizure of the annoying Harry Wu?

Contempt is contagious. When you act weakly in one place, you are presumed to be
weak elsewhere. That presumption of weakness guarantees that you will be tested,
resulting in the need to make a showing of military might. Contrariwise, when
you have earned the right to be judged tenacious, you are less likely to be
challenged, and seldom if ever forced to use force.

That is why Clinton's Carteresque avoidance of duty in the Balkans hits home: It
is the source of the infection of weakness that now pervades his foreign policy.

Bosnia has given the world's bullies good reason to believe that the U.S. under
this President can be had. Clinton piously preaches "engagement" but wimpishly
practices detachment; he denounces isolationism but joins perfidious Albion in
isolating a victim of aggression.

Clinton has turned a superpower into a subpower, stumbling down the U.N.'s road
to defeat. Though the hour is late, in Bosnia "the time has come" to follow
Dole.

LOAD-DATE: July 13, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              45 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 14, 1995, Friday, Late Edition - Final

INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS;
For U.S. Business, a Hard Road to Vietnam

BYLINE: By EDWARD A. GARGAN

SECTION: Section D;  Page 1;  Column 2;  Business/Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1557 words

DATELINE: HANOI, Vietnam, July 13


Like a great triumphal gateway, two newly painted, giant Coca-Cola bottles greet
visitors in bold Vietnamese on either side of the four-lane highway from the
airport: "Coke welcomes you to Hanoi."

There is no Coca-Cola bottling plant in the country yet -- it is on the verge of
opening -- but the message is clear: American companies are here and, like the
new red paint on the Coke sign, are hurrying to catch up with other foreign
companies, which have been here many years.

Despite the lifting of the United States embargo on trade and investment with
Vietnam 18 months ago, American companies are still scrambling to meet
competition from Asia and Europe -- commerce that is propelling this desperately
poor country toward an age of consumerism.

Billboards for Daewoo, the South Korean conglomerate, and for Sony, Toshiba,
Peugeot and British Petroleum dot this city jammed with Honda motor scooters and
Japanese cars. Danish, Singaporean and Japanese beer is served at little
sidewalk restaurants, and an Australian telephone system handles calls.

Now, with the normalization of relations between Washington and Hanoi, people in
both nations expect a welter of legislation to spur development and investment.
High on the list is preferred trading status for Vietnam, which they say is
sorely needed to promote American business. Still, no one here is predicting a
great surge in investment in a country that on paper has a per-capita gross
domestic product of $250 a year.

But few are dismissing its prospects. Vietnam has more than 73 million people,
fewer than Germany but more than France or Britain. Some manufacturers see a
low-wage source for parts. Consumer-products companies hope for a potentially
large market, and big energy companies are curious about Vietnam's offshore oil
and natural gas reserves, though some recent indications about their size have
been disappointing.

"More than 50 countries with more than 1,200 investment licenses worth more than
$14 billion are here," said Nguyen Mai, deputy minister of the State Committee
for Cooperation and Investment, which oversees foreign investment projects.
"Since the lifting of the U.S. embargo on Vietnam, there have been 44 investor
projects with a total investment of $700 million."

Among the biggest so far are the oil-exploration efforts of the Mobil
Corporation, an equipment-leasing operation by Caterpillar, and the installation
of elevators in new office buildings by United Technologies' Otis Elevator
Company.

Still, "for the time being," Mr. Mai said, "we would not put so much hope on
American investment."

Over the last nine years, Taiwan, followed closely by investors from Hong Kong,
Singapore, South Korea and Japan have led the investment invasion here. In the
last six months, Japan has emerged as Vietnam's biggest foreign investor, with
30 projects valued at $754 million, more than a fifth of the $3.6 billion worth
approved in the first half of this year. In the same period, American investors
won approval for 11 projects worth $295 million.

Yet "the U.S. has come from nowhere to No. 5 in investments," said Do Duc Dinh,
who heads the economic study department at the semiofficial Institute on the
World Economy here. "Clearly normalization is necessary," he said. "But there
are other things that are important, like most-favored-nation status. And the
second, financial-risk insurance is essential for American businesses."

Most-favored-nation status, which grants countries that trade with the United
States the lowest tariffs on exported goods, must be approved by Congress as
well as obtaining a Presidential finding that Vietnam allows free and open
emigration.

For the Overseas Private Investment Corporation, a Federal agency that helps
Americans invest abroad, to provide insurance or financial guarantees to
businesses, Vietnam must be shown to comply with international laws on workers'
rights.

Export-Import Bank financing, often a crucial ingredient in big projects with
American involvement, is currently unavailable to Vietnam because it is
classified as a Marxist-Leninist country, and thus ineligible.


Trade and investment have a way of playing out at a personal level. Eugene A.
Matthews, an entrepreneur from western Pennsylvania, bit into a chocolate
covered ice-cream bar made by a Vietnamese dairy, savored the mouthful and
pronounced, "Holsteins are the Jaguars of cows. All the rest are Chevys."

Not a man familiar with the intricacies of dairy farming -- he spent several
years in Japan as an investment banker -- Mr. Matthews is nonetheless days away
from closing a deal that will bring thousands of big Holsteins to Vietnam from
the United States to form what he says will be the country's biggest dairy. And
as a longtime consultant to companies here, he points to his dairy deal as a
model of what works in Vietnam.

"I don't want to look at anything the Government doesn't regard as a priority,"
he said. "In this case dairy is a priority, so people are nice to you. They want
to get this done."

Even so, Mr. Matthews went on, conducting business here is not easy. He has been
working on the dairy project for more than a year -- part of the time trying to
figure out if Holsteins would do well in Vietnam's tropical climate.

"It's still Vietnam," he said. "It's still a complicated place. It's still
bureaucratic. But there is a system here and it does work."

By the lean measuring rod of Government statistics, Vietnam is a country where
people have barely enough to get through the year, hardly an attractive market
for Pepsi and Coke, Motorola or Procter & Gamble. But the $250 a year in
official annual G.D.P. belies an explosion of urban consumer consciousness.

For those who can afford such goods, the shopfronts along tree-lined boulevards
bulge with cartons of Japanese televison sets. Glass cabinets in shops are
crammed with Nikon and Olympus cameras, Ray Ban sunglasses from Bausch & Lomb
and the competing Ralph Lauren glasses from Optique du Monde.

"There is a huge unofficial economy," said Mr. Dinh, the institute official.
"For most people, we can live only 5 days or 10 days a month on our salary. But
people build houses. Where does the money come from? Even in Government
ministries, there are two sets of books -- one for official money and one for
unofficial."

And everywhere the favored currency is the American dollar; even the meters in
taxicabs count up the fare in dollars.

Ho Chi Minh City, the former Saigon, where American influence is strongest, has
witnessed the greatest surge in investment and is where Vietnamese enjoy the
highest standard of living. Foreign businesses, according to Richmond
Mayo-Smith, president of the American Chamber of Commerce there, argued that
doing business is not necessarily easy, but easier than in many other places.

"A lot of the people who've been in developing countries say easier than most,
but it's still not easy," he explained. "It takes patience and time to find the
right partner and follow the right procedures. It can be time-consuming. It's
expensive. For housing and office supply, the demand is greater than supply.

"But, the people here are much more cooperative than in China," he added. "It's
not us and them. Once you've formed a joint venture, the cooperation is
relatively smooth. And American business is very welcome here. They're very open
to American business. They believe Americans are sincere when they enter in,
that American business has certain standards of conduct, that it's more
responsible. And they know Americans treat employees quite well."

Vietnam has a considerable distance to go before it joins the ranks of the Asian
tigers.

"We're just a small elephant," Mr. Dinh joked. Plans for a stock exchange in Ho
Chi Minh City have been put off twice. The banking system is primitive -- checks
are virtually unknown. State-owned companies, which produced about 43 percent of
the gross domestic product last year, are sluggish and more than a third are
money-losers. And the country's roads, rail, telecommunications, power and
airports lag well behind Asian neighbors. The legal system is skeletal.

But foreign investors keep coming. Last fall, the Exxon Corporation opened an
office here to market lubricants and asphalt. It had been exploring for oil and
gas for 20 years until it left the country in 1975. "In the longer term, Exxon
is looking at a full range of marketing in Vietnam," said Ed Burwell, a
spokesman.

Amy Myers Jaffe, senior editor at Petroleum Intelligence Weekly, said that many
companies explored off shore, expecting a hot spot, and many were disappointed.
But of the Americans, Mobil made the biggest discovery.

Still, she added: "I don't perceive that there's going to be a steady flow of
companies going into Vietnam. I wouldn't say Vietnam was a dry hole, but it
wasn't as big a find as people thought it'd be."

By contrast, Marie Belsey, the country manager for British Gas, is enthusiastic
about Vietnam, particularly about prospects for oil and gas in the waters off
the coast.

"It could be the North Sea," she said, referring to the abundant oilfields off
Britain and Norway, "but I don't think it will be a country dominated by oil.

"Vietnam," she said, "goes through phases. It's talked up and it's talked down.
Nobody's walked away yet."

LOAD-DATE: July 14, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: American companies like Coca-Cola, which has a sign on a
highway to Hanoi, are trying to be better known in Vietnam. (Lois Raimondo for
The New York Times) (pg. D1); Despite the lifting of the United States embargo
on trade and investment with Vietnam 18 months ago, American companies still
have a long way to go to catch up with Asian and European competitors. At an
electrical-appliance store in Hanoi, Japanese and South Korean brands
predominated. (Reuters) (pg. D5)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              46 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 15, 1995, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Business Digest

SECTION: Section 1; Page 37; Column 1; Business/Financial Desk

LENGTH: 669 words



Treasury Bonds Fall On Solid Retail Sales
Treasury prices ended lower after a Government report showed surprising strength
in consumer spending, shaking the market's view of a slowing economy. The report
cast doubt on the prospects for another cut in short-term interest rates.

The price of the 30-year Treasury bond fell, pushing its yield up to 6.60
percent, from 6.55 percent on Thursday. [40.]



Higher bond yields helped depress the Dow Jones industrials, which fell 18.66
points, to close at 4,708.82. The index rose 6.09 points this week. The Nasdaq
composite index rose 5.18 points, to 999.33, on the strength of technology
issues. Also, the S.& P. 500 index fell 1.11 points, to 559.89. [41.]

The dollar was slightly higher against most leading currencies, rising to 87.83
yen and 1.3903 marks. [36.]

New York Newsday to Close
Times Mirror has decided to close New York Newsday, which will publish its last
edition tomorrow. The paper was the victim of corporate pressures for profits
and a New York City newspaper market that changed sharply over the last decade.
It was estimated that in its 10 years of publication, the paper lost $100
million. [1.]

The news came a little before 5 P.M. -- with the stock market closed -- as Don
Forst, the paper's editor, famed for his snappy tabloid headlines, walked
brusquely through the desks and cubicles, summoning his staff into a big main
room. [26.]

Boeing Announces Charge
Boeing will take a pretax charge of $600 million for the second quarter because
9,500 employees have accepted early retirement packages. The charge will reduce
second-quarter net income by about $500 million. [40.]

Quicken Gets a Boost
Intuit announced that 19 financial institutions, including many of the nation's
largest banks, credit card companies and brokerage firms, would use its Quicken
software for home banking services beginning this fall. The move signals the
company's intent to compete aggressively with Microsoft after the collapse in
May of plans for the two companies to merge. [39.]

Report Criticizes B-2
As Congress considers additional financing to build new B-2 stealth bomber, a
draft report by the General Accounting Office says that the $44 billion bomber,
which is built by Northrop Grumman, may not be as stealthy as advertised. After
14 years of work, including 6 years of test flights, "the Air Force has yet to
demonstrate that the B-2 design will meet some of its most important mission
requirements," the report said. [1.]

Chrysler Comes to Vietnam
Just days after President Clinton extended full recognition to Vietnam, Chrysler
opened showrooms Ho Chi Minh City and in Hanoi this week. The moves reflect the
efforts by American companies to gain a piece of a consumer market that is
already being tapped by Asian and European competitors. [38.]

Blacks Make Labor Demands
Black labor union leaders see the struggle for the presidency of the
A.F.L.-C.I.O. as a rare opportunity to demand a much greater voice for blacks in
the nation's labor movement. The leaders have prepared a list of 11 demands,
most of them calling for more blacks in the federation's hierarchy and the
hierarchies of its individual unions. [6.]

Drug Company Goes It Alone
Express Scripts is the only major manager of prescription drug networks that has
not been gobbled up or embraced by a pharmaceutical giant, and the company is
using that fact as a big selling point. [40.]

Heat Hits Midwest Farmers
Livestock is no longer dropping dead in droves, but farmers in the Midwest
expect to be suffering the effects of this week's heat wave for weeks to come.
[29.]

Coffee Prices Climbing
Coffee prices steepened their climb after the Brazilian Coffee Exporters
Federation endorsed a plan to limit shipments to one million bags a month.
Coffee for September delivery surged 5.5 cents, to $1.447 a pound on the Coffee,
Sugar and Cocoa Exchange. [36.]

LOAD-DATE: July 15, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Table: "YESTERDAY"
Dow industrials                4,708.82              -18.66
30-yr. Treasury                   6.60%               +0.05
yield
The dollar                    87.83 yen               +0.48

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              47 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 15, 1995, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section 1; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 708 words



International 2-5

BOSNIAN SERBS MOVE ON ZEPA
Ignoring international condemnation and Western threats of retaliation, Bosnian
Serb forces began an attack on the Muslim enclave of Zepa in eastern Bosnia. 1
Terrorized Bosnian Muslims overwhelmed aid workers in Tuzla. 4



President Clinton and senior advisers conferred on Bosnia. 4

NEW FRONT FORMING IN CROATIA
Frustrated at the failure of diplomacy to recover territory occupied by Serbian
rebels since 1991, Croatia is preparing to attack. 5

NEXT CHAPTER FOR RWANDA
A year after a million Rwandan Hutu flooded Zaire, more than 2 million remain in
refugee camps, many afraid to return, others preparing for a military offensive
against the Tutsi-dominated Rwandan Government. 1

ISRAELI BEDOUINS' SEPARATE WAY
Revivim Journal: Azazme Bedouins have laid claim to a patch of desert in the
central Negev to preserve traditions of their nomadic ancestors. 2

YELTSIN CANCELS TRIP
Aides to the President said he has canceled a trip to Norway and all engagements
until July 24, raising new questions about his health. 3

DYING YOUNG IN NEW ZEALAND
New Zealand is affluent, peaceful and beautiful -- and has the highest youth
suicide rate in the world. 3

National 6-9, 29

UPHEAVAL AT THE F.B.I.
The F.B.I.'s deputy director was demoted in the wake of turmoil resulting from
the investigation into the standoff with a white separatist in Idaho in 1992.  1


GRADING THE STEALTH BOMBER
The $44 billion B-2 bomber may not be nearly as stealthy as advertised, a draft
report by the General Accounting Office says.  1

LETTING GO OF A GRUDGE
Even some former hawks are greeting news of the extension of diplomatic
relations to Vietnam with support or, at worst, shrugs.  1

NOT-SO-NIMBLE SIMPSON
A doctor testified that the wear and tear of football left O. J. Simpson with
restricted mobility, supporting defense contentions that he could not have
committed murder.  6

DIVERSIFYING LABOR
Black labor union leaders are using the election of an A.F.L.-C.I.O. president
to demand a bigger voice.  6

AN UNUSUAL TRANSPLANT
An advisory panel has recommended that an AIDS patient be allowed to get an
experimental bone marrow transplant from a baboon.  7

INVESTIGATING GINGRICH
The chairwoman of the House ethics committee said the panel might still seek the
help of an outside counsel in its investigation of Speaker Newt Gingrich's book
deal.  9

PACKWOOD REPERCUSSIONS
Accusations of official misconduct against Senator Bob Packwood have led to
dueling threats from two of his colleagues.  8

Metro Digest 23

NEW YORK NEWSDAY TO CLOSE
New York Newsday, a bold experiment in creating a new type of urban tabloid
newspaper, will publish its last edition tomorrow, a victim of corporate
pressures for profits and a changing market.  1

HEAT DESCENDS ON NEW YORK
The scourge of heat that killed at least 15 people and thousands of cattle in
the Midwest descended on the New York area, bringing temperatures in the
mid-90's and the humidity of a rainforest. 1

Business Digest 37

Arts/Entertainment 11-17

Arts groups fear Federal cuts.  11

Film: "Under Siege 2." 16

Music: "The Gypsy Baron." 11

When computers rule.  14

Ringo Starr at Radio City.  15

Sonny Simmons.  15

Dance: Marge and Gower Champion.  11

Obituaries 10

Sports 30-34

Baseball: Twins rip Yankees.  31

Mets rout Rockies.  33

Dodger pitches a no-hitter.  33

Basketball: Rutgers names C. Vivian Stringer as coach.  31

Columns: Rhoden on the Jesse Owens award.  31

Golf: Second round of U.S. Women's
Open suspended by a storm.  34

Soccer: U.S. blanks Argentina.  31

Sports People.  30

Editorials/Op-Ed 20-21

Editorials

Mr. Arafat's governance.

Don't "throw until you die."

Sweat equity.

Subway saviors.

Letters

Frank Rich: Such stuff as dreams.

Russell Baker: You in there, Bob?

Richard Rhodes: Echoes of the big bang.

Maurice M. Shapiro: A blinding blast, then a foreboding.

Chronicle 22

Bridge 17

Crossword 12

LOAD-DATE: July 15, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              48 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 15, 1995, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Reflecting on Vietnam Ties, Many Agree That It's Time

BYLINE: By DIRK JOHNSON

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 1;  Column 3;  National Desk

LENGTH: 1053 words

DATELINE: JOLIET, Ill., July 14


A generation ago, when the Vietnam War was driving a wedge through America,
Marco Scolari, a union concrete worker and World War II veteran, could scarcely
bring himself to speak to any man who had avoided military service. Back then,
it seemed that passions over Vietnam might never cool, on either side.

But when President Clinton extended diplomatic recognition to Vietnam on
Tuesday, a move that once would surely have ignited a firestorm, the response
across the nation, in interviews with dozens of Americans, was measured, and
mostly favorable.

Even Mr. Scolari, the onetime hawk now 77 and retired here in Joliet, merely
shrugged. "You know, even the draft dodgers don't bother me anymore," he said.
"They were halfway right about Vietnam."

A majority of the 75 or so people interviewed this week -- from this faded
factory town on the Illinois River to the pinstripe-and-starch district of
downtown Houston, from immigrant neighborhoods of Boston to the espresso cafes
of Portland, Ore. -- looked on the Vietnam War as a finished chapter in American
history. Although there was still some disagreement about the meaning of
Vietnam, it was rarely expressed in the shrill tones of the divisions a
quarter-century ago.

"It's been 20 years, and you can't hold a grudge forever," Bruce Donald, a
39-year-old banker, said as he browsed through a bookstore in Boston. "Look, my
father-in-law lost a limb in World War II. It doesn't mean that if he saw a
German today he'd turn the other way."

Joliet is the sort of working-class place that sent more than its share of sons
and brothers to Vietnam. Indeed, it seems to be the rare person here who does
not have a relative who fought in the war. John Adams, a 31-year-old auto sales
manager whose father and grandfather both did, said: "It's time to let it go and
move on. We shouldn't be paralyzed by our past."

Florine Johnson, 50, of Pikesville, Md., said there was only one reason the
Government had waited so long to restore relations: Vietnam was the war America
lost. "If we had won," she said, "this wouldn't be an issue."

To be sure, some people saw Mr. Clinton's move as a betrayal of those who
fought, and especially of the families of men still missing in Vietnam. Several
argued that the nation's most important bargaining chip in negotiations to gain
more information about missing American troops had been squandered by the
President's move.

"There's nothing to dangle over the Vietnamese Government's head," said Arguetta
Ruffin, a 38-year-old administrative assistant in Atlanta. Ms. Ruffin said she
believed that some American soldiers were still being held in prison camps.

But that view was in the minority.  Even among those who said they opposed
formal recognition of Vietnam, few held out much hope that any missing Americans
were still alive.

"The family members and their friends are clinging to a little bit of hope --
it's an irrational hope," said Phil Kothmayer, a 37-year-old high school teacher
in Ocala, Fla. "I can empathize with them, but look at it from a realistic
standpoint. It's not going to happen."

Among those opposing recognition was Mark Sayers, 34, who works at a nuclear
power plant near Joliet. "We lost 58,000 people in that war," he said, "and it's
still a Communist country. Recognizing Vietnam is offensive to the families who
lost somebody there."

Elizabeth Jessup, whose husband, Joseph, was wounded in Vietnam, said she could
never bring herself to forgive its Communist leaders. "It's the same Vietnam
that took our sons and brothers," she said. "I could never forgive them for
that."

But others argued that the United States was not blameless either.

"The question should be, Can Vietnam forgive us?" said Billie Stokes, 40, who
works as a customer service representative for a telephone company in Joliet. "I
mean, look at all that we did to that country -- all the bombs we dropped, all
the kids we killed."

Among some people, Mr. Clinton came in for renewed criticism for his avoidance
of the draft. "He has no credibility on military matters," said Cheri Carhill, a
47-year-old housewife. "It's a joke for this coward to be making decisions about
a war he refused to serve in."

Others, though, said that Mr. Clinton had surely known that he would be
subjected to some criticism over his decision of this week, and that he deserved
praise for taking the political risk.

"If he would just stand up for what he believes once in a while -- just because
he believes in it -- people would have more respect for him," said Rita Adelman,
a 51-year-old nurse in Joliet.

Warren Carlin, a 62-year-old English teacher at the College of St. Francis here,
said he hoped that Mr. Clinton would stay the course on normalization with
Vietnam, even if opposition mounted in Congress.

"He did the right thing," Mr. Carlin said. "Now, if he backs away from this, I
will be very disappointed. But I won't be surprised."

Besides bringing closure to a traumatic chapter in American history, recognition
of Vietnam opens a potentially important market, most of those interviewed said.

"We're in a world economy now," said Tom Fewox, a 42-year-old Houstonian. "We
need to get on with business. They've allowed a lot of foreign investment in the
oil industry."

And Steve Brinker, 46, a technician for a waste-water treatment company in
Joliet, added, "Wasn't the whole war about capitalism anyway?"

Among younger Americans, of course, the Vietnam War is a matter of the distant
past. "I know nothing about Vietnam," said Cris Glenn, a Joliet disk jockey born
in 1973. "It seems like a lot of people are dwelling in the past. We should
learn from the past mistakes and move on."

Pat Jordan, 73, the commander of a Veterans of Foreign Wars post in Portland,
said he also supported Mr. Clinton's move. "You can't go on hating everyone for
the rest of your life," he said. "It's going to tear you up if you do."

Charles Loveless, a 53-year-old Joliet welder who served in Vietnam in 1967 and
1968, said that the war had been "senseless" and that in any case he saw little
to be gained by holding grudges against Hanoi. Withholding diplomatic
recognition would only hurt ordinary Vietnamese, he said.

"The people of Vietnam are not my enemy," Mr. Loveless said. "They never were my
enemy."

LOAD-DATE: July 15, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Marco Scolari, A retired concrete worker and World War II
veteran. -- "You know, even the draft dodgers don't bother me anymore. They were
halfway right about Vietnam."; John Adams, An auto sales manager and son of a
Vietnam veteran. -- "It's time to let it go and move on. We shouldn't be
paralyzed by our past."; Cheri Carhill, A housewife who is a critic of Bill
Clinton's draft avoidance. -- "It's a joke for this coward to be making
decisions about a war he refused to serve in."; Warren Carlin, A college English
teacher who supports the President's move. -- "Now, if he backs away from this,
I will be very disappointed. But I won't be surprised." (Photos by Paul Meredith
for The New York Times) (pg. 9)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              49 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 15, 1995, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section 1; Page 2; Column 6; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 28 words


"It's time to let it go and move on. We shouldn't be paralyzed by our past." --
JOHN ADAMS, an auto sales manager in Joliet, Ill., on recognizing Vietnam.
[1:4.]

LOAD-DATE: July 15, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              50 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 16, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

TELEVISION;
The Rib Tickler's Approach to Social Provocation

BYLINE: By LAWRIE MIFFLIN

SECTION: Section 2;  Page 24;  Column 1;  Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 967 words


MORE THAN RATINGS ARE at stake for Michael Moore this summer as his sometimes
loopy, sometimes acidly satiric news-magazine program, "TV Nation," returns to
prime time. His whole world view is on the line.

Mr. Moore, the iconoclastic film maker who is destined to have his name followed
forever by the phrase "producer and director of the award-winning documentary
'Roger and Me,' " says his career is propelled by the conviction that Americans
are smarter and more politically sophisticated than the television industry
thinks.

"The proof is in the Nielsen ratings," he says. "The top 10 shows are the
smartest, the most risk-taking shows, shows like 'Seinfeld,' 'E.R.,' 'N.Y.P.D.
Blue.' Look, '60 Minutes,' a news show, is always in the top 10. And 'Roseanne,'
whatever else you may feel about it, deals with serious social issues and
controversies."

Social issues, smart-aleck interviews and general rabble-rousing are what Mr.
Moore plans to offer in eight new episodes of "TV Nation." The show, which he
has moved to Fox from NBC, where it ran last summer, will be seen on Fridays at
8 P.M., starting this week.

"I really think this country is ready for a good dose of political humor right
now," Mr. Moore said recently over lunch at a cafe near his midtown Manhattan
office.

This summer, "TV Nation" will mock everyone from Presidential candidates to
"whining white men"; everything from companies that don't provide enough toilets
for female employees (in a memorable segment featuring portable Johns of Justice
delivered by truck) to fancy-dress brigades that re-enact Civil War battles.
What Mr. Moore calls his "merry band of troublemakers" will include Janeane
Garofalo, late of "Saturday Night Live" and "The Larry Sanders Show"; the
comedian Steven Wright, and an investigative reporter called Crackers the
Corporate Crime Chicken.

"TV Nation," which is produced by Kathleen Glynn, Mr. Moore's wife, often
recycles the pester-the-powers-that-be method that brought Mr. Moore success in
"Roger and Me," his 1989 film about the effect of the closing of a General
Motors factory in Flint., Mich., his hometown. In a new segment called
"Payback," for example, Mr. Moore goes to the home of the chief executive of a
car-alarm company, lines up 10 cars and sets off the alarms at 6 A.M., to see
what the executive will do (he calls the police, who make Mr. Moore move the
cars).

"But my idea with the car alarms and that sort of stuff is to draw people in,"
he explained. "Once they're in, we'll talk about real issues."

In another new segment, Ms. Garofalo takes a multiethnic group of 24 New Yorkers
by bus to the town beach in Greenwich, Conn. (Only Greenwich residents are
allowed.) Turned away, they rent a boat; stopped by police boats, they swim
ashore. "It's a public beach," Mr. Moore said, eyes flashing behind his glasses.
"You can't say only residents of Brooklyn can go to Coney Island. This is
America! You can't say only people in Venice can use Venice Beach. This is
America!"

Since "Roger and Me," Mr. Moore has mellowed in age, to 40, and in appearance,
with a few extra pounds on his 6-foot-3-inch frame. With a Detroit Tiger
baseball cap almost always perched on his mop of brown hair, he looks just like
what, on one level, he is: a white, middle-class, middle-aged husband and father
(he and Ms. Glynn have a 14-year-old daughter) from a blue-collar family, with
no college degree and a fondness for sports. But underneath the aw-shucks
demeanor beats what one critic called "a genetically subversive heart."

Mr. Moore's subversiveness takes the form of thumbing the nose at the bosses,
and he was to that manner born. "My uncle was in the sit-down strike in Flint
that founded the U.A.W.," he says, referring to the United Auto Workers' 1937
strike. "I think that generation, if they could see what goes on now, would be
very disappointed."

He is certainly disappointed in his generation, which took part in civil rights
and Vietnam War protests but faded into armchair liberalism. "To the
disenfranchised, angry, alienated, unemployed worker in Michigan, what are the
Democrats, the liberals, offering?" Mr. Moore asked. "Newt Gingrich, and people
like the Michigan militia, they have something to offer. It's the wrong thing,
but it's something people can grab on to."

He believes that his social contribution is to goad people into taking part in a
search for solutions. "If we are active and involved, we'll find our way, but if
we detach, we're going to be in a lot of trouble," Mr. Moore said. "So I want
this show to get people riled up, to get them juiced, to motivate people to get
involved, and not just sit around. If they can see a guy like me, without a
college education, from Flint, Mich., walk into the headquarters of some big
corporation, or into the halls of Congress, and challenge some people, maybe
people will say, 'Hey, maybe I can do something like that.' "

NOT MANY PEOPLE, HOW ever, would send Crackers the Corporate Crime Chicken to
ask New York Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani serious questions about tax breaks and
unemployment. And some television critics have complained that such sophomoric
stunts undermine whatever serious purpose Mr. Moore has in mind. He disagrees.

"Humor can be more devastating than some formal white paper," he said. "There's
no reason you can't be entertained and think at the same time. You can laugh,
and you can think. That's my point about the top 10 shows in the Nielsen
ratings: you have to do both. And people will do that. I don't have that
attitude, that looking down on the American people like they're all a bunch of
dopes."

He paused, and the gleam was back in his eyes. "That's not to say there aren't a
good 50 or 60,000 dopes," he said, yukking gently, "because there are."

NAME: Michael Moore

LOAD-DATE: July 16, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Man on the Street -- Michael Moore, creator of "TV Nation"--
"Humor can be more devastating than some formal white paper." (C.
Blankenhorn/Fox)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              51 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 16, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

TRAVEL ADVISORY;
Hong Kong Aquarium Is Back in the Swim

SECTION: Section 5;  Page 3;  Column 5;  Travel Desk

LENGTH: 132 words


Visitors to Ocean Park, a Hong Kong amusement park with a water theme, can
explore the expanded Atoll Reef aquarium, with 3.8 million gallons of water and
some 7,000 fish. More than 400 species native to the Phillipines, Singapore,
Vietnam, Australia, the Maldives and the Red Sea are displayed. The Atoll Reef
reopened in the spring; it had been closed since October 1992 for a $7.7 million
refurbishment program.

Ocean Park is on Hong Kong island, between Aberdeen and Repulse Bay. Entrance to
the Atoll Reef is included in admission to the amusement park, which is about
$17, $8 for children 12 and under.

The reef, 2555-3554, is open daily from 10 A.M. to 6 P.M.

More information: Hong Kong Tourist Association, 590 Fifth Avenue, New York,
N.Y. 10036; (212) 869-5008.

LOAD-DATE: July 16, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              52 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 16, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

ON THE TOWNS

SECTION: Section 13NJ;  Page 10;  Column 1;  New Jersey Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 4439 words



MUSIC

ALLAN P. KIRBY ARTS CENTER The 1995 Opera Festival of New Jersey concludes with
"Elixir of Love." Today at 3 P.M. Tickets: $18-$135. The Lawrenceville School,
Route 26 in Lawrenceville. (609) 936-1500.

BRIDGETON'S RIVERFRONT In a series of free Sunday night concerts, the Pitman
Hobo Band performs today at 7 P.M. The Brown Street Chowder Society plays next
Sunday. Routes 49 and 77 in Bridgeton. (609) 451-9208.



CHOIR COLLEGE CONCERTS The Westminster Choir College of Rider University Summer
Concert Series. Deborah Ford-Bigger, soprano, and Peter Wright, pianist, in a
recital. Today at 4 P.M. Eugene Roan, organist. Monday at 6:30 P.M. Bristol
Chapel, Princeton. The Gloria Consort. Tuesday at 6:30 P.M. Williamson Hall at
Rider University. "THe Dulcimer Lady," an Autoharp recital with Lucille Reily.
Wednesday at 6:30 P.M. Bristol Chapel. Scott Dettra, organist. Wednesday at 8
P.M. Trinity Church in Princeton. "Celebration of African-American Sacred
Music." Thursday at 8:30 P.M. Bristol Chapel. (609) 921-2663.

GARDEN STATE ARTS CENTER Van Halen. Today at 8 P.M. Tickets: $26 and $35. Sarah
McLachlan and the Chieftains and Friends present an "Acoustic Tour." Tomorrow at
8 P.M. Tickets: $18-$38.50. Ringo Starr and His-All Star Band. Tuesday at 8 P.M.
Tickets: $18-$38.50. Amy Grant with Steven Curtis Chapman. Tickets: $20-$38.50.
Joan Rivers and Don Rickles. Saturday at 8 P.M. Tickets: $20-$37.50. Exit 116 on
the Garden State Parkway, Holmdel. (908) 442-9200.

EAST ORANGE CONCERT SERIES "Jazz at the Plaza," with Ronnel Bey. Tuesday at 6
P.M. Ampere Plaza and Fourth Avenue, East Orange. (201) 266-5147.

FAIR LAWN SUMMER MUSIC FESTIVAL The Sunday evening concerts continue. Saxophone
and clarinet quartets perform music from Mozart to Glenn Miller today at 8:30
P.M. Next Sunday the Knights of Pythias sponsors an international dance program
with community dancing directed by Harold Lieberman. Free, but bring your own
chairs. Memorial Park and Berdan Avenue, Fair Lawn. (201) 796-6746.

FLOOD'S HILL, MEADOWLAND PARK Arts in the Park presents Solid Brass. Wednesday
at P.M. Free. Ridgewood Road and Meadowbrook Lane, South Orange. (201) 378-7754.


GREAT AUDITORIUM, OCEAN GROVE The Summer Stars Music Festival presents
Meng-Chieh Liu in a solo piano concert. Thursday at at 8 P.M. Tickets: $10.
Pilgrim Pathway, Ocean Grove. (908) 775-0035.

KASSCHAU MEMORIAL SHELL The Ridgewood Village Band, conducted by Roger Guccione
and Deborah Venezia, continues its free concerts throughout July. Thursday at
8:30 P.M. Veterans Field on North Maple Avenue, Ridgewood. (201) 670-3924.

MIDDLESEX COUNTY CONCERTS The Garden State Brass Sextet. Today at 3 P.M. Johnson
Park, River Road in Piscataway. Chris Pedersen and the Garden State Symphonic
Band. Today at 6 P.M. Warren Park, Florida Grove Road in Woodbridge. George
Krauss Memorial Concert Band, conducted by Barbara Santoro. Today at 7 P.M.
Spring Lake Park, Maple Park and South Plainfield. (908) 745-3936.

NEW JERSEY SYMPHONY ORCHESTRA Zdenek Macal, artistic director and conductor,
leads the orchestra in the Amadeus Festival, a new summer series. Friday and
Saturday at 8 P.M. at Richardson Auditorium at Princeton University. Today and
next Sunday at 7 P.M. at Temple B'nai Jeshurun in Short Hills. Tickets: $15-$35.
(201) 624-8203 or 800-ALLEGRO.

PAPER MILL PLAYHOUSE Roberta Flack continues the summer concert series. Tuesday
at 8 P.M. Tickets: $25 and $30. Brookside Drive, Millburn. (201) 379-3636,
extension 2644.

RAMAPO COLLEGE The Minolta Summer Music Fest free Thursday night concerts
concludes with the Emerald Experience, a program featuring the "do-wops" and
"golden oldies" of the 50's and 60's. Thursday at 8 P.M. The Bandshell, 505
Ramapo Valley Road. Off Route 17 and 202 in Mahwah. (201) 529-7612.

RIVERSIDE GARDENS PARK, RED BANK Comcast Cablevision and the Borough of Red Bank
continue their series of free Thursday outdoor jazz concerts with Line Drive.
Thursday at 7:30 P.M. West Front Street in downtown Red Bank. (908) 851-8849.

RUTGERS ARTS CENTER The Rutgers Summerfest is in full swing. Ralph Bowen
Quartet. Today at 2 P.M. Tickets: $16. Music from Puerto Rico and Argentina.
Tuesday at 8 P.M. Tickets: $18. Robert Taub. Thursday at 8 P.M. Tickets: $22.
Uptown String Quartet. Friday at 8 P.M. Tickets: $22. Rutgers Festival Orchestra
and Chorus, conducted by Patrick Gardner. Saturday at 8 P.M. Tickets: $22. Larry
Ridley and the Jazz Legacy Ensemble. Next Sunday at 2 P.M Tickets: $16. George
Street at Route 18, New Brunswick. (908) 932-7511.

SUMMERFEST '95 CONCERTS The Morris County Park Commission presents Over the
Edge. Today at 3 P.M. Silas Condict Park, Kinnelon Road, Kinnelon. John Gorka.
Wednesday at 6:30 P.M. Schooleys Mountain Park, West Springtown Road, Washington
Township. "Freedome Rode." Next Sunday at 3 P.M. McCaffrey Lane, Boonton
Township. (201) 326-7600.

WATCHUNG ARTS CENTER 'The "Emerging Artists Festival" continues with the Amazing
Incredibles. Friday at 8 P.M. Tickets: $10. 18 Stirling Road, Watchung. (908)
753-0190.

WOOD PARK, LEONIA The Players' Guild of Leonia presents "The Music Man." Today
at 8:30 P.M. Tickets: $12, or $11 for students and the elderly. Wood Park,
Leonia. (201) 947-9606.

THEATER

BICKFORD THEATER, MORRIS MUSEUM In "Love Letters," a relationship is revealed
through a lifetime of correspondence. Today at 2 P.M.; Friday and Saturday at 8
P.M.; next Sunday at 2 P.M. 6 Normandy Heights Road, Morristown. (201) 538-8069.


BLACK RIVER PLAYHOUSE The Chester Theater Group presents "Nunsense II: The
Second Coming," by Dan Goggin. Friday and Saturday at 8 P.M. Through Aug. 5.
Tickets: $15. Grove Street, Chester. (908) 879-7304.

COUNT BASIE THEATER Phoenix Productions presents "Hair." Saturday at 8 P.M. and
next Sunday at 3 P.M. Tickets: $14 and $18. 99 Monmouth Street, Red Bank.
(908) 747-0014.

COUNTY COLLEGE OF MORRIS "A Funny Thing Happened on the Way to the Forum."
Thursday, Friday and Saturday at 8 P.M. Tickets: $10. Dragonetti Auditorium, 214
Center Grove, Randolph. (201) 328-5225.

EAST LYNNE COMPANY "A Counterfeit Presentment." Friday and Saturday at 8 P.M.
and next Sunday at 3 P.M. The Meadowlands Center for the Arts, Rutherford. Also,
Wednesday through Saturday at 8:30 P.M. at Lyle Hall of the First Methodist
Church, Cape May. July 26 through Aug. 5. Tickets: $14, or $12 for the elderly.
(609) 884-6900.

FOUNDATION THEATER "Sleuth," by Anthony Shaffer. Wednesday and Thursday at 2 and
8 P.M., Friday and Saturday at 8 P.M. and Sunday at 2 PM. Through Aug. 6.
Tickets: $15, or $13 for students and the elderly. Burlington County College,
Route 530, Pemberton. (609) 894-2138.

GUGGENHEIM SUMMER THEATER "Light Up the Sky," by Moss Hart. Today at 7:30 P.M.,
Thursday, Friday and Saturday at 8:30 P.M. and next Sunday at 7:30 P.M. Tickets:
$17, or $15 for students and the elderly. Monmouth University, West Long Branch.
(908) 571-3475.

HUNTERDON COUNTY COURTHOUSE Century Productions presents "Lindbergh and
Hauptmann: The Trial of the Century." Friday and Saturday at 8 P.M. and Sunday
at 2 P.M. Through Aug. 13. Tickets: $17. Main Street, Flemington. (908)
782-2610.
NEW JERSEY SHAKESPEARE FESTIVAL "Julius Caesar." Today at 2 and 7 P.M.,
Wednesday at 2 and 8 P.M., Thursday and Friday at 8 P.M., Saturday at 2 and 8
P.M. Tickets: $16 to $30. Bowne Theater, Drew University, 36 Madison Avenue,
Madison. (201) 408-5600.

PAPER MILL PLAYHOUSE "The Secret Garden," a musical by Marsha Norman and Lucy
Simon, based on the novel by Frances Hodgson Burnett. Today at 3 and 8 P.M.,
Wednesday and Friday at 8 P.M., Thursday at 2 and 8 P.M. and Saturday and next
Sunday at 3 and 8 P.M. Tickets: $29 to $44. Brookside Drive, Millburn. (201)
376-4343.

RAMAPO COLLEGE The summer season of Shakespeare in the Garden continues with
"Romeo and Juliet." Saturday and next Sunday at 6 P.M. Through July 30. Free,
but bring your own chairs or blankets. 505 Ramapo Valley Road, Mahwah. (201)
529-7368.

RITZ THEATER "Oliver!," a musical. Friday and Saturday at 8 P.M and Sunday at 2
P.M. Through Aug. 5. Tickets: $12 and $14. 915 White Horse Pike, Oaklyn. (609)
858-5230.

ROOSEVELT PARK AMPHITHEATER The Middlesex County Department of Parks and
Recreation presents Plays-in-the-Park 1995. "The Sound of Music." Monday through
Saturday at 8:30 P.M. Tickets: $3. "West Side Story" begins on Aug. 2. 1 Block
South of the Menlo Park Shopping Mall, Off Route 1, Edison. (609) 548-2884.

SOMERSET VALLEY PLAYHOUSE "You Can't Take It With You," by Moss Hart and George
S. Kaufman, directed by Richard Dobrowolski. Friday and Saturday at 8:30 P.M.
and Sunday at 7 P.M. Tickets: $10; $12 on Saturdays. Through July 30. Route 514
and Amwell Road, Hillsborough. (908) 369-7469.

THEATERFEST "A Chorus Line." Tuesday at 8 P.M., Wednesday at 2 and 8 P.M.,
Thursday, Friday and Saturday at 8 P.M. and Sunday at 2 and 8 P.M. Through July
30. Tickets: $23 and $25, or $12.50 for the elderly. Montclair State University,
Valley Road and Normal Avenue, Upper Montclair. (201) 655-5112.

WASHINGTON CROSSING STATE PARK The Open Air Theater series continues with
"Nunsense." Thursday, Friday and Saturday at 8:30 P.M. Through July 29. Tickets:
$650-$.50. Hopewell Township, Mercer County. (609) 737-1826.

WEISS ARTS CENTER Summerfun Theater presents "The Sisters Rosensweig." Tuesday
and Wednesday at 8 P.M., Thursday at 2 and 8 P.M. and Friday and Saturday at 8
P.M. $7. "Oleanna" begins on July 25. Lloyd Road off Bloomfield Avenue,
Montclair. (201) 256-0576.

MUSEUMS AND GALLARIES

ART CENTER OF NORTHERN NEW JERSEY Salute to Women in the Arts presents
"Summerfest V," an annual juried members' show. Through July 30. Monday through
Friday, 10 A.M. to 5:30 P.M., and Saturday, 10 A.M. to 3 P.M. The Marcella
Geltman Gallery. 250 Center Street, New Milford. (201) 599-2992.

ART FORMS Photography by Jeff Martin, Vincent Servbin, Carter Farmer, Joseph
Paduano and others. Through July 29. Tuesday through Friday, 10 A.M. to 6 P.M.,
and Saturday, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M. 16 Monmouth Street, Red Bank. (908) 530-4330.

ART MUSEUM, PRINCETON UNIVERSITY "Collaborative Landscape Photographs by Laura
McPhee, Class of 1980, and Virginia Beahan," an exhibition of 20 color
photographs. Through Aug. 20. Free. Tuesday through Saturday, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.,
and Sunday, 1 to 5 P.M. Princeton. (609) 258-3788.

BERGEN MUSEUM OF ART AND SCIENCE "Edward Walsh Sculpture," nine abstract and
traditional sculptures created from stainless steel, granite and bronze. Through
tomorrow. "John Schettino: Drawings and Paintings," through July 30.
"Photographic Drawings" by David Horton. Through July 30. Tuesday through
Saturday, 9:30 A.M. to 4:30 P.M.; Sunday, 1 to 5 P.M. Suggested admission:
adults, $2.50; children, $1. 327 East Ridgewood Avenue, Paramus. (201) 265-1248.


BERLEX LABORATORIES GALLERY "Moments in Time," original photographs by Janet
Engeman and Dwight Hiscano. Monday and Friday, 9 A.M. to 5 P.M.; Tuesday through
Thursday, 9 A.M. to 6 P.M., and Saturday, 9:30 to 5 P.M. Through Aug. 10. 300
Fairfield Road, Wayne. (201) 540-1195.

BLACKWELL STREET CENTER FOR THE ARTS "Summer Daze," an exhibition of works by
all members of the center. Through Aug. 20. Thursday through Sunday, noon to 4
P.M. 32-34 West Blackwell Street, Dover.
(201) 328-9628.

BRODSKY GALLERY, CHAUNCEY CONFERENCE CENTER Color photographs taken from around
the world by Nanci Ori. Through July 28. Monday through Friday, 9 A.M. to 9 P.M.
Rosedale Road, Princeton. (609) 921-3600.

EVERHART GALLERY "Summer Group Show" with architectural renderings by Lauren V.
Walling and photographs by Bill Vandever. Though Aug. 30. Tuesday through
Saturday, 11 A.M. to 6 P.M. 117 South Maple Avenue, Basking Ridge. (908)
221-9007.

GALLERY AT GENERAL PUBLIC UTILITIES Color photographs by H. Lisa Solon and
sculptures and paintings by David A. Angelini. Through July 30. Free. Monday
through Friday, 8:30 A.M. to 5 P.M. 100 Interpace Parkway, Parsippany. (201)
263-6684.

GUILD OF CREATIVE ART Third Annual Juried Open State Show. Starts today with a
reception from 3 to 5 P.M. Through July 28. Tuesday through Saturday, noon to
4:30 P.M. 620 Broad Street, Route 35, Shrewsbury. (908) 741-1441.

HUNTERDON ART CENTER "NYC Underground," 17 oil canvas paintings of New York
City's subway system and tunnels by Alexandra Dell'amore. Through Aug. 27.
Tuesday through Sunday, 11 A.M. to 5 P.M. 7 Lower Center Street, Clinton. (908)
735-8415.

JERSEY CITY MUSEUM "Albizu Lives," a visual commemoration. Through Sept. 16.
"The Nation Is Its People: Body and Soul of Lolita Lebron." Through Aug. 18.
"Joan Fine: Wall Reliefs." Through Aug. 18. Tuesday, Thursday, Friday, 10:30
A.M. to 5 P.M. and Wednesday, 10:30 A.M. to 8 P.M. 472 Jersey Avenue, Jersey
City. (201) 547-4514.

LONG BEACH ISLAND FOUNDATION OF ARTS AND SCIENCE "Abstract Watercolors,"
featuring selected artists from the New Jersey Watercolor Society.
"Mobiles/Stabiles Installation," works by Myron Wasserman. Through Wednesday.
"Artists Alliance," an exhibition and art sale, including paintings, sculptures
and mixed media by Michigan artists. Starts next Sunday. Monday through
Saturday, 9 A.M. to 5 P.M. and Sunday, noon to 4 P.M. Free. 120 Long Beach
Boulevard, Loveladies. (609) 494-3169.

MEADOWLANDS CENTER FOR THE ARTS "Images, Dreams, Words and Marks," a solo show
of paintings and drawings by Lisa Pressman. Through Aug. 4. Monday through
Friday, 9 A.M. to 6 P.M., and Saturday and Sunday, 10 A.M. to 6 P.M. 1 Williams
Plaza, Rutherford. (201) 939-6969.

MONMOUTH COUNTY HISTORICAL ASSOCIATION MUSEUM AND LIBRARY "Optical Delights:
Stereographic Views of Monmouth County" presents images of Victorian life.
Through February 1996. Tuesday through Saturday, 10 A.M. to 4 P.M., and Sunday,
1 to 4 P.M. Admission: $2 for adults, $1 for children and $1.50 for the elderly.
70 Court Street, Freehold. (908) 462-1466.

MONMOUTH MUSEUM "Artists With Physical Disabilities" includes paintings,
photography, printmaking and sculpture. Through Aug. 17. Tuesday through
Saturday, 10 A.M. to 4:30 P.M., and Sunday, 1 to 5 P.M. Brookdale Community
College campus, Lincroft.
(908) 747-2266.

MONTCLAIR ART MUSEUM "Still Life Works From the Collection" offers 13 paintings
by American artists ranging in style from 19th-century realism to 20th-century
modernism. Through September. "Elizabeth Berdann," a self-titled installation
featuring portraits of elderly women in a nursing home. Through Oct. 1.
"Affinities and Influences: Native American Art and American Modernism" begins
today. Through Oct. 1. Tuesday, Wednesday, Friday and Saturday, 11 A.M. to 5
P.M.; Sunday and Thursday, 1 P.M. to 5 P.M. Admission: $4, or $3 for the elderly
and students with ID. 3 South Mountain Avenue, Montclair. (201) 746-5555.

MORRIS COUNTY HISTORICAL SOCIETY "A Bouquet of Brides" features more than a
dozen wedding gowns dating to 1750 and reflecting a variety of styles and
histories. Through October. Admission: $3. Thursday, 11 A.M. to 3 P.M., and
Sunday, 1:30 to 4 P.M. 68 Morris Avenue, Morristown. (201) 267-3465.

NABISCO GALLERY "Crossing Over," an exhibition of 80 mixed-media works by 20
contemporary Russian artists. Through Sept. 7. Daily, noon to 4 P.M. River Road
and DeForest Avenue, East Hanover. (201) 503-3238.

NEWARK MUSEUM "New Jersey Arts Annual: Celebrating Diversity in Crafts" takes a
look at traditional and modern crafts in New Jersey. Through Oct. 15. "American
Art Pottery: An Uneasy Evolution, 1880-1930." Through Oct. 22. "Astronauts: The
Star Travelers" features photographs of the Apollo XI flight. Through Dec. 31.
Wednesday through Sunday, noon to 5 P.M. 49 Washington Street, Newark. (201)
596-6550.

NEW JERSEY HISTORICAL SOCIETY "Moving Through Memory: Caribbean Folk Arts in New
Jersey." Through April 1996. Tuesday through Friday, 10 A.M. to 4 P.M. 230
Broadway, Newark. (201) 483-3939.

NEW JERSEY STATE MUSEUM "Echizen: 800 Years of Japanese Stoneware," an
exhibition celebrating the history and art of potters. Through Aug. 7. "Baseball
in New Jersey: The Game of History." Through Aug. 27. Tuesday through Saturday,
9 A.M. to 4:45 P.M., and Sunday, noon to 5 P.M. 205 West State Street, Trenton.
(609) 292-6308.

NOYES MUSEUM "Drawing Outside the Lines: Works on Paper by Outsider Artists,"
presents a selction of drawing in pencil, crayon, and other media with work by
Eddie Arning, Minnie Evans, Bill Traylor and Martin Ramirez. Through Sept. 17.
Wednesday through Sunday, 11 A.M. to 4 P.M. Admission, $3; the elderly, $1.50;
students and children under 18, 50 cents. Free admission on Fridays. Lily Lake
Road, Oceanville. (609) 652-8848.

PAPER MILL PLAYHOUSE The Renee Foosaner Art Gallery holds its sixth annual
Juried Exhibition of Miniature Art. Through July 30. Wednesday, Thursday,
Saturday and Sunday, 7 to 8 P.M. and Friday, noon to 3 P.M. and 7 to 8 P.M.
Brookside Drive, Millburn. (201) 379-3636, extension 2272.

PASSAIC COUNTY COMMUNITY COLLEGE The Passaic County Cultural and Heritage
Council presents paintings and collages by Arnold Brown. Through July 20. Monday
through Friday, 9 A.M. to 9 P.M.; Saturday, 9 A.M. to 5 P.M. Broadway and
Memorial Drive, Paterson. (201) 684-5448.

PETERS VALLEY CRAFT CENTER "Artists in Residence," featuring works with wood,
fiber, ceramics, fine metals, blacksmithing and metals, and photography. Through
Dec. 31. Sunday through Thursday, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M., and Friday and Saturday, 10
A.M. to 9 P.M. 19 Kuhn Road, Route 615, Layton. (201) 948-5200.

PRINTMAKING COUNCIL OF NEW JERSEY "Three Landscape Printers," through Saturday.
"Manny Haller Retrospective," through next Wednesday. Wednesday through Friday,
11 A.M. to 4 P.M., and Saturday, 1 to 4 P.M. 440 River Road, Somerville. (908)
725-2110.

RIVERRUN GALLERY "Myth in Modern Times," an exhibition of contemporary European,
Eastern European and American art inspired by mythology. Through Aug. 28. Monday
and Wednesday through Saturday, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.; Sunday, noon to 5 P.M. 287
South Main Street, Lambertville.
(609) 397-3349.

RUTGERS ARTS CENTER "Multiple Exposures: Ukrainian Photography Today." In the
May Duff Walters Gallery through next Monday. Wednesday through Saturday, 6:30
to 9:30 P.M., and Sunday, 12:30 to 3:30 P.M. Chapel Drive, New Brunswick. (908)
932-7511.

STEAMROLLER GALLERY "Implied Dissent," paintings and assemblages by Michelle
Henkin Bader. Starts Friday. Through
Aug. 20. Tuesday, noon to 2 P.M.; Friday
and Saturday, noon to 9 P.M. and Sunday,
noon to 7 P.M. 52 Bridge Street,
Frenchtown. (908) 996-7279.

STONY BROOK-MILLSTONE WATERSHED ASSOCIATION "Naturescape," an exhibition of
paintings by Christina Allen, Sarah Antin and Guy Ciarcia. Wednesday through
Friday, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.; Saturday, 10 A.M. to 4 P.M.
Titus Mill Road, Hopewell Township.
(609) 737-7592.

SWAIN GALLERIES "Recent Works," oils by Brian Townsend. Tuesday through
Thursday, 9:30 A.M. to 5:30 P.M. 703 Watchung Avenue, Plainfield. (908)
756-1707.

WATCHUNG ARTS CENTER The New Jersey Photo Forum sponsors a show of photographic
prints in the upstairs gallery. "Vietnam: 20 Years After the Fall" features the
silkscreen photography of Richard Gerstner in the downstairs gallery. Free.
Through July 29. Monday through Saturday, 1 to 4 P.M. 18 Stirling Road,
Watchung. (908) 753-0190.

ZIMMERLI ART MUSEUM The George Riabov Collection of Russian Art includes
medieval icons, 19th-century landscapes and 20th-century costume and stage
design. The Kusakabe-Griffs Japonisme Gallery showcases Western art from the
late 19th and early 20th centuries, documenting the Japanese influence on
Western art. Free. Tuesday through Friday, 10 A.M. to 4:30 P.M.; Saturday and
Sunday, noon to 5 P.M. Rutgers, corner of George and Hamilton Streets, New
Brunswick. (908) 932-7237.

Spoken Word

ENGLEWOOD PUBLIC LIBRARY Pat Reilly, the founder and director of the New Jersey
Aviation Hall of Fame and Museum at Teterboro Airport, presents a slide and
lecture program on his new book, "From Balloons to the Moon," a 200-year history
of aviation in the Garden State. 31 Engle Street, Englewood. (201) 568-2215.

NEWARK MUSEUM "Photo Fundamentals" with H. Lisa Solon covers the basics of the
35mm. camera with topics including film selection, shutter speed, f-stop depth
of field light metering and composition. Tuesday, 10 A.M. to 4 P.M. Fee: $40. 49
Washington Street, Newark. (201) 596-6550.

PLAINSBORO PUBLIC LIBRARY Walter Marz gives novice and professional
photographers some pointers on taking photographs of nature and animals. Tuesday
at 7 P.M. Free. The Municipal Complex, 641 Plainsboro Road, Plainsboro. (609)
25-2897.

SOMERSET MEDICAL CENTER Dorothy L. Zufall, director of community health
education, presents "Remember This," Tuesday at 7 P.M., and "Don't Forget,"
Thursday at 7 P.M. Free, but advance registration is required. 110 Rehill
Avenue, Somerville. (908) 685-2827.

SOUTHERN OCEAN COUNTY HOSPITAL Carol Schoenberger, director of community health
education, presents "Living Wills," a program reviewing the advanced directive
form, which is used in making a living will. Tuesday at 10 A.M. Free. Ms.
Schoenberger will also present a three-part "Kids CPR Course." Monday, Wednesday
and Friday, 9:30 A.M. to 11:30 A.M. Fee: $30. The Conference Center, 1140 Route
72 West, Manahawkin. (609) 978-8999.

For Children

BERGEN MUSEUM OF ART AND SCIENCE "Treasures of the Sea Workshops" will allow
children to learn to identify shell types learn about the creatures that live in
the shells and about the environment that the creatures once lived in. Saturday
at 11 A.M. Fee: $4. 32 Ridgewood Avenue, Paramus. (201) 265-1248.

BICKFORD THEATER, MORRIS MUSEUM The Saturn Summer Theater Series for Children, a
selection of plays, musicals and variety shows, continues with "By the Light of
the Silver Moon," by Touchstone Theater. Tuesday at 11 A.M. and 1:30 P.M.
Tickets: $6.25. 6 Normandy Heights Road, Morristown. (201) 538-8069.

COUNTY COLLEGE OF MORRIS The Family Performing Arts presents "Dinosaurs, Puppets
and Picasso." Thursday at 11 A.M. Tickets: $5. Dragonetti Auditorium, 214 Center
Grove Road, Randolph. (201) 328-5225.

MEADOW THEATER The Meadow Kids' Summer Clubhouse offers a new show every week
with audience participation, songs, games, dancing, improvisations and short
plays. Saturday at 11 A.M. Through Aug. 26. Tickets: $5. Galleria Atrium, Bridge
Avenue and West Front, Red Bank. (908) 758-0099.

FORUM THEATER The Yates Musical Theater and the Forum Theater Group present "The
Wizard of Oz." Tuesday at 10 A.M. Tickets: $8. 314 Main Street, Metuchen.(908)
548-4670.

NEWARK MUSEUM Mr. Hustler shares the power of knowledge as he teaches about
galaxies, stars and nebulae in "The Power." Wednesday through Friday at 2:30
P.M. and Saturday and Sunday at 1 and 3 P.M. Learn African myths and legends
behind the constellations in "African Skies." Wednesday through Friday at 1:30
P.M. and Saturday and Sunday at 2 and 4 P.M. Adults, $2; children under 12, $1.
49 Washington Street, Newark. (201) 596-6550.

NEW JERSEY STATE MUSEUM Join Sandy, a golden retriever, in teaching Pepper, a
beagle, about lunar and solar eclipses. Saturday and Sunday at 1 and 3 P.M.
Travel to mysterious worlds of our solar system and beyond with Patrick Stewart
in "To Worlds Beyond." Saturday and Sunday at 2 P.M. Tickets: $1. 205 West State
Street, Trenton. (609) 292-6308.

RARITAN VALLEY COMMUNITY COLLEGE The college's planetarium offers "Mystery! Who
Stole the Night," a show that is part
legend, fairy tale, science documentary
and classic mystery yarn, for the entire
family. Monday and Wednesday at 2 P.M.
Through Aug. 16. Admission: $4.50. Route
28 and Lamington Road, North Branch.
(908) 231-8805.

STOCKTON PERFORMING ARTS CENTER "Marvelous Mostly Midday Matinees" features a
different professional children's theater company each Wednesday in July. The
Toppling Genie Theater Caravan presents a revised version of "Jack and the
Beanstalk," with a corporate slant. Wednesday at 10:30 A.M., 2 P.M. and 6 P.M.
Jim Leeds Road, Pomona. (609) 652-4607.

STONY BROOK MILLSTON WATERSHED ASSOCIATION A "Fossil Hunting Expedition" for
children 8 to 14. Monday, 10 A.M. to 4 P.M. Fee: $30. Children 3 to 5 can learn
about "Summer Birds." Wednesday and Thursday, 10 A.M. to 11:30 A.M. Fee: $8.
Titus Mill Road, Hopewell Township. (609) 737-7592.

SUMMERFUN THEATER "Seeing Is Believing," an afternoon of magic with Jim Snack.
Wednesday at 1 P.M. Tickets: $7. Weiss Arts Center. Lloyd Road at Bloomfield
Avenue, Montclair. (201) 256-0576.

THEATER IN THE PARK Touchstone Productions performs "By the Light of the Silvery
Moon." Wednesday at 7 P.M. Free. The Donald Rainear Ampitheater, Sunset Lake.
(609) 451-9208.

WILLIAMSON BUILDING, CHESTER The Growing Stage Theater for Young Audiences
presents "Androcles and the Lion." Wednesday at 2 and 7 P.M. Tickets: $4. Main
Street, Chester. (908) 89-4946.

ZIMMERLI ART MUSEUM The Rutgers Collection of Original Illustrations for
Children's Literature: "Riders Up! Preparing for a Pony Race," an exhibition of
photographs and other materials by Barbara Beirne for her book about a young
girl and her pony as they prepare for their first race. Through July 31. Tuesday
through Friday, 10 A.M. to 4:30 P.M.; Saturday and Sunday, noon to 5 P.M. Free.
Rutgers, corner of George and Hamilton Streets, New Brunswick. (908) 932-7237.

Etc.

DINNER AND THEATER The $42 ticket price includes a four-course meal and "Deep
Space Noir," an interactive and futuristic detective story. Saturdays, 8 P.M. Il
Giardino Restaurant. 41 Ridgedale Avenue, Cedar Knolls. (201) 301-0562.

FLEA MARKET The Chester Lions Club Flea Market offers craft items, linens,
books,
children's clothing, housewares, plants
and produce, makeup, jewelry, scarves,
handbags and other accessories. Sundays,
9 A.M. to 5 P.M., through Dec. 19. Free. West Blackwell Street, Morris and
Sussex Streets in downtown Dover. (201) 442-1494.

NEW JERSEY FILM FESTIVAL "Man of Aran," Friday, "The Grapes of Wrath," Saturday,
and "The Learning Tree," July 28. Show times, 7 P.M. Tickets: $4. Rutgers
University in New Brunswick, College Avenue campus, Milledoler Hall, George
Street and Seminary Place. (908) 932-8482.

LOAD-DATE: July 16, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Shadow Dancing
The Destine Afro-Haitian Dance Company performs "Witch Doctor" and other
traditional Caribbean dances as part of the ninth season of the Rutgers
Summerfest.
RUTGERS ARTS CENTER Wednesday and Thursday at 8 P.M. Tickets: $18. New Theater.
George Street at Route 18, New Brunswick. (908) 932-7511.

Clowning Around
From riding a unicycle to juggling to walking on wires and stilts, the "Science
of Comedy" with Richard Ellis shows children how a clown does his tricks.
BICKFORD THEATER, MORRIS MUSEUM Thursday at 11 A.M. and 1:30 P.M. Tickets:
$6.25.
6 Normandy Heights Road, Morristown. (201) 538-8069.

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              53 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 16, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

MARKET WATCH;
The Dow Is Near A Real Record

BYLINE: By FLOYD NORRIS

SECTION: Section 3;  Page 1;  Column 1;  Money and Business/Financial Desk

LENGTH: 581 words


For the last 13 years, the most important investment trend has been the relative
prices of financial assets -- stocks and bonds -- as opposed to real assets --
stuff ranging from cars to clothing to silver.

One easy way to monitor that is to look at what might be called the "real" Dow
Jones industrial average -- the Dow adjusted for inflation as measured by the
Consumer Price Index. At its low point in 1982, the Dow was less than eight
times as high as the price index. A basket of stocks was worth 7.95 baskets of
consumer goods.

That 1982 low for stocks followed a dispiriting period that began in early 1966,
when the prices of stuff began to rise at increasing rates while the prices of
shares meandered in the wilderness. At its peak in January 1966, the Dow stood
at 31.26 times the Consumer Price Index. That is to say, that same basket of
stocks purchased almost four times as many goods as in 1982. Measured in goods,
rather than in dollars, stocks lost nearly 75 percent of their value.

Now, they are almost all the way back. At its high close last week, 4,727.48 on
Thursday, the Dow was at 31 times the estimated July level of the price index.
One good day this week could propel the Dow to its first record close, on an
inflation-adjusted basis, in nearly three decades.

When that record was set on Jan. 18, 1966, there were already signs that
inflation was rising, although the price index was up less than 2 percent over
the prior year.

Just a few days before the real Dow peaked, President Lyndon Johnson reacted
with indignation to a Bethlehem Steel price increase. "This is certainly no time
for unwarranted price increases, which can lead to inflation," he thundered. "It
is the time to consider the larger national interest, to weigh the impact of
unnecessary price action against the sacrifices of our men in Vietnam, and to
act accordingly."

Inflation was set to take off, but it was not the fault of greedy steel
executives. The Government was about to embark on what, for those times, seemed
like risky deficit spending to finance both the Vietnam War and the Great
Society's social programs. The economic impact of that was not widely foreseen,
and with share prices very high, there was little room for error.

Almost three decades later, the world is a very different place. The Republicans
want to unravel the Great Society, and promise to end deficit spending. The
economic impact of such moves is not easy to foresee, but with stocks so
expensive relative to real things, there is again not much margin for error. If
in 1982 you could make money buying almost any stock, now it will be much
harder.

It is conventional wisdom to say that inflation is bad for the stock market, but
that is not quite right. While most stocks do badly in times of high inflation,
the best companies to own at any time are likely to be the ones with the market
power to raise prices in excess of their costs. For much of the 1980's, it was
the brand-name consumer goods companies that had that ability.

Now it is the raw-materials producers, notes Robert Barbera, the chief economist
of Capital Investments International. The Producer Price Index for crude goods
is up 18.4 percent over the last year. The market has made that discovery --
Inco and Phelps Dodge were among the stocks setting new highs last week -- but
those stocks may well be the best bets now in a market that, in real terms, is
close to setting its first new high in almost 30 years.

LOAD-DATE: July 16, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Graph shows Dow Jones industrial average from 1960 to 1995

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              54 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 16, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

DIARY

BYLINE: By HUBERT B. HERRING

SECTION: Section 3;  Page 2;  Column 3;  Money and Business/Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1053 words



STOCK OPTIONS
The Low Four Figures

There are stock options and there are stock options; never has this been
clearer. You often hear of top executives getting them -- windfalls that would
pay off the mortgages in entire neighborhoods, with enough left for a few
centuries' worth of groceries. But at Chemical Bank, some goodies trickled down
to humbler workers last week, too; when the stock topped $50 for three days
running, a share plan announced a year ago kicked in. The numbers had
considerably fewer decimal places than those in executive pay packages -- a
profit of $1,481 (before taxes) -- but it did spark interest. "It was amazing
how suddenly the whole organization began paying attention to the stock price,"
said Chemical's chairman, Walter Shipley, who at yearend owned 551,950 shares
and has options to buy 530,000 more.

TOBACCO
Yes, It's a Drug. Now What?

The F.D.A. has this tricky problem. It has decided that nicotine is an addictive
drug, and one that's clearly dangerous; plug those facts into a legal computer
and you'd have to ban cigarettes. It can't do that, of course -- smokers would
probably burn Washington to the ground (or bury it in ashes). So last week the
agency sent some more modest ideas to the White House (given the explosiveness
of this issue, it passed the buck). These included banning vending-machine
sales, clamping down on sales to minors, and barring "Joe Camel"-type ads (which
seem to have nearly vanished anyway). Even such modest measures face a rough
ride, though. Tobacco is "a legal commodity" and should be treated as such, said
one tobacco-state lawmaker, while another was "distressed" and "annoyed." . . .
Also last week, a glimpse into tobacco history: In 1950, an epidemiologist named
Morton Levin wrote one of the first papers to show that smoking causes lung
cancer, and campaigned against smoking throughout his career. Dr. Levin just
died at 91.

SPENDING IT
Down and Out at Genentech

It's hard to get by on nearly $1 million a year. So to make ends meet -- and
considerable ends they must be -- G. Kirk Raab kept borrowing from Genentech,
where he happened to be chief executive. Finally, Mr. Raab sought a $2 million
personal-loan guarantee from Roche Holdings of Switzerland, even as he was
negotiating the sale of his company to Roche -- a deal, by the way, that
shareholders say shortchanged them. This was too much for the board, which sent
Mr. Raab packing last week. That ended a stormy tenure at this fast-growing
company, one marked by strong criticism of its sales practices. A top Genentech
sales executive, in fact, is about to go on trial on charges of paying kickbacks
to a pediatrician to prescribe Genentech's growth hormone.

INVESTIGATIONS
Blowing a Golden Whistle

It is not, generally, a great idea to bite the hand that feeds you -- especially
if that hand belongs to a powerful company like Archer-Daniels-Midland. That
company has fed Mark Whitacre very nicely, in fact: as head of the BioProducts
division, he is a rising company star. But it's unclear whether that star will
keep rising. For last week it turned out that Mr. Whitacre, working with the
F.B.I., secretly taped executives' conversations as part of an inquiry into
possible price-fixing. Though whistleblowers have popped up in all sorts of
places to denounce corporate naughtiness, it's highly unusual for such a high
executive to play that role.

TRADE
No Favors From China

Yes, we can talk tough with China all we want -- on human rights, on Taiwan's
status. But highmindedness, no matter how virtuous, might also have its costs,
for China's sheer bulk gives it indisputable power. Last week, after saying that
no decision was due for months, China snubbed Ford and Chrysler to give Mercedes
a $1 billion contract to build mini-vans and engines in China, even though
Mercedes has never actually built a true passenger mini-van -- you know, with
all the cup-holders. Chinese officials denied that rising tensions with
Washington had anything to do with the decision, but Detroit has to be
wondering.

DIPLOMACY
The Next Step in Vietnam

The building of a diplomatic bridge to Vietnam raised emotional issues -- some
people saying the move was overdue, others insisting it wouldn't be time till
all the missing were accounted for. But put those issues aside for a moment: a
big step in healing the wounds will come when goods can flow freely between the
nations. And despite last week's opening, that can't happen quite yet. Still
needed are a trade agreement and preferred trading status, and even then
American companies must struggle to catch up with Asia and Europe to do business
in a country with 73 million people, more than France or Britain.

AUTOS
Japan Meets One Trade Goal

Remember that hoopla-laden trade agreement with Japan last month, the one that
made the world safe for Lexus owners? No numbers. No specific targets. Just
words. But most people have probably forgotten that when George Bush went to
Tokyo three years ago, Japan's auto industry set a target of buying $19 billion
worth of American parts in the year that ended this past March, twice the
previous level. And guess what: Japan did so, and more. Figures out last week
showed $19.86 billion in purchases. There's a footnote, though: that figure is
total purchases, not imports. Most parts were for Japanese plants here. Japan
had set a goal of $4 billion in imported parts, but fell short with just $3.23
billion.

CONSOLIDATION
One Bank, Indivisible

Something strange is going on. One advantage of a national Government --
politics, if possible, aside -- would seem to be the economies of scale it
offers in running things. But everyone's been slamming the centralized
bureaucracy as a failure. Banking, though, is heading full-blast in the opposite
direction. Repeatedly citing "economies of scale," the nation's banks are
tripping over themselves in a rush to merge into behemoths. A few weeks ago,
First Union said it would buy First Fidelity of Newark. Then last week PNC
agreed to buy Midlantic, and First Chicago and NBD agreed to merge into a
Midwest powerhouse. The value of the deals: $5.4 billion, $3 billion and $5.3
billion. But there was no truth to rumors that Citibank was buying the Federal
Reserve.

LOAD-DATE: July 16, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              55 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 16, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

U.S. Opening to Vietnam Sends China a Message

SECTION: Section 4;  Page 14;  Column 4;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 230 words


To the Editor:

Lost in the controversy surrounding normalization of relations between the
United States and Vietnam has been one overriding geopolitical accomplishment.

With ties between the United States and China at their lowest point since
official diplomatic relations were established in 1979, President Clinton's
decision to normalize relations with Vietnam couldn't have come at a better
time.

Recently, Chinese officials decided to play diplomatic hardball with the United
States, as China's actions in light of the visit of President Lee Teng-hui of
Taiwan and in the matter of the Chinese-American dissident Harry Wu have
signified.

However, President Clinton's decision to normalize ties with Vietnam sent a
clear message to the Chinese. By establishing relations, the United States now
adds Vietnam to the list of Asian countries in which its presence will expand
and solidify.

It is no coincidence that the Chinese request to return to the status quo with
the United States (news article, July 13) came only after relations between
Vietnam and the United States were announced.

If the Chinese forgot who they were dealing with, President Clinton reminded
them. Intentional or not, his move was a power play that deserves credit.

JOSEPH SHWIRTZ
Brooklyn, July 13, 1995

The writer is a graduate student at the London School of Economics.

LOAD-DATE: July 16, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              56 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 16, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

The World: Withdrawal Symptoms;
Honor, Too, Is Put to Flight in Bosnia

BYLINE: By ROGER COHEN

SECTION: Section 4;  Page 1;  Column 1;  Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1519 words

DATELINE: PARIS


MANY things have died or been seriously compromised in Bosnia. The optimism of
the cold war's end. The credibility of NATO. The American commitment to European
security. The notion that a Europe no longer divided shares a commitment to
basic human dignity. But perhaps the death of Western honor has been the most
devastating.

It was a sense of honor, conceived as part of a military culture that also
embraced the values of self-sacrifice and unswerving courage, that drove
American boys into Nazi fire and onto the Normandy beaches. The same values were
the guarantee and the bedrock of postwar security and prosperity in Western
Europe. Even in Vietnam, where America's confidence in itself was battered, the
honor of fighting to extend the reach of freedom stood at the core of the
beliefs of those who backed the war.

But where lies the honor, or the commitment to anything, amid the Bosnian
morass? Forty months into the war, the sight in recent days of still further
thousands of Muslim women and children pushed over the Bosnian hills by the
Serbs after the fall of the so-called United Nations "safe area" of Srebrenica
was a reminder of how far the West has fallen in Bosnia. The number of Muslims
thus shifted during the war now exceeds three-quarters of a million.




A 'Lack of Values'

This defeat -- for the mixed society of Bosnia is now in shreds -- has its
political and military implications; but in themselves these are perhaps not
overwhelming. Bosnia is a small country of no compelling strategic significance
or wealth. It is the defeat of Western values in this ill-born state that may
prove most costly.

Indeed, the question of what, if anything, Western democracies stand ready to
defend has to be posed. In an essay on Bosnia published this week, Jean
Baudrillard, a French sociologist, wrote, "What the West now wants to impose on
the whole world, under the cover of universality, is not its values, which are
completely disjointed, but precisely its lack of values." In the name, he added,
"of an indifferent and valueless world order."

Of course, Europe and America know from two world wars that the Balkans are
intractable terrain, and the argument that involvement in the Bosnian war would
have been folly cannot be lightly dismissed. The war has been successfully
contained until now, albeit at the cost of prolonging it. Many in the West also
know that appeals to honor can sometimes prolong horrible mistakes, as in
Flanders and elsewhere during World War I. But none of this can alter the fact
that the Western surrender before the destruction of Bosnia has revealed a
hollowness at the heart of Western societies.

There have been individual acts of courage in Bosnia. One of the most
conspicuous occurred in Srebrenica in March 1993. Lieut. Gen. Philippe Morillon,
then the commander of United Nations forces in Bosnia, went to the embattled
Muslim enclave and declared that he would not move until the survival of its
people was assured.

Like most examples of bravery, and some of outstanding leadership, it was an
irrational act. In the name of military principles, including the sacredness of
the mission and personal honor, this French officer identified his own life with
those of tens of thousands of Muslims, most of whom had already lost their homes
to Serbs and been herded into Srebrenica. Confronted by this stubborn general,
the Bosnian Serbs desisted from their onslaught and Srebrenica survived for
another 28 months. Srebrenica was called a haven, although it was in essence a
large camp.




The Freshly Bereaved

Still it was better than the kindergartens, schools and rundown shelters in
Kladanj and Tuzla where old Muslim women who lost their husbands or sons in 1992
have lain almost prostrate with grief for over three years, to be joined this
week by the freshly bereaved.

Srebrenica's fall last week was directly related to the fact that General
Morillon's stand proved so unusual. Repeated climbdowns from tough stands have
been the rule in Bosnia. The pattern was particularly conspicuous when the Serbs
seized several hundred United Nations soldiers as hostages in late May after
NATO air strikes near Pale.

Public declarations of unbending firmness were made by Western leaders at the
same time as private evidence of utter pliability was being given to the Serbs
through secret meetings and letters. The Serbs, no fools, drew their own
conclusions and soon marched into Srebrenica, a town the United Nations had
vowed to protect.

Shortly after the hostage crisis, Lieut. Gilles Jarron, a United Nations officer
in Sarajevo and a proud member of the French Foreign Legion, described what
happened during three weeks that he had spent with 11 other legionnaires
surrounded at a United Nations weapons-collection site in Ilidza, a Serb-held
suburb.

On May 27, the day after the second NATO air strike near Pale, 80 Serbs with
rocket-propelled grenades approached the French soldiers, while a T-55 tank
leveled its cannon at them. The Serbs gave the peacekeepers five minutes to give
up.

Lieut. Jarron called his commanding officer. There was little question the
legionnaires would all be killed in any battle. The last order he received from
Col. Jean-Louis Franceschini was, "From this moment on, make sure that every
French life is paid for dearly by the Serbs."

The legionnaires duly prepared to fight. "The honor of a soldier is to die with
his arms," said Lieutenant Jarron. "We were all serene and determined."

Every evening, as the stand-off wore on and the Serbs failed to carry out their
threats, the soldiers read each other the code of the legionnaire: "The mission
is sacred. You execute it to the end, at any price. In combat you act without
passion or hatred. You respect your defeated enemy. Never do you abandon your
dead, your injured or your arms."




Valor Undone

The honor of these men, standing under a United Nations flag and guarding a
selection of Serbian artillery in a forlorn outpost, was conspicuous.

But it was also rendered preposterous by the institution they serve. Even then,
the commander of United Nations forces, Gen. Bernard Janvier, was slipping off
to clandestine get-togethers with Gen. Ratko Mladic, the Bosnian Serb commander,
who had orchestrated the hostage-taking. After the crisis ended, the post was
abandoned and the Serbs got the weapons in it.

But then, General Janvier is no longer a French officer in the sense defined by
the legionnaire's code. As a senior United Nations official, he has become the
representative of a consensus so wide -- a coalition so weak -- as to be the
enemy of leadership, individual courage and codes of honor.

It is here that America's absence from Bosnia has been felt most profoundly.
America still personifies the confidence necessary to draw a distinction between
right and wrong and then fight for it. Europe lacks the self-belief, the unity,
even perhaps the relative innocence of an unconquered state, to do so.

Bill Clinton, as a candidate in 1992, was clear enough that essential values
were threatened in Bosnia. He spoke of genocide and the dangers of sitting and
watching. He suggested that he was ready to fight to stop the sort of ethnic
purification that reached a new apogee at Srebrenica last week.

But then he shrank away, under a barrage of warnings of Vietnam-like quagmires,
talk of ancient tribal rivalries, and the notion that the Bosnian war is purely
a civil war. He committed himself, instead, to backing from afar the effort to
contain the war while distributing United Nations rice and macaroni to Bosnians
-- that is, to the substitution of charity for foreign policy.




Does Bosnia Exist?

The war has festered. A fundamentally racist attack on a mixed society,
initiated from Serbia, has continued. Indeed, it began in earnest in early April
1992, not far from Srebrenica, when militiamen from Belgrade began shooting
Muslims in the street in Bjeljina and Zvornik, so sowing the seeds of hatred
necessary to destroy Bosnia.

For that is the core of the Serbian proposition: Bosnia, a state recognized by
the United Nations, a mixed society, does not exist. Neither the United States
nor Europe nor the United Nations have ever been ready to confront that claim.

By resuming full diplomatic relations with Vietnam last week 20 years after the
fall of Saigon, President Clinton closed a difficult chapter in American
history. Vietnam was a defeat; but it came after a war undertaken, however
disastrously, in pursuit not only of self-interest but of a principle: the fight
against Communism and the defense of an American conception of freedom and human
dignity.

In Vietnam, therefore, the often-repeated phrase -- "withdrawal with honor" --
was not entirely empty. A United Nations withdrawal from Bosnia, more likely
after the fall of Srebrenica, could make no such claims. If a "bright shining
lie," to borrow the phrase of John Paul Vann, is what sustained Americans in
Vietnam, the peacekeepers in Bosnia have been offered less: a moral void.

LOAD-DATE: July 16, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: The United Nations' failure to protect Srebrenica leaves open
the question of what principles it will stand up for. A French peacekeeper peers
from his bunker in Sarajevo. (Associated Press)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              57 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 16, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

The Republicans Are Threatening to Bury the Ghost of the Military Draft

BYLINE: By DAVID E. ROSENBAUM

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 16;  Column 1;  National Desk

LENGTH: 1051 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 15


No one in the United States has been drafted into the military since 1972. But
the Selective Service System, the agency in charge of the draft, lives on --
with a budget of more than $20 million a year.

Now, in one of the latest skirmishes of the Republican revolution, the House of
Representatives is threatening to abolish the agency to save money.

This has resulted in an odd twist of politics, history and personalities.

Two men who juggled deferments to avoid conscription in the 1960's -- Newt
Gingrich, the Speaker of the House, and Dick Armey, the majority leader -- will
probably lead the charge to shut down the agency.

But another man with a well-documented record of escaping the Vietnam War draft,
President Clinton, has become the chief protector of the Selective Service
System.

At a banquet in Chicago last month for some employees of the agency, Robert G.
Bell, a special assistant to the President on the staff of the National Security
Council, read a letter from Mr. Clinton describing his position.

Without any allusion to the somersaults he turned as a young man to keep from
being drafted, the President wrote that maintaining the Selective Service System
was a "relatively low-cost insurance policy" against an unexpected military
threat and that abolishing it could send the wrong signal about the resolve of
the United States to defend itself.

The letter then stated: "As fewer and fewer members of our society have direct
military experience, it is increasingly important to maintain the link between
the all-volunteer force and our society at large. The armed forces must also
know that the general population stands behind them, committed to serve, should
the preservation of our national security so require."

The Selective Service System today is but a shell of what it was at the height
of the Vietnam War when it had more than 8,000 employees across the country,
when more than 350,000 men a year received draft notices and when the director,
Gen. Lewis B. Hershey, was a dominant figure.

Now, there are about 200 employees divided between a high-rise office building
in Arlington, Va., and a data-processing center just north of Chicago. The
director, Gil Coronado, is a retired Air Force colonel who worked in Texas on
Mr. Clinton's Presidential campaign.

Draft boards still exist in every county in the country. But the members are
unpaid volunteers, and they seldom meet. No one has spilled blood on draft
records in decades.

Mostly what the system does is keep track of the 5,000 men who turn 18 every day
and by law must register for the draft. (Draft registration was suspended in
April 1975, 21 months after President Richard M. Nixon officially ended
conscription, but it was reinstated under President Jimmy Carter in 1980.
Congress has refused to require women to register.)

The Pentagon has said that the Clinton Administration's policy of having a
military strong enough to fight and win two major regional conflicts
simultaneously could be fulfilled without reinstating the draft.

But Mr. Coronado said the Selective Service System remained the nation's "third
line of defense," after the active duty forces and the reserves. Procedures are
in place, he said, to mobilize millions of men within six months if the Defense
Department asked for them.

The latest threat to the Selective Service System arose this week when the House
subcommittee with jurisdiction over its appropriations approved only $6 million
for the fiscal year that begins Oct. 1 and directed that all the money be used
to close down operations.

Explaining why the subcommittee acted the way it did, the chairman,
Representative Jerry Lewis, a Republican from California, said in an interview,
"Dollars now are mighty dear, and it seemed to us that one agency you could do
without is Selective Service."

The House passed a similar bill two years ago, but the agency got a reprieve
from the Senate. Then, the votes showed that the agency had supporters and
opponents in both parties but that as a rule, conservative Republicans were its
strongest defenders.

In 1993, Mr. Gingrich and Mr. Armey favored keeping the agency alive. Its
leading supporter in the House was Representative Gerald B.H. Solomon, a
Republican from upstate New York.

Mr. Solomon, who is now chairman of the powerful Rules Committee, said in an
interview this week that he would do whatever he could to make sure the
Selective Service System received its full appropriation. "The small amount of
money is worth it," he said. "Killing it is not going to put any more school
lunches on anybody's table."

But Mr. Solomon is not likely to prevail if his party's leaders want to scrap
the agency. Spokesmen for Mr. Gingrich and Mr. Armey said that the leaders had
not addressed the matter specifically this year but that their inclination in
almost every case was to side with the chairmen of the appropriations
subcommittees.

The situation in the Senate is harder to gauge. A spokeswoman for Senator
Christopher S. Bond, the Missouri Republican who is chairman of the subcommittee
with jurisdiction over its budget, said the Senator had not yet formed a
position on the Selective Service System.

The chairman of the full Appropriations Committee, Senator Mark O. Hatfield,
Republican of Oregon, has opposed the military draft as long as he has been in
politics. Senator Bill Bradley, Democrat of New Jersey, who had called the
system "a dinosaur in the post-Soviet world," is likely to lead the forces
against the agency.

With deep spending cuts needed throughout the Government to meet the
Republicans' promise of a balanced budget in seven years and with the Selective
Service System competing directly for money with popular veterans programs,
which are covered by the same appropriations bill, the agency cannot feel
comfortable about its future.

Congressman Lewis and others who want to abolish the agency argue that a
draft-registration system could be quickly re-established in an emergency.

But Mr. Coronado, the director, said that was not the case and that once the
infrastructure was abandoned it would take a long time to put it back together
again.

"It needs to be made clear," he said, "that the Selective Service System is a
national security issue, not a budget issue."

LOAD-DATE: July 16, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              58 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 16, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Edward F. Gray, 78, Organizer for U.A.W. and Social Causes

BYLINE: By ROBERT McG. THOMAS Jr.

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 32;  Column 1;  Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 550 words


Edward F. Gray, a former union official who began his career recruiting factory
workers in New Jersey and ended it by organizing the elderly in New York, died
on Thursday at the Cabrini Hospice in Manhattan. He was 78.

The cause was complications of Parkinson's disease, said his wife, Lois.

It may have been his youthful experiences as a sharecropper and migrant farm
worker in the Depression or simply something in his blood, but somehow, early in
his life, Mr. Gray developed an acute and wide-ranging sense of social justice.

In his years as a United Auto Workers official, Mr. Gray, who was first elected
to the union's executive board when he was 26 and was later a regional director
in New York, took a broad view of his role. He helped lead the union into the
campaign against racial discrimination, was an organizer of the Labor Committee
to End the War in Vietnam, and championed affordable housing for the elderly and
the disabled.

While serving as a U.A.W. area director in Buffalo in the late 1940's, his wife
recalled yesterday, Mr. Gray became so incensed that black workers were banned
from bowling leagues sponsored by the American Bowling Congress that he
established a rival, integrated bowling organization that helped prompt the
A.B.C. to change its policies.

Mr. Gray's union career began in his 20's when he took a job at an auto parts
plant in Trenton and promptly led a successful campaign to organize a U.A.W.
local there. As the local's first president, he became an early and fierce
supporter of Walter Reuther in the union's bitter factional wars of the 1930's
and 1940's and won election to the union's executive board in 1943.

Mr. Gray was defeated for re-election the next year and was in the Army in the
latter stages of World War II. But with Mr. Reuther finally installed as U.A.W.
president, Mr. Gray was named to the position in Buffalo, where he led a bitter
19-week strike at the Bell Aircraft plant in 1949.

After violent clashes between union workers and strikebreakers, Mr. Gray was
convicted of conspiracy to riot, but the charge was dismissed on appeal.

Mr. Gray, who became assistant director of the region covering New York, New
Jersey and Connecticut in 1955, became regional director in 1977 and was again
elected to the union's executive board. In his years with the regional office,
Mr. Gray, concerned that some auto workers in New Jersey had to commute long
distances because they could not afford to live in the expensive suburbs near
their plants, was active in the campaign against restrictive zoning regulations
that prevented the construction of low-cost, multifamily housing.

After retiring from the U.A.W. in 1983, Mr. Gray brought a private-sector
perspective to municipal union matters as a member of the New York City Office
of Collective Bargaining's dispute settlement board.

As he grew older and became more aware of problems faced by the elderly, Mr.
Gray, ever the organizer, led the drive to establish the New York State Council
of Senior Citizens and was elected its first president.

In addition to his wife, a professor of labor relations at Cornell University,
he is survived by a son, John, of Goldsboro, N.C.; a daughter, Lori Cauthorn of
Tampa, Fla.; four grandchildren, and seven great-grandchildren.

NAME: Edward F. Gray

LOAD-DATE: July 16, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              59 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 16, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

U.S. Opening to Vietnam Sends China a Message;
Make Cuba Next

SECTION: Section 4;  Page 14;  Column 6;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 187 words


To the Editor:

It is indeed an occasion to celebrate the normalizing of relations with Vietnam,
and it is to be hoped Congressional opponents will not obstruct the signing of a
trade agreement and granting of most-favored-nation trading status to Vietnam.

It is also a good occasion to revisit our relations with a Communist country
closer to home, Cuba. At the moment the White House is fostering reconciliation
with Vietnam, Congress is discussing the Helms-Burton bill to tighten the Cuba
embargo.

While Vietnamese-Americans are free to visit and support their families in
Vietnam, it is illegal for Cuban-Americans to see loved ones or provide them
with financial assistance. While United States companies can turn a profit in
Vietnam, United States businesses are losing out to Canadians, Mexicans and
Europeans, who are investing in Cuba.

And while Vietnamese can now look forward to an improvement in their economic
status, the United States embargo against Cuba is depriving Cubans of
life-sustaining medicines and food.

MEDEA BENJAMIN
Director, Global Exchange
San Francisco, July 12, 1995

LOAD-DATE: July 16, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              60 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 16, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

U.S. Opening to Vietnam Sends China a Message;
Don't Prop Them Up

SECTION: Section 4;  Page 14;  Column 5;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 332 words


To the Editor:

Re "Hello, Vietnam" (Op-Ed, July 11): Much of the rhetoric used to justify
recognition of Vietnam has centered on two points made by Vu-Duc Vuong: national
interest and coming to terms with Hanoi.

But too often, in Vietnam as in China, national interest becomes a synonym for
the economic interests of a few companies.

Moreover, the money to be made does not come from Vietnam but from United States
Government support; as Mr. Vuong acknowledges, "American companies have been
reluctant to invest in Vietnam because they are not backed by Government
agencies like the Commerce Department." Only with Overseas Private Investment
Corporation guarantees, Export-Import Bank grants and loans from the World Bank
and the Asian Development Bank will money be available in Vietnam.

The United States interest must entail a broader agenda that goes to the heart
of the second point: coming to terms with Hanoi and allegedly breaking with
those Mr. Vuong cites as remaining "mired" in the cold war. The cold war ended
with the collapse of the Soviet regime and its Communist dictatorship. But a
continuing legacy is the remaining Communist dictatorships of Vietnam, China,
Cuba and North Korea.

Those regimes, not policies that stigmatize them for their repressive,
undemocratic character, are anachronisms in the world today. The United States
needs to cultivate relations with Vietnam's 70 million people, but not by
recognizing as legitimate a regime they never elected.

The war in South Vietnam sought to deter the expansion of Communist dictatorship
of North Vietnam. Hanoi triumphed through military assault on the South in 1975,
but still fears any exercise of political freedom by the people it allegedly
liberated.

Diplomatic recognition and the financial flows that follow only help to sustain
a regime that, like its Soviet predecessor, belongs in the dustbin of history.

JEFFREY B. GAYNER
Senior Fellow, Heritage Foundation
Washington, July 12, 1995

LOAD-DATE: July 16, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              61 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 16, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

CONFLICT IN THE BALKANS: THE POLICY;
NATO Bombing and Serb Hostage-Taking Now Mark Turning Point in War

BYLINE: By STEPHEN ENGELBERG and ERIC SCHMITT

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 8;  Column 1;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 2176 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 15


As the Western allies ponder how to respond to the latest crisis in the Balkans,
they face a fundamental question: Are they willing to risk war over Bosnia?

When the Bosnian Serbs absorbed the most damaging NATO air strikes of the war
and took United Nations peacekeepers as hostages six weeks ago, the West backed
down, and the Serbs went on the offensive.

Now, Western leaders confront a problem of their own making: The Serbs no longer
take their threats of military action seriously. That complicates every option
being considered, from withdrawal of the peacekeepers to plans for restoring
their military credibility.

The May air strikes were a pivotal confrontation with the Serbs, and a
reconstruction of how they were planned and executed shows that their failure
seemed scripted almost from the start.

One American official said the decision then to attack ammunition depots at the
Bosnian Serb headquarters near Sarajevo on May 25 amounted to little more than
"drop a few bombs and see what happens." Another senior American official said
that "there was no strategy behind any of this."

That was made clear on May 26 at an emergency session of the United Nations
Security Council. The United Nations commander, Gen. Rupert Smith, wanted a
third day of bombing, even though the Serbs held nearly 400 of his troops
hostage and threatened to kill them.

Boutrous Boutrous-Ghali, the United Nations Secretary General, had the power to
approve the request and send in the bombers. But he told members attending the
closed door meeting that this was too big a decision to make on his own. The
hostages could die. The U.N. could be pushed out of Bosnia entirely. A wider war
could erupt.

The members threw the decision back to him. No one, including the United States,
encouraged him to continue the attacks, and Britain and France had already
privately recommended a pause in the bombing.

The United Nations power was equal to its members' lack of will. And the Serbs
knew it when the bombing stopped.

Many of the decision makers, from United Nations commanders in Sarajevo to
Defense Secretary William J. Perry, knew that the bombing would succeed only if
the West was prepared to hit back harder each time the Serbs raised the stakes.
"I don't mean to deny the reality: One or two air strikes won't resolve the
problem," Mr. Perry said hours after the first raid.

Senior officials in Washington, Europe and at the United Nations headquarters in
New York also assumed that the Serbs would try to block such a sustained bombing
campaign by taking peacekeepers hostage.

But the question of "what then?" was never settled ahead of time. The United
States, which had argued for the bombing at the United Nations in May, did no
formal planning on what should be done if the Serbs seized hostages, American
officials said. Since this was not an American operation, that issue was left to
the NATO and United Nations commanders in the region, a senior Pentagon official
said.

But in Sarajevo, General Smith had been given no assurances by Britain or France
that they would agree with his view that the bombing should continue, even if
the Serbs seized hostages.

At the United Nations headquarters, Mr. Boutros-Ghali was deeply skeptical of
Washington's arguments that air strikes alone would change the Serbs' behavior.
When he authorized the second day of strikes, he told an associate they would
probably fail, but might demonstrate once and for all the political realities.

But American officials insisted that the situation in Bosnia was worsening and
that the West had to try something, even a long shot, to deter the Serbs. The
escalation of the war over the last six weeks, they argue, would have happened
sooner or later -- as the inevitable result of the West's refusal to go to war
over Bosnia.

But one of the Pentagon's most senior officers said that the Clinton
Administration had been too casual in pressing the United Nations to bomb. "The
lesson of all this is that you never threaten force unless you're willing to use
it and are willing to go for the jugular," he said.

The Question
How Much Force, And When?

Since the fall of Communism, Western powers -- particularly Washington -- have
grappled with the question of how and when to use military force. Gen. Colin L.
Powell, the former chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, has argued that the
military force should be limited to instances like the Persian Gulf war, when
the West can train overwhelming and decisive firepower to achieve a clear,
well-defined objective.

President Clinton took office with a different view. As Commander in Chief, he
has seen a place for the limited use of force, usually as part of a
multinational mission. The results have been mixed.

When 20,000 American troops massed for an invasion of Haiti last fall, they were
able to take control of the country without a shot being fired. But in Somalia,
the United States encouraged the United Nations force to hunt down a clan
leader, setting the stage for a failed American raid in Mogadishu that prompted
the international withdrawal.

Earlier in the Bosnia conflict, in 1994, the threat of NATO bombing persuaded
the Serbs to stop pounding Sarajevo with heavy artillery. For nearly a year,
shelling and sniping of the city abated. But still, the Bosnian Serbs could not
be pushed by the West to accept a peace plan under which they would give back
more than one-quarter of the land they had conquered.

"Based on their experience in the wars from Vietnam to today, the Western
countries have learned they cannot recruit their own children to realize goals
outside their homelands," Gen. Ratko Mladic, the Bosnian Serbs' military
commander, said in an interview with a local publication after the May bombing
raids.

The Compromise
Peacekeeping, Then Cheating

When the first lightly armed United Nations peacekeepers rolled into Sarajevo in
1992, the city was under siege from rebel Serbian forces. Western nations,
particularly the United States, made it clear they had no intention of going to
war to retake the nearly 70 percent of Bosnian territory that the Bosnian Serbs
held.

The United Nations mission was to deliver food to civilians. The peacekeepers
had orders not to take sides, even though their main task was to feed a city the
Serbs were trying to starve into submission.

From the beginning, Western leaders struggled to split the difference between
abandoning Bosnia to its fate and warring with the Serbs. It was an awkward
compromise that gave the Bosnians hope, but denied them arms to defend
themselves.

Over the next two years, the countries that make up the United Nations ordered
the peacekeeping soldiers to tilt more toward the Bosnian side. A "no-fly zone"
was declared over Bosnia; only the Serbs had attack aircraft. The United Nations
also declared that the six remaining Muslim-populated zones of the country were
"safe havens," protected against attack.

Prodded by the United States, the West gained one major triumph in mid-1994.
After a Serb shell killed 68 people in a Sarajevo market place in February, the
United Nations threatened NATO air strikes if heavy weapons were not withdrawn
from the 12.5-mile zone around the Bosnian capital.

With air strikes against Serbia rumored, the Serbs in Bosnia and Belgrade could
not be sure how far NATO would go, a senior Pentagon official said. The Serbs
backed down.

But they kept testing the West's resolve. In November 1994, Muslim forces
attacked the Serbs from one of the safe areas. Serb airplanes bombed the town.
NATO responded by bombing a military runway, but pilots were ordered to avoid
hitting Serb airplanes parked on the tarmac.

With that, a Pentagon officer said, the West had eroded the credibility of its
bombing threats. Last November, Anthony Lake, the President's national security
adviser, wrote President Clinton a memorandum saying it was time to give up on
bombing.

A month later, both sides in Bosnia agreed to a cease-fire through May 1.

For its part, Washington then pushed to strengthen the United Nations force. If
the Europeans balked at calling in air strikes, the reasoning went, then the
United Nations troops should have more powerful weapons to give them an option
between capitulation and bombing. But nothing was ever done.

On May 1, the cease-fire expired and with it peace in Sarajevo. United Nations
officials said that General Smith, who relieved Gen. Michael Rose as the force
commander, knew he lacked the force to protect the safe areas, bar heavy weapons
from Sarajevo, and escort food convoys. He confided to Western diplomats that
the time had come to "break the machine," and either expand the force or shrink
its mission.

Over the previous four months, the Serbs had stepped up their harassment of
United Nations troops. They rained shells down on Sarajevo's civilian population
in response to the Government's attacks on their positions.

From Sarajevo, General Smith wrote a memo to Gen. Bernard Janvier, the French
officer who commands the United Nations forces. It called for air strikes, but
an American official said it also listed various reasons why this could bring
catastrophe.

That spurred American officials to pressure European officials and the United
Nations to opt for bombing.

On May 12, Mr. Boutros-Ghali met in Paris with his key Bosnia advisers. The mood
was grim. General Smith detailed the deteriorating situation, a United Nations
official said. He did not have troops to defend the enclaves in eastern Bosnia.
The heavy weapons exclusion zone was collapsing, and both sides were sliding
toward a deeper war that he was powerless to stop.

A week later, Mr. Perry flew to New York and joined Madeline K. Albright,
Washington's representative to the United Nations, in urging Mr. Boutros-Ghali
to use NATO bombers more aggressively.

Under this "dual-key" arrangement, NATO commanders in Bosnia decided when to
call air strikes. But they could be, and had been, vetoed by the United Nation's
senior civilian official there, Yasushi Akashi.

It was a cumbersome arrangement, and one that has frustrated Washington. Richard
C. Holbrooke, the Assistant Secretary of State for European and Canadian
Affairs, calls it "the most idiotic command arrangement ever invented by beast
or man."

The Challenge
Hostages Taken, The West Blinked

After the Serbs stole heavy weapons from two depots guarded by the United
Nations, General Smith issued an ultimatum on May 24 demanding that they be
returned by noon the next day or face air strikes.

That day, Mr. Boutros-Ghali met with Security Council members at the residence
of the French representative to the United Nations. He was skeptical about the
West's resolve to confront the Serbs and warned that the seizing of hostages
would have a drastic effect, a participant said.

Back in Sarajevo, General Smith was worrying about hostages as well. He had
hundreds of soldiers behind Serb lines. Some guarded heavy weapon depots around
Sarajevo, others manned observation posts. United Nations officers believed the
Serbs would immediately seize these soldiers if any attempt were made to move
them on the eve of a threatened air strike.

But General Smith was prepared to keep bombing, even if Serbs took hostages and
threatened to kill them, a United Nations officials said. "There was an element
of who blinks first," said one United Nations official, who added that General
Smith's strategy implied the troop contributing nations were "prepared to sign a
blank check."

The noon deadline passed without response from the Serbs, and NATO planes bombed
the Serbs' headquarters at Pale two hours later. The Serbs retaliated
immediately, firing the deadliest artillery shot of the war. A single shell
exploded on a street of crowded cafes in the central Bosnian city of Tuzla,
killing 71 people.

General Smith asked for a second air strike against the remaining six ammunition
depots in Pale. Mr. Akashi, the United Nations civilian official who had
authority to veto the attack, telephoned Mr. Boutros Ghali, who gave his
blessing.

The next day, the Serbs seized hostages.

That evening, General Smith recommended a third day of air strikes. General
Janvier, the overall commander of the United Nations force in Zagreb, disagreed.
That night, Mr. Boutros-Ghali met in closed session with the United Nations
Security Council. The countries providing the bulk of the troops demanded a
pause, and the United States, which had no troops there, felt obliged not to
oppose that.

In the aftermath, many American critics of the United Nations, including some
within the Administration, blamed the international organization for bungling
the bombing mission. United Nations officials say this is unfair.

"It's very easy to depict the U.N. as a bunch of wimps who pull up their skirts
and run at the first sign of trouble," said Maj. Gen. Frank van Kappen, the
Secretary General's military adviser. "They are getting blamed for the failure
of us all."

LOAD-DATE: July 16, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: August 3, 1995, Thursday

CORRECTION:

An article on July 16 about NATO policy toward Bosnia referred incorrectly to a
mortar attack that killed 68 people in a Sarajevo marketplace in February 1994.
A United Nations investigation could not conclude which faction fired the mortar
shell; Serbian responsibility has not been definitively established.


GRAPHIC: Photos: WORDS FOR THE WEST "The Western countries have learned they
cannot recruit their own children to realize goals outside their homelands." --
GEN. RATKO MLADIC (Reuters); ON USE OF AIR STRIKES "I don't mean to deny the
reality: One or two air strikes won't resolve the problem." -- WILLIAM J. PERRY
(Associated Press)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              62 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 16, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Men in Love

BYLINE: By Suzanne Berne;   Suzanne Berne teaches writing at Harvard University.

SECTION: Section 7;  Page 21;  Column 1;  Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 705 words



HOW LONG HAS THIS BEEN GOING ON?
By Ethan Mordden.
590 pp. New York:
Villard Books. $25.

LIKE PEOPLE IN HISTORY
By Felice Picano.
512 pp. New York:
Viking. $23.95.

YOU'VE seen them on countless racks in airports and supermarkets: fat, steamy
novels that span decades, work through five or six intertwined subplots in
different locales and -- most important -- include lots of sex. Two of this
year's crop are Ethan Mordden's "How Long Has This Been Going On?" and Felice
Picano's "Like People in History," novels as mainstream as sunscreen save that
their subject is the history of gay male culture in America.

Mr. Mordden chronicles the emergence of gay identity from the closets of
post-World War II California through the AIDS epidemic, finishing up in 1991
with Gay Pride Week. Along the way, he presents every gay male type he can round
up, as well as a few lesbians, apparently to explode the notion that there is
such a thing as a gay type.

So, among many others, we meet Frank, vice cop turned porno star. And Lois, the
lesbian bar owner with a heart of gold. And Luke and Tom, fresh-faced Midwestern
teen-agers who struggle with their attraction to each other. And Johnny the Kid,
a k a the Green Goddess.

Unfortunately, Mr. Mordden doesn't always trust his story to make his point, and
sometimes tangles up a good yarn with editorializing: "For we are not only your
sons and daughters: We are your fathers and mothers, husbands and wives, fiances
and fiancees. We are everywhere, trapped by your social pressures, religious
witchcraft and suffocating laws. Free us!"

Too sensational to be a political novel, too political to be pure romance, "How
Long Has This Been Going On?" ends up wandering somewhere in between. The
novel's plot more or less boils down to relationships, which mostly boil down to
sex, which boils down to: "Panting and wondering. The two of them, wet and hot.
Scary, necessary. Without sex, what is art?" A question wisely left unanswered.

Mr. Picano's novel, like Mr. Mordden's, takes place largely in New York and
California and also spans the last four decades. But although the jacket
identifies it as "A Gay American Epic," his book is actually more of a comic
Bildungsroman.

We follow its middle-aged hero, Roger Sansarc, back and forth from his present
situation as a member of the literati to various episodes in his complicated
past -- complicated chiefly by his extravagant, chameleonlike and shamelessly
self-interested second cousin, Alistair Dodge.

The repeated intersection of these two lives supplies the basic plot, beginning
with a boyhood visit to Roger's Long Island home and winding up with a grim 45th
birthday party at Alistair's Manhattan apartment. Along the way, Roger and
Alistair experience Woodstock, Vietnam War protests and orgiastic weekends on
Fire Island.

What was treated rather piously in Mr. Mordden's book is satirized here. The
main appeal of the novel, in fact, is its irreverence, extending even to the
horror of AIDS itself. "The epidemic seems to have developed an
ever-metamorphosing construct of etiquette," Roger observes. "I sometimes think
there should be an Illness Manners Crisis Hotline you can phone to get the
latest subtle twist."

MR. PICANO seems determined to tweak the AIDS-era gay generation (whom Roger
suspects would accuse him of "a Serious Lack of Seriousness") by insisting that
nothing is so dark that it can't accommodate a little lightening up. Which is
where this novel succeeds, although Roger and Alistair's conflicts get a bit
predictable and the story slows down considerably once Roger meets Matt
Loguidice, the love of his life and the book's only boring character.

The decision of these two writers to use the history of gay culture as the
subject for popular novels is a shrewd one. So far, there hasn't been a
commercial novel about gay life that has attracted the enormous audience of
books by writers like Danielle Steel -- books to be read at poolsides across
America, by people who otherwise might never consider (or consider considering)
what it means to be a gay man. Neither Mr. Mordden nor Mr. Picano has written
that kind of book, but they're both moving in the right direction.

LOAD-DATE: July 16, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              63 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 16, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Notes of a Red Menace

BYLINE: By Douglas Brinkley;   Douglas Brinkley, a professor of American history
at the University of New Orleans and author of "Dean Acheson: The Cold War
Years," is working on a book on Jimmy Carter after his Presidency.

SECTION: Section 7;  Page 28;  Column 3;  Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1022 words



THE GOLDEN AGE IS IN US
Journeys and Encounters, 1987-1994.
By Alexander Cockburn.
434 pp. New York:
Verso. $24.95.

SELDOM in this time of democracy-building and free-market economies does one
encounter a full-fledged Marxist thinker. Genuine lefties have become quaint
collectibles -- fascinating novelty items, like Wobblies' songbooks preserved
under glass.

Sure, old-timers like Noam Chomsky and Howard Zinn, with their denunciations of
American imperialism, still attract student audiences. But their professorial
presentations are not intended to launch a workers' revolution or trigger youth
riots in the streets. Alexander Cockburn, frequent columnist in The Nation and
distinguished curmudgeon of the left, is often lumped into this Gentleman
Marxist category. However, his newest book, "The Golden Age Is in Us: Journeys
and Encounters, 1987-1994," reveals a savage wit and flashy optimism -- unusual
traits for a self-proclaimed Leninist living in the capitalist shadowlands of
the Reagan/ Bush/Clinton era.

At first glance "The Golden Age Is in Us" seems little more than disgruntled
entries in the journal of a contrary transplant from the British Isles, born to
debunk and expose in pithy prose the shallow extravagance of the colonies.
Besides painting almost all working-class Republicans as redneck dolts, Mr.
Cockburn's journal gleefully demythologizes America's white male heroes to
nothing more than hate-filled degenerates: Elvis Presley is outed as a racist;
Jackson Pollock is pictured as "a horrifying drunk"; Jack Kerouac hits the road
as an "anti-Semitic right-winger" and Walt Disney is cast as a prairie
progenitor of the know-nothing right.

Fortunately, Mr. Cockburn reserves his most potent weapons for those who most
richly deserve them. Take talk radio. Yet he also takes aim at the
left-of-center for failing to debate Rush Limbaugh, whom he calls a "safe
demagogue." Mr. Cockburn argues:

"There is almost no one out there fighting the political battles with Limbaugh
in any kind of language ordinary people can understand and enjoy. If National
Public Radio wasn't made up of a bunch of terrified elitist liberals with
basically the same agenda as Limbaugh in more polite language they'd field a
tough talk show with a radical democrat, with a small d."

An excerpt dated Sept. 1, 1988 (El Paso), is typical of Mr. Cockburn's ability
to look straight through the power brokers of the day:

"The thing you notice pretty soon about George Bush is that he does shameful
things in that peculiarly upper-class shameless way which stems from the useful
sense that it's not really him -- Bush -- who is doing these awful things, but
some other false-Bush, momentarily pinch-hitting for the true-Bush."

His relentless critiques of Bill Clinton are hard hitting and always
illuminating:

"It's a measure of Clinton that he should be muddying up the most visibly
principled act of his life -- namely, his opposition to the war in Vietnam. He
hops about, telling one silly fib after another, till he's managed to convert
principle into something devious. Why be apologetic for refusing to napalm
peasants, shoot old women in paddy fields or herd villagers into concentration
camps while dumping Agent Orange on their forests?"

Liberal readers of these journeys and encounters may not be moved to vote for
the Communist Party, U.S.A. in the next election, but they may think twice about
casting a ballot for Mr. Clinton after exposure to Mr. Cockburn's musings. He
derides everything from the F.B.I. at Waco to Nafta.

Some of the most enjoyable entries in "The Golden Age Is in Us" are the travel
vignettes. Covering both the Democratic (Atlanta) and Republican (New Orleans)
conventions in 1988, Mr. Cockburn escapes the pandemonium to wander the streets
and try to understand the forces at work in modern America.

"Mies van der Rohe once declared that the destiny of modern architecture was to
translate the will of the epoch into space," Mr. Cockburn writes of the cluster
of glass-tower skyscrapers that makes up downtown Atlanta. "Whose will has
triumphed over Peachtree Street?" Back in New Orleans, as he moves through the
French Quarter his mind wanders from Mardi Gras's Mystic Krewe of Comus to
Ignatius Donnelly's Populist Party platform of 1892.

Whether journeying to Key West, Fla., Humboldt County, Calif., Ireland or
Istanbul, Mr. Cockburn is a warrior/freethinker, armed with courage and gifted
prose to cut down the hypocrisies of tyrants. He is a Marxist Mencken -- a
composite of the comic/poet Andrei Codrescu (minus the Transylvanian sarcasm),
the erudite Christopher Hitchens (minus the radical chic impulse) and the gonzo
journalist Hunter S. Thompson (minus the drugs, guns and rock-and-roll).

What other writer would publish hate mail from Howard Fast, who quotes Lenin to
accuse Mr. Cockburn of "infantile petty-bourgeois leftism" for a "silly and
shrill denunciation of Gorbachev" in The Nation?  What other radical would
ridicule Amnesty International, not just over tactics but for the proverbial fun
of tweaking the beaks of the self-righteous? Few other top-gun journalists
attacked Allan Bloom's "Closing of the American Mind" with the vigor of Mr.
Cockburn's language: "actively pernicious drivel." And what other serious
columnist would justify supporting Jerry Brown for President merely because
"he's the only candidate you could find yourself next to on an airplane without
having to hide behind the in-flight magazine"? Mr. Cockburn's relentless candor
is refreshing and admirable from any point on the political spectrum.

Mr. Cockburn has established himself as a literary mischief-maker, a life-loving
anarchist more imbued in the whimsical tradition of Abbie Hoffman than the stern
politics of Eugene Debs. Still, many readers will be astonished to discover that
the muzzled and "irrelevant" left still has much to offer as we search for a
utopian resolution to our tangled social problems. "The Golden Age Is in Us" is
a delightful reminder that the New Left, which blossomed in the 1960's, has not
completely withered and died.

LOAD-DATE: July 16, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              64 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 17, 1995, Monday, Late Edition - Final

A Small Town in the South Prepares to Try a Neighbor

BYLINE: By RICK BRAGG

SECTION: Section A;  Page 8;  Column 5;  National Desk

LENGTH: 765 words

DATELINE: UNION, S.C., July 16


As people down here like to say, it's all over but the shoutin'.

A jury of nine men and three women -- seven whites and five blacks -- is in
place for the capital murder trial of Susan Smith, clearing the way for opening
statements this week. The jury will hear a polished, soft-spoken, Ivy League
lawyer argue for her life with a plain-spoken young prosecutor who has gone
against a rising community sympathy to demand her death.

The two men, David Bruck, the defense lawyer, and Tommy Pope, the prosecutor,
are expected to begin opening statements on Tuesday, but those could come as
soon as Monday afternoon.

The jury appears less than objective -- it includes the wife of the police
chief, a woman who used to baby-sit Mrs. Smith -- but that was inevitable in a
town of 10,000 where everyone seems to work, play, or pray with everyone else.

Almost all the white jurors -- five men and two women -- had friends or
acquaintances on the list of witnesses for the trial, but all said they could
set aside their feelings and friendships and decide the case on the evidence.

David Smith, Mrs. Smith's estranged husband, has said over and over that he
wants her to die for drowning their two young sons in a lake on Oct. 25. Mrs.
Smith let her car roll down a boat ramp with the boys inside, then lied for nine
days that they had been abducted by a black carjacker.

Most white members of the jury said they knew people on one side of the family
or the other, and that is not sure to be a benefit for Mrs. Smith.

It makes sense, legal experts said, that the jurors with closer ties to David
Smith would be more inclined to give Mrs. Smith the death penalty.

Although Mrs. Smith has already confessed, the judge has entered a plea of
innocent on her behalf, so the jurors must first rule on her guilt, then, after
a day off, decide whether or not she should die for what she did.

The trial is expected to last at least a month, much to the chagrin of many
townspeople who just want the whole thing to go away.

Another unpredictable element of the trial will be how the black jurors -- four
men and one woman -- respond to Mrs. Smith's claim that the phantom carjacker
was a black man.

But one juror, a black man in his 30's, said he was not angry at Mrs. Smith for
that. He said she was only creating a carjacker that the people of the state of
South Carolina would be likely to believe.

"I blamed the state," he said.

Law professors and psychiatrists have said that the case, like many cases, turns
on the abilities of the lawyers. In that, Mrs. Smith seems to have the clear
edge. Mr. Bruck has handled 50 death penalty cases, either in the trial stage or
on appeal, and only three of his clients have been executed.

Mr. Bruck is also a Candian-born liberal and a Harvard man who protested against
the war in Vietnam, just the kind of person many people here like to hate.
Although he lives in nearby Columbia, and has for several years, he is still
considered a Yankee by many here.

But while the trial pits an outsider against a young man who talks just like
them, who is the epitome of a small town boy who made good, many people here are
refusing to rally behind the home boy. They have blasted Mr. Pope, the son of a
South Carolina sheriff, for grandstanding and playing to the camera, accusing
him of using the publicity as a stepladder to the state Attorney General's
office.

Mr. Pope, the youngest prosecutor in the state at 32, said he was acting on the
wishes of Mr. Smith's side of the family and what he thought was right.

Neither lawyer will provide much theatrics. Mr. Bruck speaks so softly that it
is impossible to tell what he is saying at a distance of more than a few feet,
unless one can read lips. He has made his reputation in appeals, finding the
little mistakes that can taint a whole trial.

Mr. Pope, who is hardly a contrast in flamboyancy, has all the excitement of a
lumber yard inventory. He is a tall, muscular young man, a former undercover
drug agent with the State Law Enforcement Division. But he can be warm, and his
friendliness seems genuine. He is stubborn -- friends say hard work is his
greatest strength -- but he has tried just one murder case before this one, the
case of a father who confessed to smothering his son.

Oddly, he plea bargained that case to an eight-year prison sentence.

His father, J. Elbert Pope, a 76-year-old retired sheriff, told The Associated
Press that his son's decision not to bargain on the Smith case may just be
inherent stubborness.

"He'll follow through with whatever he starts," he said.

LOAD-DATE: July 17, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              65 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 17, 1995, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Edward Gray, 78, United Auto Workers Official

BYLINE: By ROBERT McG. THOMAS Jr.

SECTION: Section B;  Page 9;  Column 1;  Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 554 words


Edward F. Gray, a former union official who began his career recruiting factory
workers in New Jersey and ended it by organizing the elderly in New York, died
on Thursday at the Cabrini Hospice in Manhattan. He was 78 and lived in
Manhattan.

The cause was complications of Parkinson's disease, said his wife, Lois.

It may have been his youthful experiences as a sharecropper and migrant farm
worker in the Depression or simply something in his blood, but somehow, early in
his life, Mr. Gray developed an acute and wide-ranging sense of social justice.

In his years as a United Auto Workers official, Mr. Gray, who was first elected
to the union's executive board when he was 26 and was later a regional director
in New York, took a broad view of his role. He helped lead the union into the
campaign against racial discrimination, was an organizer of the Labor Committee
to End the War in Vietnam, and championed affordable housing for the elderly and
the disabled.

While serving as a U.A.W. area director in Buffalo in the late 1940's, his wife
recalled on Saturday, Mr. Gray became so incensed that black workers were banned
from bowling leagues sponsored by the American Bowling Congress that he
established a rival, integrated bowling organization that helped prompt the
A.B.C. to change its policies.

Mr. Gray's union career began in his 20's, when he took a job at an auto parts
plant in Trenton and promptly led a successful campaign to organize a U.A.W.
local there. As the local's first president, he became an early and fierce
supporter of Walter Reuther in the union's bitter factional wars of the 1930's
and 1940's and won election to the union's executive board in 1943.

Mr. Gray was defeated for re-election the next year and was in the Army in the
latter stages of World War II. But with Mr. Reuther finally installed as U.A.W.
president, Mr. Gray was named to the position in Buffalo, where he led a bitter
19-week strike at the Bell Aircraft plant in 1949.

After violent clashes between union workers and strikebreakers, Mr. Gray was
convicted of conspiracy to riot, but the charge was dismissed on appeal.

Mr. Gray, who became assistant director of the region covering New York, New
Jersey and Connecticut in 1955, became regional director in 1977 and was again
elected to the union's executive board. In his years with the regional office,
Mr. Gray, concerned that some auto workers in New Jersey had to commute long
distances because they could not afford to live in the expensive suburbs near
their plants, was active in the campaign against restrictive zoning regulations
that prevented the construction of low-cost multifamily housing.

After retiring from the U.A.W. in 1983, Mr. Gray brought a private-sector
perspective to municipal union matters as a member of the New York City Office
of Collective Bargaining's dispute settlement board.

As he grew older and became more aware of problems faced by the elderly, Mr.
Gray, ever the organizer, led the drive to establish the New York State Council
of Senior Citizens and was elected its first president.

In addition to his wife, a professor of labor relations at Cornell University,
he is survived by a son, John, of Goldsboro, N.C.; a daughter, Lori Cauthorn of
Tampa, Fla.; four grandchildren, and seven great-grandchildren.

NAME: Edward F. Gray

LOAD-DATE: July 17, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              66 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 17, 1995, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Editorial Notebook;
The Not-So-Mysterious East

BYLINE: By JAMES L. GREENFIELD

SECTION: Section A;  Page 12;  Column 1;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 683 words


Old Asia hands who revisit the Far East in search of the past inevitably come
down with a bad case of nostalgia-shock. The visitor realizes, with some
sadness, that progress has exacted a price, imposing architectural and
commercial conformity on what was once a collection of endlessly variable
destinations.

Almost nothing is familiar. Bangkok, once one of Asia's most charming cities, is
self-destructing. The water-filled klongs that crisscrossed the city and gave it
much of its charm were long ago filled with concrete to create gridlocked
streets. Elevated highways are sprouting above the streets, part of the city's
plan to cut down travel time between the airport and Bangkok's plush hotels.

Almost the only surviving remnant of old Thailand in the city's center is the
house of the late Jim Thompson, an American who single-handedly revived
Thailand's silk industry in the 1950's. Built of teak on traditional stilts and
now a museum, it squats like a daddy-longlegs amid the high-rises. The city's
Thieves Market, which actually used to offer a wide variety of pilfered goods at
bargain prices, has gone boringly legit. It is full of shops selling machine
parts.

Hotels are the first shock. In Shanghai, the stately 1930's French Sport Club
that boasted an Olympic-size swimming pool has been turned into a spiffy lobby
for the Japanese-run Garden Hotel. Its oval Art Deco bathroom has been restored
and retained as a tourist attraction. Across the street is another tourist
attraction: Ralph Lauren's Polo shop. In the 60's, Bangkok's Erawan Hotel, a
gracious colonial building built around a pool, was a favorite of Vietnam war
correspondents. The new Erawan is a marbled skyscraper with eight restaurants, a
Japanese department store and a lagoon-shaped pool on the fifth-floor terrace.

And whatever happened to the good old gin and tonic? At the Bamboo Barin
Bangkok's Oriental Hotel, it has been replaced by something called Ustinov's
Ultra Gold, apricot brandy mixed with lemon and pineapple juice at seven bucks a
throw.

Everything in Asia, in fact, seems ripe for the wrecking ball. Until recently, a
combination of poverty and a distrustful Government in Beijing kept Shanghai
pretty much the way it was in the 1940's. Now, with South China booming, old
Shanghai is disappearing at the rate of a block a week. It was once China's most
European city -- a mixture of British, French, Russian and Chinese styles. Now,
developers seem determined to turn it into a Hong Kong clone. City fathers
promise to save the famous Bund, a stately row of British-built banks and
trading houses. But across the river, a new skyscraper city is adding a building
a month.

Hong Kong sets the pace. Climbing the steps that wind up Hong Kong's steep hills
was once an exciting way to poke about. The tired tourist can skip that now,
because a covered escalator will whisk you effortlessly to the mountain top.
Most of the stately 19th-century buildings have been bulldozed to make way for
some of the world's most innovative modern architecture. Elevated walkways that
snake between skyscrapers make it possible to work downtown without descending
to street level. This is all quite spectacular. It is also curiously
dehumanizing.

In the face of such progress, the turn-of-the-century Grand Hotel in Sean Reap,
Cambodia, is still a nostalgia hunter's dream. There are gently whirling ceiling
fans open showers and a smattering of green gecko lizards in the rooms to serve
as mosquito catchers. Even a cluster of red signs down the road, warning of mine
fields, gets the adrenaline flowing. There were, of course, glitches. The shower
water was rusty. The geckos were missing too many mosquitoes and seemed
uninterested in the roaches. Memory was vague, but in the old days did the
lizards sometimes fall into your bed from the ceiling at 2 A.M.?

Still, this old Asia hand plans to return. Hanoi, the travel agent promises, has
kept much of its prewar charm. And besides, who knows what historic gem may
still be lurking behind the next skyscraper?   JAMES L. GREENFIELD

LOAD-DATE: July 17, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              67 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 17, 1995, Monday, Late Edition - Final

BOOKS OF THE TIMES;
5 Famous Men and What They Learned at Annapolis

BYLINE: By CHRISTOPHER LEHMANN-HAUPT

SECTION: Section C;  Page 13;  Column 3;  Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 963 words



THE NIGHTINGALE'S SONG
By Robert Timberg
Illustrated. 544 pages. Simon & Schuster. $27.50.

The idea that moved Robert Timberg to write "The Nightingale's Song" seems to
have been to take five famous graduates of the United States Naval Academy and
show how their training at Annapolis imbued them with values that subsequently
made them military heroes: Senator John McCain, John M. Poindexter, Robert C.
McFarlane, James Webb and Oliver L. North. He would then dramatize the sense of
betrayal these men felt when America turned against the Vietnam War and spell
out the tragic consequences of their feelings. In light of his own background as
a graduate of the Naval Academy and a Marine veteran of Vietnam, he would write
in a spirit of indignation over what he saw as the American middle class's
abandonment of the country's patriotic heritage.

But when Mr. Webb, a 1968 graduate and a former Secretary of the Navy, said to
him during an interview, "I'm not sure I'm as angry as you want me to be," Mr.
Timberg realized that his project might not be as neat as he had hoped. He
admits in his prologue, where he reports Mr. Webb's remark, that "this book did
not turn out precisely as I expected." He concludes, "In the end, it gets messy,
in some ways as messy as the war that spawned it."

Mr. Timberg does well enough describing his subjects' careers at Annapolis, how
they were tempered in the furnace of the academy's almost sadistic rituals of
initiation. From this experience they learned lessons summed up by "A Message to
Garcia," the Spanish-American War tale of doubtful authenticity about a
resourceful young naval lieutenant who takes on a difficult assignment as a
courier without asking for more than the name of the missive's recipient.

The undergraduate exploits make for theatrical narrative: how Mr. Poindexter
quietly excelled while Mr. McCain noisily goofed off, with each in his way
establishing himself as a leader of men; how Mr. McFarlane led an assault
against upperclassmen in which he ended up the lone attacker of a roomful of
football behemoths, how Mr. North barely defeated Mr. Webb in a famous boxing
match whose outcome turned on a psychological stratagem.

Even more arresting are some of the later experiences: Mr. McCain's heroic
endurance as a prisoner of war undergoing torture in Vietnam; Mr. Poindexter's
resourcefulness in acquiring a doctorate in nuclear physics at Caltech; Mr.
Webb's development as a novelist. These stories are marred only by the author's
occasional brushes with cliche: "During the four years '68 was at the Academy,
the social fabric of the nation was shredded and rewoven in a way that Webb and
North barely recognized." And once or twice Mr. Timberg forces a point: when he
suggests, for instance, that Mr. Poindexter's appearance on the television show
"Music Bingo" shortly before the quiz scandals broke was somehow a premonition
of his involvement in the Iran-contra scandal.

One larger problem with "The Nightingale's Song" is that Mr. Timberg does too
good a job digging into the background of his characters. For what his
explorations suggest is that where Mr. McCain and Mr. Webb were psychologically
resilient and able to learn from suffering, Mr. Poindexter, Mr. McFarlane and
Mr. North were flawed in various ways and therefore more vulnerable to the
pressures they would face. Not only does this point compromise Mr. Timberg's
narrative by forcing him to follow stories so disparate that the reader begins
to lose the thread of the argument, it also undermines the author's thesis by
suggesting that individual character, not America's revulsion with Vietnam, was
the real source of what happened.

But where the book gets into serious trouble is in the thesis summed up by its
title, a reference to the fact that, as Mr. Timberg reports, while the
nightingale "has a template in its brain that contains all the notes for the
music . . . the bird cannot sing unless its song is first triggered by the song
of another nightingale." In Mr. Timberg's view, while Mr. McFarlane, Mr.
Poindexter and Mr. North were programmed by the Naval Academy with the sense of
"duty, honor, country," they could not act on it until President Ronald Reagan
came along and reaffirmed their patriotism by calling Vietnam a "noble cause."
But, writes Mr. Timberg, Mr. Reagan ultimately betrayed them after encouraging
them to sell arms to Iran in exchange for American hostages and then divert the
profits to the Nicaraguan contras.  "The singer, in many important ways, was a
fraud," Mr. Timberg concludes.

The problems with this thesis are multiple. For one thing, it leaves out Mr.
McCain and Mr. Webb, who, because they never had any trouble singing their
particular songs, become irrelevant to the main thrust of the book. For another,
it ignores the whole issue of character shortcomings that Mr. Timberg has been
at such pains to develop.

Most damaging of all, the argument places far too much blame on Mr. Reagan for
singing a nightingale's song that begged his couriers to deliver a message to
Garcia. After all, Mr. Reagan was not some aberration who came out of nowhere.
The point Mr. Timberg misses, or fails to develop in any depth, is that he was
elected by a majority of citizens and was therefore an expression of something
this majority felt, which was precisely the longing for the simpler moral code
that the nightingale's song seemed to express.

So in blaming Mr. Reagan for the complex set of catastrophes he narrates, Mr.
Timberg ignores the real villain of his narrative. This villain is the history
that taught us all the straightforward lessons of World War II and then, in the
age of colonial insurrection that followed, changed all the rules of the
geopolitical game.

LOAD-DATE: July 17, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              68 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 18, 1995, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Lost Japanese Sub With 2 Tons of Axis Gold Found on Floor of Atlantic

BYLINE: By WILLIAM J. BROAD

SECTION: Section C;  Page 1;  Column 5;  Science Desk

LENGTH: 1815 words


LONGER than a football field, the Japanese submarine I-52 was carrying more than
two tons of gold and hundreds of tons of other metals and raw materials to the
Nazi war machine when she was sighted on June 23, 1944, by allied forces in the
Atlantic. An American bomber swept out of the midnight sky and dropped a
torpedo. The pilot, listening to undersea sounds radioed by acoustic buoys,
heard an explosion and a metallic groan as the submarine lost air and sank with
more than 100 men. Debris found floating the next day included fragments of silk
and a Japanese sandal.

For half a century the warship lay hidden in the depths of the Atlantic. No
diver, submersible or robot ever uncovered her grave, the exact location of
which was a mystery.

Until now. With the help of advanced gear and methods once reserved for the
world's militaries, Paul R. Tidwell, a maritime researcher, found the hulk this
spring more than three miles beneath the sea. He now plans to recover the gold,
valued at more than $25 million, and perhaps eventually to raise the warship as
well.

"It's amazing the condition she's in," Mr. Tidwell said in an interview. "There
are no rivers of rust like on the Titanic," the British luxury liner that sank
in 1912 and was discovered in 1985 in icy darkness.

Finding the I-52 is a case study of how the deep oceans, once inaccessible, are
being opened up for science and commerce. During the cold war, deep ocean
technology was a monopoly of the superpowers and their navies. But Mr. Tidwell,
using an advanced research ship from Russia and special navy skills from
America, put together a team that accomplished something seldom if ever done
before by civilians at such depths.

His team located the warship in 17,000 feet of water some 1,200 miles west of
the Cape Verde Islands, apparently intact save for a torpedo hole on her
starboard side and some minor bow damage. She lies on rocky seabed, sitting
upright, lines draped eerily across her deck as if the ghost ship were caught in
some kind of preparatory activity.

"We want to disturb the wreck as little as possible," said Mr. Tidwell, a former
Army infantryman who served two tours of duty in the Vietnam War and won a
Purple Heart. "I feel a responsibility to make sure we treat it with respect.
Those people were doing their jobs and died bravely, regardless of their
nationality."

Jesse D. Taylor, the Navy pilot who torpedoed the submarine a half-century ago,
said the discovery was a surprise. "I never had any idea that this thing could
be located," he said in an interview, clearly fascinated. "I just never thought
of it."

The I-52 was part a secretive exchange of materials and technologies between
Hitler and Emperor Hirohito. With Allied attacks making surface transport
impossible, the Axis powers resorted to submarines sneaking half way around the
globe.

"Japan was desperate for German technology," said Dr. Carl Boyd, a military
historian at Old Dominion University in Norfolk, Va., who has no tie to the
project. "And the Germans were desperate for raw materials."

Three hundred and fifty-seven feet long, bigger than any American submarine of
the day, the I-52 was carrying 2 metric tons of gold, 228 tons of tin,
molybdenum and tungsten, 54 tons of raw rubber and 3 tons of quinine. She also
carried 109 men, including 14 experts from such concerns as the Mitsubishi
Instrument Company, who were along to study and procure German technology.

The I-52 left Japan in March 1944 with the 4,409 pounds of gold on board, then
stopped in Singapore to pick up the other raw materials. In late April she set
out again, traveling through the Indian Ocean and around Africa, bound for the
seaport of Lorient in Nazi-held France. She traveled the usual way, submerged
during the day and surfaced at night, charging batteries.

Unbeknownst to Tokyo and Berlin, the I-52's route and cargo were known to the
Allies, who had broken a host of Axis ciphers for secret communications,
including German military orders and Japanese naval codes. Plans were laid for
her ruin.

On the moonless night of June 23, 1944, under a clear sky, the I-52 rendezvoused
with a German submarine in the mid-Atlantic. Food, fuel and two German
technicians were taken aboard, as well as a radar detector meant to help the
Japanese submarine evade enemy planes as she neared Europe.

But it was too late. Mr. Taylor, then a lieutenant commander flying as part of a
naval task force, took off from the aircraft carrier Bogue in an Avenger bomber.
Near midnight, just after the rendezvous, he picked up the I-52 on his radar.
Zeroing in, he dropped flares and two 500-pound bombs and watched in dismay as
the submarine desperately sought to dive, kicking up white water and
successfully evading the attack.

Laying acoustic buoys over a mile of sea, Commander Taylor and his crew tracked
the submarine, the chu-chu-chu of her propellers clearly audible. He then
swooped out of the sky and dropped his only torpedo. A long silence was followed
by a loud explosion.

Far away, both the Bogue and the escaping Nazi submarine saw the flares of the
distant battle, and both of them noted the position of the blaze above the
I-52's grave.

Shipwrecks in deep water were once lost forever. But during the cold war they
slowly became reachable as American and Soviet navies developed gear for
surveying each other's lost assets. Civilians started to reach the same depths
only in the 1980's, the best-known example being the discovery of the Titanic
under 2.4 miles of water.

Mr. Tidwell, a maritime researcher who works both for himself and for clients,
saw the glimmer of a prize in this emerging field in 1990 when he stumbled on
recently declassified data about the I-52 in the National Archives while
tracking wartime gold shipments. The files included decoded German and Japanese
radio transmissions about the submarine's cargo.

Excited, he moved to the Washington area with his wife and two children and
threw himself into discovering all he could about the lost submarine, eventually
obtaining the sighting data of the Bogue and the escaped Nazi submarine, as well
as an official Navy estimate of the I-52's position. Along the way he raised $1
million from investors.

His goal was aided as the world's militaries began to cast off secretive gear
after the cold war, putting robots, sensors, submersibles and novel techniques
onto the commercial market, opening the abyss to civilians.

Working through Sound Ocean Systems Inc., a marine contractor and agent in
Redmond, Wash., Mr. Tidwell hired a big Russian research ship, the
Yuzhmorgeologiya, to hunt for the lost submarine with sonars and cameras dangled
on long cables. To help run the expedition and refine the Russian sonar data,
Mr. Tidwell hired Meridian Sciences Inc. of Columbia, Md., a Navy contractor
skilled in teasing information out of a sonar signal.

Mr. Tidwell also had Meridian do something that in retrospect proved very
useful. For the Navy, Meridian analyzes secret data on nuclear submarines to
remove navigational errors, allowing officers back on land to better understand
actual routes. So too, Mr. Tidwell had Meridian do its computational magic on
the half-century-old sighting data, in theory giving a better fix on the
submarine's grave.

An element of intrigue arose early this year when Mr. Tidwell found that a rival
British group, also using a Russian ship, the Akademik Keldysh, was planning to
go after the I-52 as well. He offered to join forces. But the other group
declined and set sail before Mr. Tidwell could. Despite the headstart, the
British group left the search area empty-handed.

Mr. Tidwell and his team set sail in April. His operations director was Tom
Dettweiler, a Meridian staff member who had helped locate the Titanic. For two
weeks the hunt was fruitless. The Yuzhmorgeologiya ran low on fuel and the
search was almost abandoned.

Then, on May 2, a sonar reading produced a telltale dark sliver. Another pass
with the sonar revealed the sliver to be a sunken submarine lying more than 3.2
miles down in international waters.

"I was under a lot of stress," Mr. Tidwell recalled. "I was responsible for the
money. I had been up two and a half days and had cramps in my side I was so
stressed."

Everybody was too tired to celebrate.

On May 5, the team successfully towed a Russian camera sled over the Japanese
hulk, photographing it and allowing Mr. Tidwell to make a positive
identification. Later, the team also recovered some of the submarine's remains
from an adjacent debris field, enabling Mr. Tidwell to make an international
claim to its salvage rights.

Remarkably, the submarine was found tens of miles from the Navy's estimate of
her position and only a half mile from Meridian's calculated spot.

"If we hadn't done the renavigation, they would have come home empty-handed,"
said David W. Jourdan, president of Meridian and a former Navy submariner.

The team is now preparing for follow-up voyages, led by Mr. Tidwell, president
of Au Holdings of Centreville, Va., his research company. Au is chemical
shorthand for the element gold.

Scholars and scientists from American universities and companies are to be
invited along on the next voyage to help assess the wreck's condition, and later
to help salvage it as well.

"This is going to be hot stuff," said Dr. Boyd of Old Dominion. "It's not the
Titanic or the Bismarck, but in a more subtle way, it's perhaps more interesting
because they were pretty well known."

Historians have no photographs of the I-52, one of the biggest of all the
Japanese submarines of World War II. By contrast, the Titanic was photographed
hundreds and perhaps thousands of times, including every stage of its
construction

The I-52's sunken gold consists of 146 bars packed in 49 metal boxes, according
to a manifest that was radioed from Tokyo to Berlin and decrypted by its
American interceptors. After the recovery, Mr. Tidwell says, the whole I-52
might be lifted by filling the wreck with a special kind of foam, making the
vessel light enough to come to the surface.

He says he is working closely with the Japanese authorities and has offered to
return any personal effects and possibly the whole submarine, if raised. Mr.
Tidwell noted that the Japanese tended to make no claims to lost riches and war
booty.

All told, he said, recovery of the I-52's gold might cost $5 million to $8
million, leaving him and his investors a tidy profit. It would also provide the
capital for other projects. Without giving any details, he says he has
documentary evidence of ships that were lost with 5, 7 and even 15 tons of gold.

"There was a lot of hardship getting to this point," Mr. Tidwell said of his
five-year hunt for the golden submarine. "But now I've reached a plateau of
achievement in my life. I was right. And that's a good feeling."

LOAD-DATE: July 18, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Researchers using once-secret military technology zeroed in on
a treasure-laden Japanese submarine. First, they recalculated old navigation
data to approximate its position. A Russian sonar device revealed the sliver of
the hull, left, then a clear image, below. Finally, a Russian camera provided
close-up identification. (Photographs by Paul R. Tidwell) (pg. C1); Russian
submersible camera that identified Japanese submarine being hoisted by crew
members of the research vessel Yuzhmorgeologiya. (Sean Cayton) (pg. C7)

Map of the Atlantic Ocean highlighting site of Japanese submarine sinking (pg.
C7)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              69 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 18, 1995, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Observer;
How the Going Got Bad

BYLINE: By RUSSELL BAKER

SECTION: Section A;  Page 13;  Column 5;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 705 words


Good manners are breaking down on the Internet. Rudeness, even savage insults
filling the E-mail. Assorted species of porn flourishing. The good fellowship of
the nerds poisoned, souring into the bad fellowship of the electronic jungle.

It makes me glad I resisted when everybody was saying it was the future, and the
train was leaving the station, or the rocket was leaving the pad, or the bauds
were leaving the modem, or whatever, and not being on it would leave you
stranded.

I laughed. I was too used to being stranded. I had been stranded ever since the
Queen Mary, the Michelangelo, the France and the S.S. United States all left the
dock and never came back.

I had survived for years in a world where you could no longer go anyplace
without being sealed in a tin can, strapped into a seat designed to make you beg
for mercy, and hurtled through time with all the dignity of a crate of deviled
ham being shipped by Federal Express.

Let the train leave the station without me. Let the bauds do their worst. That
was my attitude.

Oh, don't think it was an irrational decision, a whimsical surrender to quixotic
impulse, a sentimental expression of yearning for the buggy and village
blacksmith. Not at all.

It was based on my studies of how technology works on us all. These studies made
it obvious that the Internet simply had to produce a breakdown in good manners,
the very collapse in civility which is now occurring.

First, the nature of technology:

Technology is a great blessing, and what do we know about blessings? That every
blessing has its trade-off, or curse. The greater the blessing, the nastier the
curse. For instance, the curse we accept for the blessing of the automobile is
an annual casualty list of dead and maimed that exceeds the average annual
casualty rate of the Vietnam War.

Another curse is technology's tendency to separate people from the consequences
of their worst behavior. Where once we had to kill enemies with cleavers, swords
and clubs, technology now lets us do it from high in the sky. Even from a
switchboard on a faraway continent.

When insulated from the mayhem, how much easier it is to be insouciant about
killing thousands than when you are required to wade about in their gore.

Advances in communications technology show the same principle at work:
Technology makes savagery easier by keeping people from having to cope
face-to-face with the consequences of their rotten behavior. The obscene
telephone caller and the telemarketing industry are just two of many trade-offs
we accept for the blessing of 911.

Recent developments in the once-civilized talk-radio field dramatize how
technology brutalizes public discourse. In backward centuries when slandering
people often involved meeting one's victims in the flesh, there were restraints
on the viperish tongue.

Technology ended that. Now famous professional slanderers sit in remote studios
and encourage amateurs to phone from the far side of Nowhere, and the abuse
flows casually with no risk at all of being punched in the nose, receiving a
sword in the liver or being challenged to pistols at dawn. Here is technology
helping cowardice rise to new heights in public esteem.

The Internet was clearly destined to deepen the isolation of Technological Man
from the unhappy consequences of using this blessed electronic system. Isolation
was inherent. A human alone with his machine talking to machines activated by
other humans alone. Easy to hide in that maze. Be as bestial as instinct wishes
and so what? Hard to catch you, punch your nose, put a stiletto into your
kidney.

Rudeness was made easier by the blessing. And rudeness without style, elegance,
wit. Telegraphic brevity was cherished. No capital letters. An invitation, right
there, for the undiscriminating mind to do its worst.

None of that antiquated parchmenthead lingo, either, about "Dear Mister This"
and "Dear Madam That." The train was leaving the station, the rocket leaving the
pad. What bliss to be alive in that dawn when the bauds were leaving the modem.

If only the Michelangelo were leaving the dock. Six days to Naples. Ravioli
melting in the mouth. Oh, the shame of being an antiquated ocean linerhead.

LOAD-DATE: July 18, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              70 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 19, 1995, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

We Paid a Terrible Price for Atom Bomb

SECTION: Section A;    Page 18;    Column 5;    Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 391 words


To the Editor:

Richard Rhodes is no doubt correct in stating that the emergence of nuclear
weapons 50 years ago "changed the conditions" for global war ("Echoes of the Big
Bang," Op-Ed, July 15). But we can't agree with his view of the bomb's enormous
value as a peacemaker, past and future. And Rhodes also ignores the terrible
price we paid for embracing the bomb following the Trinity test.

Trinity, in fact, was a tragic event. It marked the birth of America's lasting
dependency on ever more destructive nuclear weapons. Trinity also enhanced the
idea of the bomb as a usable military weapon; our leaders were drawn to its
power, leading directly to the destruction of Hiroshima and Nagasaki.

Mr. Rhodes attributes the absence of world war after 1945 to the credibility of
United States and Soviet deterrents. On numerous occasions, however, one mad, or
misperceived, act could have instigated a nuclear holocaust. For the same
reason, he is too sanguine in suggesting that we have "little to fear" from an
Iraqi, Iranian or North Korean bomb. We can hardly put permanent faith in the
mixture of nuclear restraint and good luck that has prevailed so far.

Even if the bomb played a part in avoiding another world war, it has not
prevented hundreds of regional wars, including America's own bloody involvement
in Korea and Vietnam.

And Mr. Rhodes fails to emphasize the crucial fact that miscalculation might
lead not just to another world war, but also to the end of the world as we know
it.

Mr. Rhodes also does not explore the many ways that the bomb has severely
damaged America and its people. The economic price of the arms race -- recently
placed at $3.9 trillion -- and its environmental impact are well known, but
other costs are just as significant.

The secrecy of the Manhattan Project, for example, did not end with Nagasaki.

It came to surround the entire nuclear realm with horrible results for millions
of Americans unwittingly exposed to forms of radiation or subjected to cruel
medical experiments.

That climate of secrecy would eventually pervade much of our Government -- and
society as a whole.

Trinity, far from liberating us from fear, marked the beginning of our nuclear
entrapment, and of enduring danger to a human future.

ROBERT JAY LIFTON
GREG MITCHELL
New York, July 16, 1995

LOAD-DATE: July 19, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              71 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 19, 1995, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Book Notes

BYLINE: By Mary B. W. Tabor

SECTION: Section C;    Page 15;    Column 2;    Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1193 words



A Poet's Life

In the 1930's, Virginia H. Adair, then a precocious poet in her 20's, happily
saw her verses published in Atlantic Monthly, The New Republic, The Christian
Science Monitor and The Saturday Review of Literature.

But with a husband and then children, Mrs. Adair began to shun publication,
saying it was too time-consuming and restrictive.

"At that time, everyone was talking about what voice a person wrote in and I
didn't want to be tied to a voice," said Mrs. Adair, who wrote her first poem
when she was 6.

After her husband died in 1968, she again sought publication, this time simply
to help her win tenure at the California Polytechnic University in Pomona.
Within several years, more than 70 of her poems had been accepted by more than
30 periodicals and anthologies, including "Best Poems of 1974" (Pacific Books).
But once granted the full professorship, she again became reticent.

"I think my husband was really sort of tortured for a desire for fame," she said
in a telephone interview from her home in California. "I didn't want to get
trapped in that kind of emotion or anxiety or feeling of what do they want, what
do they expect? I write to please myself."

She may be pleasing many other readers soon.

After much coaxing from Robert Mezey, a fellow poet, Mrs. Adair, now an
82-year-old great-grandmother who is blind from glaucoma, recently agreed to let
him put together an anthology of her poems, "Ants on the Melon," and submit it
to magazines and publishers.

A result: Alice Quinn, the poetry editor of The New Yorker, is eagerly
publishing 15 of those poems beginning this fall. "She's really remarkable," Ms.
Quinn said . "We discover poems in the mail all the time, but you can imagine
this discovery was particularly gratifying." Random House, with equal
enthusiasm, is publishing her first book of poetry next spring.

Other poets have championed her as well. "Her poems reverberate with nuanced
wisdom and finely articulated emotion, with great meaning and rare insight,"
wrote Maurya Simon, a poet, in a recent edition of Poetry Pilot, the newsletter
of the Academy of American Poets.

Mrs. Adair said she used to write in longhand but now composes in her head and
then types a final draft.  While she has written many sonnets and longer poems,
she now prefers shorter, rhymed verse, particularly couplets, she said. "I have
to be able to remember them," she said. She also writes on a broad spectrum of
topics, from love to religion to animals. "God gives me latitude to move from
gutter to beatitude," she said with a laugh.

As for her book debut, she said she was a little anxious about the attention.
She said she hoped others enjoyed her poetry, but that acceptance by the public
had never much mattered to her.

"While my father was living, and he lived to 94," she said, "if I showed him
things and he liked them, then I was satisfied."


On Hiroshima

Nothing whets a publisher's appetite like a compelling, confusing, controversial
piece of human drama. Witness the mountains of books about the Civil War and
Vietnam, President John F. Kennedy's assassination, the Holocaust and Watergate
and Elvis.

The dropping of the atomic bombs on Japan is no exception. And since the 50th
anniversary of the bombing of Hiroshima is on Aug. 6, publishers have eagerly
planned no fewer than 14 new books to revisit the subject, from every imaginable
angle.

In addition to four histories, including one written from a military
perspective, two books -- "Decision to Use the Atomic Bomb" (Alfred A.  Knopf),
by Gar Alperovitz, and "Hiroshima in America: 50 Years of Denial" (G. P.
Putnam's Sons), by Robert Jay Lifton and Greg Mitchell, seek to dispel notions
that President Harry S. Truman had no choice but to drop the bomb and that he
had no regrets at the time.

Also being published are "Atoms, Bombs and Eskimo Kisses" (Viking), a memoir by
Claudio G. Segre, the son of Emilio Segre, an architect of the bomb; "City of
Silence" (Orbis Books), by Rachelle Linner, who tells the stories of
Japanese-Americans in Nagasaki at the time of the bombing, and "Hiroshima Notes"
(Marion Boyars), by Kenzaburo Oe, a statement by the Nobel laureate on the
meaning of the bombing.

For children (yes, children) come three books: "Hiroshima" (Blue
Sky/Scholastic), a novella by Laurence Yep; "On the Wings of Peace" (Clarion
Books), a collaborative book on peace, and "Shin's Tricycle" (Walker & Company),
by Tatsuharu Kodama, a true story of a Hiroshima victim.


A Summer of Fiction

It has been a blockbuster summer for publishers of fiction, who have pumped out
one mega-seller after another, beginning as early as last spring. The names
alone send people to bookstores: John Grisham, Stephen King, Anne Tyler, Mary
Higgins Clark.

Consequently, competition for readers' attention and top billing on best-seller
lists has been unusually stiff for the usually quiet summer season.

In general, these new books have been fast out of the gate, in part because of
the authors' propulsive popularity and in part because of a marketing technique
called a "one day lay down," in which publishers ship books so they arrive in
all bookstores on the same day. They often do this on Wednesdays since it
coincides with midweek paydays and is a warm-up day for weekend shoppers. (The
usual, less-expensive method is to stagger shipments over several days.)

Instead of sales dribbling in, they skyrocket.

While a book may become an immediate No. 1 on the best-seller list, the constant
flow of big names has created a turnstile at the top, leaving publishers with
only the briefest of bragging rights.

Beginning in late April, Doubleday published John Grisham's "Rainmaker," which
neatly stepped over James Redfield's "Celestine Prophecy" (Warner Books) to make
its debut on the hard-cover fiction best-seller list of The New York Times.

Except for a brief interruption from "The Bridges of Madison County" (Warner
Books), by Robert James Waller, whose sales rose with the release of the Clint
Eastwood-Meryl Streep movie, Mr. Grisham's latest novel held its spot through
June. But in July, Pat Conroy arrived with his long-awaited "Beach Music" (Nan
A. Talese/Doubleday) and shoved Mr. Grisham from his place.

Mr. Conroy lasted only two weeks at that spot. For on July 30, the No. 1 spot on
the Times list will go to Anne Rice's "Memnoch the Devil" (Knopf), which went on
sale last Wednesday. "Memnoch" is the fifth tale in Ms. Rice's vampire
chronicles.

Now it's Ms. Rice's turn to watch over her shoulder for the August crop of No. 1
wannabes. Several publishers are betting they'll roost Ms. Rice within a few
weeks. Mr. Conroy is hoping for a comeback. And Stephen King's new novel "Rose
Madder," stunted by the competition, is still angling for the top.

The one sure contender will be Michael Crichton's "Lost World," the sequel to
"Jurassic Park," to be published by Knopf in September.

"It's a very competitive time," said Emi Battaglia, a spokeswoman for Warner
Books. "Some of the biggest names are out there now, which forces us to be very
creative and aggressive in our marketing."

LOAD-DATE: July 19, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              72 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 19, 1995, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

BOOKS OF THE TIMES;
On the Trail of a Missing Man, in the Old Indochina

BYLINE: By RICHARD BERNSTEIN

SECTION: Section C;    Page 16;    Column 3;    Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1014 words



 HIGHWAYS TO A WAR
 By Christopher J. Koch
 469 pages. Viking. $23.95.

"In April 1976," Christopher J. Koch announces in the first line of his eventful
new novel, "my friend Michael Langford disappeared inside Cambodia." That was
exactly one year after the Khmer Rouge marched into Phnom Penh and inaugurated
one of the cruelest experiments in social engineering of our dreadful century.
Mr. Koch, the Australian writer whose best-known book is "The Year of Living
Dangerously," about foreign journalists in Indonesia, is obviously turning his
considerable talents toward a more familiar locale, Indochina during and just
after the Vietnam War.

But "Highways to a War" also extends a theme familiar to readers of Mr. Koch's
other works, a theme well established in the modern canon by such writers as
Joseph Conrad and Graham Greene. It is the sometimes deadly, mostly male,
Western addiction to Asia: its exoticism, its luxuriance, its silky feminine
beauty, its life-and-death dealings with ideology and power, and, not least, the
status it confers on white European men for simply being white, European and
male.

It is the kind of theme, in short, that often begets banal devices almost as old
as Western fiction about the East: the war, the foreign man, the native woman,
passions crashing tidally against the barriers of impossibility. "Highways to a
War" has those devices (and one of the least poetic titles for a novel in
memory). But while it certainly brushes close to cliche, it is nonetheless a
gripping tale, a convincing, page-turning evocation of recent history full of
compelling characters, tumultuous events and just plain excitement.

The story is essentially a long flashback, a quest to solve the mystery of
Langford's disappearance. His boyhood friend, Ray Barton, from the hop-growing
farmland of Tasmania, goes to Bangkok to try to find out why Langford crossed
into Cambodia. He listens to his friend's taped memoirs and interviews the
people who knew him, along the way reconstructing the events that rolled toward
Langford's final actions.

It is a good story that Mr. Koch endlessly enriches through his skill in evoking
the atmospheres that have made Asia such a redoubt of Western fascination: the
sounds of Singapore, the smell of fish sauce, gasoline fumes and camphor smoke
in Saigon, the terror that gripped Phnom Penh when it was surrounded by the
merciless Khmer Rouge in April 1975, just before the end. And the mystery that
lies at the heart of the story, Ray's search for the reasons for Langford's
disappearance, give the book an unrelenting narrative strength.

"It's all a bit unreal," someone says in Mr. Koch's story. The speaker is
sitting on the terrace of the Hotel Continental in Saigon in 1965, surveying the
chaos and the cacophony of Tu Do Street after having spent the day photographing
G.I.'s "on the rim of death" in the Ia Drang Valley.

It was unreal, this world that burned like magnesium for a brief moment and then
dimmed forever. For nonmilitary foreigners, the war in Indochina was an occasion
for an especially intense voyeurism that, once it was over, was difficult to put
into the past.

Langford, who gains renown as a television cameraman and still photographer, was
surely one of the you-can't-go-home-again brigade. He comes to love the people
he lives among, both in the abstract and, more than once, in the particular,
first in South Vietnam and then in Cambodia. He goes native in his peculiar way.
That leads him to wish for the defeat of the Communists and to admire the
pro-Government foot soldiers with whom, by contrast to his American colleagues,
he spends dangerous days and nights. And it leads him to be angry at corrupt
local officials and American generals for failing to help these people achieve
their goals.

"Yes, it's rotten," he tells a buddy in Phnom Penh of Cambodia's pro-American
Government, suggesting what appears to be Mr. Koch's own political vision. "But
it gives them a chance against tyranny. Because what's coming is real tyranny,
mate: so much worse you won't believe it."

In only one instance does Mr. Koch's sense of drama defy plausibility. It
happens when Langford and two of his friends are captured by North Vietnamese
troops in eastern Cambodia and taken on a forced march down the Ho Chi Minh
Trail toward the Vietnamese border. Along the way, they talk with their
Vietnamese captor about Hegel, Saint-Just, and the Jacobins while B-52's rattle
the earth, and the Vietnamese commander says unlikely things like: "Do you not
credit the French revolutionaries with love of liberty?"

That slip seems to be a product of Mr. Koch's sustained interest in conflicting
political visions. Langford's friends are always arguing, always laying out
positions. The leftist British reporter Trevor Griffiths hates the Americans and
looks forward to Indochina's "liberation." Dmitri Volkov, Russian-born and
French-educated, films the war alongside Langford and sees the Communists as
murderous social engineers.

Langford meanwhile rises, or sinks, into his own airtight moral world. He falls
in love. He sets up a home full of art and antiques in a native quarter of Phnom
Penh. He manages uncannily always to be at the right place at the right time,
until the end, when his timing deserts him and he makes the miscalculation that
determines his own end. When the mystery of his disappearance is finally
resolved, it has the satisfying if melancholy feel of a symphony's return to the
tonic chord. "Highways to a War" is one of those well-constructed books that
leaves no loose ends, no leftover fragments of plot.

Mr. Koch writes in a brief preface that "Highways to a War" is the first of a
pair of related novels, the second of which is to be about Langford's
great-great-grandfather, one Robert Devereau. In telling Langford's story, Mr.
Koch has shown us, just in passing, Devereau's portrait gathering dust in a
locked storeroom at the farm back in Tasmania. It will be interesting to see
what Mr. Koch does when that storeroom of the past is unlocked.


LOAD-DATE: July 19, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Christopher H. Koch. (Jerry Bauer/Viking)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              73 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 19, 1995, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

International Briefs;
Hyundai in Vietnam

SECTION: Section D;    Page 2;    Column 4;    Business/Financial Desk

LENGTH: 82 words


The Hyundai Motor Company said yesterday that it had formed a $200 million joint
venture to assemble cars in Vietnam. The venture with Vietnam's Corporation 990
Trading and Services will initially assemble 20,000 Hyundai cars a year.
Production is scheduled to begin next year, a Hyundai spokesman said. Hyundai
Motor will cover 65 percent of the venture's start-up costs, he said. The
Hyundai conglomerate of South Korea also makes ships, home electronics and
semiconductors.   (AP)

LOAD-DATE: July 19, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              74 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 19, 1995, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

French War Stories

BYLINE: By Tony Judt;     Tony Judt is author of "Past Imperfect: French
Intellectuals, 1944 to 1956."

SECTION: Section A;    Page 19;    Column 1;    Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 823 words

DATELINE: VIENNA


There are countries in Europe where almost every village holds a repressed
memory of something terrible done by one group of people to another during World
War II. In Austria, the Netherlands and elsewhere, most war crimes have been
conveniently attributed to the Germans. Nowhere has this tendency been more
evident than in France, where the Government has always drawn a careful
distinction between those who collaborated with the Nazis and everyone else.

President Jacques Chirac's speech on Sunday acknowledging the collective
responsibility of the French state for the wartime deportation of Jews is thus
startling. For the first time, a French head of state has admitted that his
country was and remains responsible for crimes committed by Frenchmen under the
Vichy regime of Marshal Petain.

French statesmen, notably the former President, Francois Mitterrand, have long
insisted on preserving a distinction between the "illegitimate" Vichy state of
wartime France and the timeless, guiltless Republic.

It was characteristic of Mr. Mitterrand's Socialist Party that it quickly
distanced itself from President Chirac's apology, saying that "the Republic"
could not be held to account for the crimes of the collaborators. In France, the
left and the right are not always where you expect to find them.

The importance of Mr. Chirac's statement lies in the scale of the crime. Some
76,000 Jews from France died in death camps. A disproportionate number were
foreign-born, people who had taken refuge from persecution elsewhere. The
Germans could never have located them without the assistance of French
bureaucrats and the police.

Mr. Chirac's speech marked the anniversary of the largest roundup, which
occurred on July 16, 1942, when 13,000 mostly non-French Jews were herded into a
Parisian sports arena before being sent to the camps. The Nazis had specifically
excluded young children from the deportation order, yet the French separated
them from their parents and transferred them to a camp near Paris. There, 4,000
babies, toddlers and older children were pushed, dragged or carried by French
officials into dark cattle cars for shipment to Auschwitz. Not one of them
survived.

Croats, Slovaks and Ukrainians have been extradited and imprisoned for crimes
against humanity, but only one Frenchman has: Paul Touvier, a Lyons police
official.

For many decades after the war, no one in France wanted to be reminded of its
treatment of the Jews. Survivors wanted only to melt back into the democratic
Republic. The Gaullists found it useful to depict Vichy and its collaborators as
the work of a handful of extremists, with most of the French silently or
actively supporting the Resistance.

Intellectuals, so prominent in postwar France, might have been expected to force
the issue. Yet people like Jean-Paul Sartre and Michel Foucault were curiously
silent. One reason was their near-obsession with Communism. While proclaiming
the need to "engage," to take a stand, two generations of intellectuals avoided
any ethical issue that could not advance or, in some cases, retard the Marxist
cause.

Vichy was dismissed as the work of a few senile Fascists. No one looked closely
at what had happened during the Occupation, perhaps because very few
intellectuals of any political stripe could claim to have had a "good" war, as
Albert Camus did. No one stood up to cry "J'accuse!" at high functionaries, as
Emile Zola did during the Dreyfus affair. When Simone de Beauvoir, Roland
Barthes and Jacques Derrida entered the public arena, it usually involved a
crisis far away -- in Madagascar, Vietnam or Cambodia. Even today, politically
engaged writers call for action in Bosnia but intervene only sporadically in
debates about the French past.

So why President Chirac, and why now? Perhaps it is because he is the first
French head of state to be young enough to bear no responsibility for wartime
events. Or because he has always been a Gaullist. He is also uninhibited by
memories of prewar France, when an obscenely anti-Semitic press, a gnawing fear
of war and the establishment of camps for refugees cleared the way for Vichy.

President Chirac has done more than face up to French history. He has laid down
an uncomfortable marker for the present. If it was a genocidal crime in 1942 to
use ethnic criteria to round up people, herd them into camps and deport them, it
is no less a crime today.

Just as Mr. Chirac was ahead of his countrymen in his apology, so he has surely
set an example for the West on Bosnia. In proposing resolute military force, he
may even rescue what remains of Western moral credibility, though the chances of
that seem slim.

It is well that Mr. Chirac has told the truth about the French past, but as
citizens we share moral responsibilities over space as well as over time. As the
Europeans are forced to confront their old ghosts, new ones prepare to take
their place.

LOAD-DATE: July 19, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              75 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 20, 1995, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

CONFLICT IN THE BALKANS: POLITICS;
Bosnia and U.S. Politics: High Stakes for Dole

BYLINE: By STEPHEN ENGELBERG

SECTION: Section A;  Page 14;  Column 3;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1152 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 19


By venturing into the shoals of Bosnia policy, Senator Bob Dole is taking a
considerable risk, one that could leave his political fortunes hostage to events
in the Balkans.

The Clinton Administration's shifting Bosnia policy makes a fat target, and Mr.
Dole took to the Senate floor this afternoon and squarely blamed Mr. Clinton for
the Western alliance's repeated failures on this issue.

The theme is one Republicans believe will resonate against Mr. Clinton in the
1996 Presidential campaign: leadership, or lack of it. "We've been waiting, and
waiting, and waiting for leadership, and so far, nothing has happened," Mr. Dole
declared.

But in proposing a specific alternative -- a bill that would require Mr. Clinton
to permit American arms sales to the Bosnian Government after the pullout of the
United Nations forces there -- Mr. Dole has put himself in a position to catch
some of the blame if things go awry.

Administration officials insist that the bill, which is supported by enough
Democrats to win passage, would almost certainly trigger the pullout of the
United Nations force from Bosnia. This would undo the Administration approach's
over the last three years, which has been to strengthen the United Nations
mission and keep it in Bosnia as long as possible. Administration officials say
they are striving mightily to avoid a United Nations pullout because the United
States has pledged to contribute 25,000 troops to assist in what could be a very
dangerous mission.

Mr. Dole tentatively agreed tonight to postpone a vote until next week.

Mr. Dole's measure, which was co-sponsored by Joseph Lieberman, Democrat of
Connecticut, gives the Bosnian Government a powerful incentive to demand that
the United Nations forces leave their country.

Sven Alkalaj, Bosnia's Ambassador to the United States, said in an interview
today that if Mr. Dole's bill survives an expected Presidential veto, his
Government would immediately ask the United Nations to leave. Mr. Alkalaj said
he hoped this would encourage dozens of other countries to join the United
States and sell arms to his Government. Many of Bosnia's Central European
neighbors have large stocks of surplus tanks and heavy weapons they could sell
if they stop complying with the United Nations embargo.

All this could leave the Bosnians in a much better position to defend
themselves, and win plaudits for Mr. Dole for ending months of impasse. But
depending on how events unfold, Mr. Dole could also find himself campaigning
next year against assertions that he precipitated a United Nations withdrawal
that brought American casualties, or a tragedy for the Bosnian Government.

For the moment, that prospect does not seem to much worry Mr. Dole's advisers,
who believe Mr. Clinton is the only American politician who can be held
responsible for the three years of Western impotence in Bosnia. Mr. Dole, they
say, is taking the moral high ground and has spelled out a policy that Americans
can understand.

Rich Bond, former chairman of the Republican National Committee, said, "It would
be pretty hard, given the situation now, for anybody to blame Bob Dole for
Bosnia.

"I don't think I've seen any military action that we've indulged ourselves in
since Vietnam that is so unpopular. Dole is deeply on the side of American
public opinion in trying to restrict our involvement."

Administration officials and military officers fear that the United Nations
departure from Bosnia could quickly degenerate into a morass of mortar shots and
hostage-taking. They worry that some or all the combatants would try to capture
the equipment of the retreating United Nations force.

Moreover, a withdrawal prompted by enactment of Mr. Dole's bill would give the
Serbs every incentive to step up their attacks on Bosnian Government forces
before the hoped-for shipments of heavy weapons could arrive.

Senator Dole acknowledged in a recent broadcast interview that the interim
period between passage of his bill and dispatch of the weapons could be "sticky"
for the Bosnian Government forces.

The bill makes no provision for air strikes that might be needed to protect the
Bosnians after the United Nations departs, leaving that issue entirely to Mr.
Clinton. It leaves vague how heavy weapons might find their way from the United
States to Bosnia, although supporters of the measure said they assume American
arms dealers would acquire Soviet-made weapons on the international market.

Some critics, including Madeleine K. Albright, the chief United States delegate
to the United Nations, contended Mr. Dole's plan would seriously undermine other
sanctions imposed by the United Nations. "If we lift unilaterally on Bosnia,
somebody else will say they can lift unilaterally on Iraq or Libya," Ms.
Albright said.

In a brief interview, Mr. Dole said this did not worry him. "We think the
embargo is illegal in the first place," he said, noting that it was imposed in
1991 on a Yugoslavia that no longer exists.

Mr. Dole casts his support for breaking the embargo as a matter of principle,
not politics. But almost every move he makes as majority leader has implications
for his Presidential ambitions.

In this case, for example, Mr. Dole chose to bring the Bosnia bill to the floor
after a week in which one of his most prized legislative initiatives, the
regulatory reform measure, foundered in the face of opposition from both
Republicans and Democrats. On Tuesday evening, after the Democrats had very
nearly passed their own regulatory bill, Mr. Dole used his prerogative as
majority leader to shelve one of his bills and bring up another.

Mr. Dole's support for breaking the arms embargo has echoes in the 1992
campaign, when Bill Clinton denounced President Bush for standing aside while
Serbian forces conquered Bosnia. Mr. Clinton's alternative was to arm the
Bosnian Government and launch air strikes if necessary against the Serbs.

Mr. Clinton abandoned that idea only weeks after he took office when the
European allies would not go along. Mr. Dole, who began proposing it during the
Bush Administration, has never changed his tune.

But unlike Mr. Clinton, who was Governor of Arkansas when he ran for President,
Mr. Dole is both a candidate and a legislator with great influence over foreign
policy.

As he has attacked Mr. Clinton's approach to Bosnia on the Senate floor day
after day, Mr. Dole seems almost to enjoy hoisting the Clinton Administration on
the petard of its abandoned Bosnia policy.

"It is indeed ironic that the Clinton Administration -- whose policy on Bosnia
needs to be checked hourly -- is on attack against those in Congress like myself
who have consistently argued for a policy that candidate Clinton advocated," Mr.
Dole said last month. "Maybe Administration officials are tired of attacking
each other in the press and have decided to take out their frustration on
Congress."


NAME: Bob Dole

LOAD-DATE: July 20, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: The Senate majority leader, Bob Dole, met with the Bosnian
Foreign Minister, Muhamed Sacirbey, center, and Representative Mack Collins.
(Stephen Crowley/The New York Times)

TYPE: News Analysis; Biography

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              76 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 21, 1995, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Diametric Views of Waco: Federal Agents as Aggressors -- and as Victims of
Outlaws

BYLINE: By TIM WEINER

SECTION: Section A;  Page 16;  Column 1;  National Desk

LENGTH: 1150 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 20


As President Clinton denounced Congressional hearings on the Branch Davidian
siege as part of an ideological "war against police," House Republicans today
used the hearings to raise the specter of the Government's making war on its own
people.

The President told a group of senior law-enforcement officials that it was
"irresponsible for people in elected positions to suggest that the police are
some sort of armed bureaucracy acting on private grudges and hidden agendas." He
said it was wrong to equate the innocent, if fatal, mistakes of Federal agents
and the moral "depravity" of the leader of the Branch Davidian sect.

On Capitol Hill, in the second day of hearings into the events that led to the
1993 standoff at the sect's compound near Waco, Tex., Republicans sought to turn
attention from the cult's leader, David Koresh, to the two failed Government
raids and to the threat posed by military officers' assistance to the Federal
agents who stormed the sect's headquarters.

The contrarian clash of words that marked the hearings' opening day on Wednesday
continued. Conservatives defended the counterculturalists. Liberals took a
law-and-order stance. Republicans and Democrats cried shame at one another for
the conduct of the hearings. The Democrats continued their accusations that the
National Rifle Association had infiltrated the Republicans' investigative staff.
Republicans called the Democrats panderers for questioning a 14-year-old girl on
Wednesday about how she was sexually abused by Mr. Koresh.

But no significant new evidence was cited as the members of the House Government
Reform and Judiciary committees questioned military officers and a five-man
panel of law-enforcement experts dubbed "the hindsight team" by some of the
lawmakers.

The panel offered opinions about what went wrong in the 1993 siege, which began
on Feb. 28 with a raid that left four agents of the Federal Bureau of Alcohol,
Tobacco and Firearms dead and ended 51 days later with an F.B.I. assault and a
fire that killed about 80 members of the sect.

One of the experts, a former senior official of the firearms agency, told the
committee that he thought the agency had pressed for an assault "for the
purposes of publicity," and that some of the agents involved in the botched raid
thought the same.

The former official, Robert Sanders, who was deputy director for enforcement and
resigned from the agency in 1984, said that at the time of the initial assault,
the A.T.F. was "very troubled," facing accusations of discrimination from black
and female agents and worried about its budget, which was to be the subject of
appropriations hearings within days. The agents in the field thought the assault
was "something forced on them by headquarters," Mr. Sanders testified.

Democrats on the committee seized on Mr. Sanders as an example of what was wrong
with the hearings.

In an interview, Representative Charles E. Schumer, Democrat of Brooklyn,
described Mr. Sanders, now a lawyer in Washington, as "a disgruntled A.T.F.
member" who had no personal knowledge of the Waco disaster, received legal
referrals from the National Rifle Association and met recently with N.R.A.
officials.

While the Republicans running the hearings want to make the actions of Federal
agents a central target of the eight-day inquiry, the Democrats have tried to
shift the focus to the rifle association's influence on the Republicans. The
Democrats have said that the N.R.A. infiltrated the Republican staff members'
ranks and tried to use the hearings as an attack on enforcement of Federal gun
laws.

President Clinton's spokesman, Michael D. McCurry, stepped up the criticism
today.

"The N.R.A. bought and paid for these hearings," he said. "The Republican
majority has ceded to this very extreme special interest group the integrity of
the United States Congress, and that's appalling."

The Republicans' focus on the military's participation in planning the initial
raid was based on facts already known from previous investigations. A Defense
Department counternarcotics task force was called in to help plan the raid
because the firearms agency asserted that the Branch Davidians were operating a
methamphetamine laboratory on their compound. No evidence of such a lab was
found.

"Since before the founding of our nation, Americans have had deeply rooted
concerns about the separation of the military from civilian affairs," said
Representative Steve Buyer, an Indiana Republican. "More than any other, the
image of Bradley fighting vehicles and M-1 tanks set against the burning Mount
Carmel compound calls into question the role of the military at Waco."

But he offered no proof that the military directly participated in the raid or
violated the law of posse comitatus, which generally bans the military from
policing American citizens. And senior military officials testified that their
help in training firearms agents and providing them with armored vehicles and
helicopters was proper.

This evening, one former and two current A.T.F. agents who participated in the
initial raid were excoriated by Republicans and testified to the divisions
within their agency and their bureaucratic overseers in the Treasury Department.

Asked why he did not call off the raid after learning that the Davidians had
found out that an assault might be imminent, Phillip Chojancki, the former chief
of the firearms agency's Houston office, said he was "never informed that we had
lost the element of surprise." Sitting next to him was Lewis Merletti, a
Treasury Department official who said the firearms agency was fully aware that
the element of surprise was lost. Next to him sat another A.T.F. agent, Chuck
Sarabyn, who called Mr. Merletti's assertion "twisted."

And William Buford, part of an A.T.F. assault team that suffered three dead and
three wounded, including himself, testified that the rebukes he was hearing
reminded him of how he felt after he came home from Vietnam: "I did a service
for my country and was being criticized for it."

Earlier, President Clinton seized on Wednesday's testimony as evidence that the
Davidians' leader, not Federal law enforcement, was the demon of the Waco
morality play.

Speaking to law-enforcement officials gathered at Blair House, across the street
from the White House, Mr. Clinton called the sect's leader "a man who was
molesting young girls and paddling children with boat oars, a man who was laying
up supplies and illegal weapons for Armageddon, who took the trust of young
children and twisted it, who told people that if they wanted to do the will of
God, they had to be willing to kill for God."

He denounced what he called the effort of the Republicans on the committee to
draw "some sort of equivalency between what the law enforcement officers tried
to do at Waco, and the kind of things that were going on in that compound."

LOAD-DATE: July 21, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: The President told law-enforcement officials yesterday that it
was "irresponsible for people in elected positions to suggest that the police
are some sort of armed bureaucracy acting on private grudges and hidden
agendas." Attending the meeting in Washington were Attorney General Janet Reno,
to the President's immediate left, and Lee Brown, who directs the drug-abuse
program, second from left. (Paul Hosefros/The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              77 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 21, 1995, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Editorial Notebook;
Don't Kill the C.E.A.

BYLINE: By MICHAEL M. WEINSTEIN

SECTION: Section A;  Page 24;  Column 1;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 587 words


The Council of Economic Advisers helped persuade President Kennedy to cut taxes
and thus spur a recovery -- a decisive case of applying the theories of John
Maynard Keynes to public policy.

The council warned President Johnson that he would ignite inflation if he
persisted in paying for the Vietnam War by borrowing rather than taxing --
advice he ignored with disastrous consequences.

The council steered President Nixon away from lavishly expensive subsidies for
supersonic air travel and President Bush away from underwriting the development
of advanced television technology that would soon have been obsolete.

The council advised President Clinton to downsize his monster health-care plan.
He rejected that counsel, and watched as health-care reform went down the drain.

By anyone's standards, the C.E.A. has dispensed more good advice than bad over
the years. Yet despite its solid record and modest size, it has now been
abolished by the House, which intends to apply the council's puny $3.5 million
budget to deficit reduction. That is a poor decision, and the Senate should
reverse it.

The council consists of three economists and an eager staff, most of whom are on
temporary loan from universities. It provides Presidents with professional
analysis of public policies that is not available anywhere else in government.
True, there are dozens of economists scattered throughout the Federal
Government. But they are for the most part advocates, representing their cabinet
secretaries or vested interests. The council has one client, the President, and
one constituency, the consumer. It is the only disinterested voice the President
hears.

The council has attracted distinguished members. James Tobin, a Nobel laureate,
served on the Kennedy council, whose staff included two more Nobelists, Robert
Solow and Kenneth Arrow. Joseph Stiglitz, on many short lists for a future
Nobel, serves now. Professional integrity has driven members to oppose their
boss when necessary. Martin Feldstein publicly attacked oversize deficits,
though he served President Reagan.

The council has also been farsighted. In the Kennedy era, apart from the general
tax cut, it designed a novel tax credit for business investment. Michael Boskin,
chairman of President Bush's council, pushed for market-based environmental
policies that provided companies with financial incentives to fight pollution.
The Bush council also pushed for auctioning the broadcast spectrum so that
taxpayers could pocket some profit. But mostly the council naysays, telling
Presidents that their latest fad, or Congress's, will backfire.

I do not come to this debate without bias. As a graduate student in the 1970's,
I was stirred by Professor Solow's descriptions of the heady 1960's, when
economists traveled from Cambridge, Mass., to preach the gospel of Keynes. A
decade later, it was obvious that economists possessed few macroeconomic
answers. But I remain committed to the proposition that professional analysis
can save the country from multiple disasters.

The G.O.P attack on the council is doubly ironic. First, the C.E.A. has usually
sided with Republicans who prefer markets to bureaucratic controls. Second, it
is the Republicans who are pushing the economist's favorite tool, cost-benefit
analysis. Senate Republicans might keep one fact in mind. If the council steers
a President away from one rotten decision -- just one -- it will have made up
for its measly annual budget in perpetuity.
   MICHAEL M. WEINSTEIN

LOAD-DATE: July 21, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              78 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 21, 1995, Friday, Late Edition - Final

On My Mind;
Bombs for Bosnia

BYLINE: By A. M. ROSENTHAL

SECTION: Section A;  Page 25;  Column 1;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 720 words


In the name of Heaven, where is the plan for peace?

Where is the document that presents the best, calmest, fairest proposals of the
West to all sides in Bosnia and promises support only to those who accept it
after decent negotiation? There is no document.

Where is the list of goals that President Clinton has presented to the American
people to explain why he is now planning to send American bombers to pound
Bosnian Serbs? There is no list.

Bombing is war. So where is the declaration that President Clinton and
Republicans once agreed should precede American involvement in war -- on what
conditions we will get in, how and when we will get out? No declaration.

President Clinton, drawn deeper into trouble by the evasions and bluffs of the
latter-day hawks in his Administration, raises his head now only to support the
heavy bombing he rejected not long ago.

The Administration knows bombing will not bring peace.The decision is being
taken desperately to avoid what would be worse -- the French demand for U.S.
helicopters to bring in more troops, known in the Pentagon as Dienbienphu West.

Bombing is supposed to save Mr. Clinton's credibility. Of all the reasons for
killing people, trying to save a politician's lost credibility is the worst,
morally and pragmatically.

Senator Robert Dole's plan is to arm the Bosnian Muslims so they can fight
longer and harder. If he is elected President, even as he campaigns, how long
will he be able to say this is all I have to offer -- more weapons to keep the
war going, with no plan to end it?

Unless Western occupation troops are sent in, one day the bombing will end. Then
the Bosnian Serbs will resume the war, exactly as did people who rose from
bombardment from the Battle of Britain to the evacuation of Saigon.

The Bosnians themselves have no real peace plans. In 1991 the Muslims and Croats
of the area of Yugoslavia known as Bosnia-Herzegovina declared the independence
of a Bosnian state, the first in history. They knew that Bosnian Serbian
Christians would fight to the death against being absorbed into a new nation
they considered Muslim-ruled. So ever since, the new Bosnian Government worked
to have the world protect its control of Bosnia.

As for the Serbs, driving Muslim women and children out of their homes is
destroying their own substantial case for self-determination. Bosnia is not the
Holocaust, as supporters of the Muslims often say. The Jews of Europe were
hardly trying to force the Germans into a new nation under their control, and
the Bosnian Serbs are not hunting down and incinerating all Muslims of the
world. Ethnic cleansing is vicious enough without the Holocaust analogy. And
unlike the specific lines of Bosnian partition, it creates a human horror from
which the West should not walk away.

Henry Kissinger spent years beating around the world under the Nixon Presidency,
trying to negotiate a Vietnam peace -- proposals, timetables, offers,
emissaries, codes, back channels. For these efforts Mr. Kissinger and Mr. Nixon
received only hatred from some of the same American opponents of the Vietnam War
who now support U.S. military intervention in Bosnia. They say nothing of the
scandal that the Clinton Administration helped kill the workable Vance-Owen
peace plan for Bosnia and has come up with nothing of its own.

The ingredients of a feasible plan are not mysterious. Bosnian Serbs would have
to agree to the return or indemnification of Muslims driven from their homes.
The partition would have to give the Serbs not the 70 percent their conquests
won for them but more than they had before the war.

But to have a prayer of acceptance by the Bosnian Serbs the plan would have to
be more than a map. It would have to give their piece of Bosnia the right to
federate with Serbia -- as the Bosnian Muslims and Croats have with Croatia. The
Bosnian Serbs might even rejoin Serbia someday.

So the West and Bosnian Muslims would have to admit they were wrong to try to
force their new Bosnia down the throats of Bosnian Serb Christians.

If admitting errors to gain peace damages the "credibility" of Western diplomats
and politicians, that seems a bearable price for ending a war that should never
have started. Can't some brave people in Washington tell that to Mr. Clinton? Or
Mr. Dole?

LOAD-DATE: July 21, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              79 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 21, 1995, Friday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

Susan Smith's Lawyer vs. the Electric Chair

BYLINE: By DAVID STOUT

SECTION: Section B; Page 6; Column 1; National Desk; Law Page

LENGTH: 1357 words


David Bruck is not at all flamboyant, and his soft voice does not always make it
to the far reaches of a courtroom. Although courteous and pleasant in one-on-one
conversation, he has only a modest talent for banter. He might not be the one to
liven up a backyard barbecue.

All he seems to care about (other than his family, anyhow) is fighting the death
penalty and saving the lives of those who face it. As the lawyer for Susan
Smith, on trial in Union, S.C., for drowning her two children, he is now on
center stage, where he seems a good deal less comfortable than, say, F. Lee
Bailey.

South Carolina is a conservative state where executions are carried out with
some regularity, so Mr. Bruck would seem to be fighting a losing cause. Yet he
has done just fine with juries and appellate courts in the state.

He has defended about 50 murder defendants in South Carolina, either before
juries or on appeal, and only three of his clients have been put to death. So
far, he has saved the lives of a score of death row inmates, by winning new
trials that resulted in life sentences or, in one case, an acquittal.

At 46, Mr. Bruck is at a stage in life where, with his abilities and
connections, he could be making himself rich. "I'm grateful I don't have to
trade the chance to do work that means something for more money," he said in a
telephone interview the other day. Describing his life in Columbia, S.C., as
comfortably middle class, he said he saw "an inversely proportional relationship
between how interesting your work is and how much you expect to get paid for it
as a lawyer."

South Carolina pays lawyers for indigent defendants in capital cases $50 an hour
for out-of-court work and $75 for courtroom time, to a total of about $25,000 --
carfare for the lawyers on O. J. Simpson's defense team. But given public
support for capital punishment, Mr. Bruck expects to be doing his kind of work
for a while.

His dedication no doubt explains why, when he visits South Carolina's death row,
in Columbia, the shouts of welcome from the condemned can be heard over the
clang of gates and the babble of voices that echo crazily off stone walls. There
he seems at ease, stopping to trade smiles and quiet words and grasping hands
that have killed and that now reach out to him between the bars.

He is genuine in his compassion, but also discriminating. He has repeatedly said
that his heart does not automatically bleed for killers. "I have the same sense
of horror and revulsion, when I see the facts and look at the photos of murder,
that anyone else does," he told The Charlotte Observer in a recent interview.

But on a visit to death row several years ago, his heart did go out to a
luckless, illiterate sharecropper's son with an I.Q. of 65 who had killed a man
with an ax after drinking whisky with him. Mr. Bruck got the killer's sentence
reduced to life in prison.

The state has said it will seek the death penalty against Susan Smith, who last
October at first said that her two children had been abducted by a carjacker,
then confessed to letting her car slide into a lake where the children, strapped
inside, drowned.

Although Mr. Bruck has kept his personal feelings about Mrs. Smith to himself,
those who know him say he surely feels pity for the 23-year-old defendant, who
had emotional problems long before the drownings and who has been described by
doctors as suicide-prone since.

His fellow lawyers say there is no mystery at all about how Mr. Bruck has been
able to save so many people on death row. He is always prepared, they say, and
he has the intellectual candlepower to match wits with anybody.

A former Columbia-area prosecutor, Dick Harpootlian, recalled how he prepared to
oppose Mr. Bruck before the United States Supreme Court a year ago.

"I worked with some of the foremost prosecution experts in the country to get
ready for that argument," Mr. Harpootlian said, "and they didn't know one-tenth
of 1 percent of what he knew."

The High Court argument, over a death sentence imposed on a man who had crushed
the head of an old woman with a toilet lid as he was burglarizing her house,
turned on what at first had seemed an incidental issue: whether the jury should
have been told before recommending sentence if the defendant, should he be
sentenced to prison, would ever be eligible for parole.

Mr. Harpootlian said Mr. Bruck had noticed that issue arising in other states
and had calculated that the Supreme Court would one day consider it. Mr. Bruck
was right. The High Court overturned the death penalty and sent the case back to
the South Carolina courts for reconsideration of the sentence.

"Bruck has that dimension of not only being able to try a case but of knowing
today what the law is going to be three or four or six years down the line," Mr.
Harpootlian said. "That makes him extraordinarily dangerous from a prosecutor's
perspective."

Mr. Harpootlian spoke out of friendship as well as respect. Mr. Bruck and his
wife, Beverly, who has a master's degree in public health, have two young
children, who went to the same day-care center as Mr. Harpootlian's. And Mr.
Bruck and Mr. Harpootlian have debated in the steam room after exercising at the
Y.M.C.A. "David is a true believer in the sanctity of life," Mr. Harpootlian
said. "He's almost Gandhiesque on that, and you have to admire him for it."

Tommy Pope, the prosecutor facing Mr. Bruck in the Smith trial, may be less
admiring. Not wanting television cameras in the courtroom, Mr. Bruck filed a
motion suggesting that Mr. Pope wanted the trial televised to advance his
political career. It was a motion Mr. Pope could not oppose, and the trial is
not being televised.

That kind of shrewdness is no surprise to Millard Farmer, an Atlanta lawyer who
represents death row inmates. "David is able to localize his intelligence," Mr.
Farmer observed. "He's chameleonlike, and I mean that as a compliment. He
understands that you argue a case in Columbia differently from how you argue one
in Union, and you argue one differently before the United States Supreme Court
than you do before the South Carolina Supreme Court."

After graduation from Harvard College, magna cum laude, Mr. Bruck came to South
Carolina early in 1972, during the Vietnam era, to join antiwar protesters near
Fort Jackson, a major Army base near Columbia. Before entering the University of
South Carolina Law School that fall, he worked as an unskilled construction
laborer and, even more incongruous for the son of a well-to-do textile
manufacturer from Montreal, took a welding job in a steel-fabricating plant,
where he became a union organizer.

In the late 1970's, he toured the country in an old Chevrolet, took another
welding job in Vancouver, British Columbia, then returned to South Carolina,
where he helped defend anti-nuclear demonstrators. Around that time, he became
interested in capital punishment. He quickly became convinced that many
defendants facing the death penalty did not get adequate legal representation,
and he saw that death row populations were made up largely of poor men, many
with dark skin.

He has said many times, in court and in legal publications, that the death
penalty is inherently wrong because it is irrevocable, because it does not deter
and because it cannot possibly be meted out fairly. Flying back to Columbia from
Washington after a Supreme Court argument several years ago, he compared the
selection of who shall live and who shall die to a fisherman's "reaching down
into a bait box" and pulling out a worm for his hook.

Mr. Bruck's friends say his prematurely gray, somewhat bookish appearance is
deceiving. They note that he is an avid canoer, and that he can play an
impressive medley of Irish tunes on the flute, when he has the time.

There is a high percentage of burnout among lawyers who defend the condemned.
Having made financial sacrifices, having watched a few of his clients die in the
electric chair, Mr. Bruck is still not consumed by what he does, but he is
dedicated to it.

"I get to do work every day that I think is important," he said. "That is a
privilege."

LOAD-DATE: August 9, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: July 27, 1995, Friday

 CORRECTION:
An article on Tuesday about the trial of Susan Smith for the murder of her two
sons, and six earlier articles on the subject, misstated provisions of South
Carolina's death penalty law. Under a change this month, if Mrs. Smith receives
a death sentence, she will be allowed to choose lethal injection or
electrocution. Electrocution is no longer the only method.

GRAPHIC: Photo: David Bruck, left, has his fair share of admirers within the
South Carolina bar, including Dick Harpootlian, right, who said: "Bruck has that
dimension of not only being able to try a case but of knowing today what the law
is going to be three or four or six years down the line. That makes him
extraordinarily dangerous from a prosecutor's perspective." (Associated Press)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              80 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 21, 1995, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Art in Review

BYLINE: By PEPE KARMEL

SECTION: Section C;  Page 23;  Column 1;  Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 363 words



'(Dis)oriented'
 Shifting Identities of Asian Women in America
 Steinbaum Krauss Gallery
 132 Greene Street
 SoHo
 Through July 29

 Henry Street Settlement
 Abrons Art Center
 466 Grand Street
 Lower East Side
 Through July 28

In the catalogue of this exhibition, the curator Margo Machida recounts the life
stories of the 16 artists (including two pairs of collaborators). Some are
immigrants from Japan, Korea, Vietnam, China, India and the Philippines; others
are second- or third-generation Americans. American life seems to have liberated
many of the artists from the restricted roles assigned women in Asian societies,
while imposing on them the colonialist stereotype of the Asian woman as an
exotic, submissive handmaiden.

The problem is giving this complex personal and historical experience satisfying
artistic form. The centerpiece of Genara Banzon's installation at the Henry
Street Settlement is the arresting image of a white cross superimposed on the
black contour of a woman's body, painted onto a bed -- the image of a Filipino
mail-order bride. Unfortunately, the surrounding wall display of photographs and
agricultural products, accompanied by two mannequins, adds little or nothing to
the painted bed. A large photo-plus-text piece by Monica Chau and Daniel Mirer,
at Steinbaum Krauss, retells some amazingly dumb ethnic jokes, but its artistic
impact is pretty close to zero.

The more accomplished artists here create striking forms that slowly yield up
their historical content. At Steinbaum Krauss, photographic self-portraits by
the collaborators Donna Han and Saiman Li explore the boundaries of sexual and
ethnic identity with remarkable elegance. Lynne Yamamoto's Surrealist
constructions and Tomie Arai's paper and bamboo collages, also at Steinbaum
Krauss, have been seen in recent exhibitions.  Ritsko Uchida's "Portrait," at
the Henry Street Settlement, displays a series of food grains encased in gilt,
oval picture frames. They look like monochrome, all-over abstractions; it's hard
to know what to make of the fact that white rice is at the center, surrounded by
darker, more exotic varieties.   PEPE KARMEL

LOAD-DATE: July 21, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              81 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 22, 1995, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Observer;
Spreading The Rubble

BYLINE: By RUSSELL BAKER

SECTION: Section 1;   Page 19;   Column 1;   Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 706 words


The people ruined so far by the Simpson trial must be numbered in battalions. I
saw one the other day while passing the kitchen TV set. He was a tow-truck
driver. He'd had the bad luck to be working when the cops ordered the famous
white Bronco towed. He had the bad judgment to pocket some receipts left in the
Bronco, apparently thinking they might become valuable collector's items. He
failed to ponder that a celebrity case swarming with the nightmare hordes of
justice would leave no receipt unpursued, so was caught. He had worked many
years for that towing company, he said. And now, fired.

Another poor devil ruined for justice. How many others? Hardly a witness has
escaped with character unsmeared, professional reputation untattered or dignity
undestroyed. This spectacle has solidified my determination, should I ever be
called as a witness in any trial, to skip the country and take up residence in
Brazil.

The ruining of people is one of the grimmer aspects of these popular show
trials, but even grimmer is the souring of the national spirit.

The depth of public cynicism about the Simpson case is illustrated in surveys
indicating that whether people think Simpson innocent or guilty depends largely
on their race. Great, isn't it? Whatever the result of this circus, the
country's already bad racial problem can only be made worse.

Convict Simpson and black America will be reassured that he is the victim of
white racism. Find him not guilty and white America will be reassured that a
black man tried by a jury on which blacks are represented can get away with
murder.

As if California v. Simpson weren't poison enough, the Republicans in Congress
have finally opened two committee investigations that amount to free-swinging
show trials of President Clinton.

One is aimed at cutting up the President by pursuing the so-called Whitewater
affair. The other seeks to solidify the Republican grip on the gun lobby by
exploiting the Waco disaster to amplify accusations that the F.B.I. and the
Treasury's Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms agents are fascistic forces of
government oppression.

Both these shows are part of the long Republican campaign to undo the election
of 1992. The Republican line from this Administration's very beginning has been
not just that Bill Clinton simply won't do, but also that he was not justly
entitled to the White House.

Ross Perot's voters, by denying a majority to both Democrat and Republican,
encouraged the G.O.P. to question the legitimacy of Clinton's Presidency. "No
mandate" is the usual way of attacking Presidents without majorities, and this
is the line Republicans have taken from the start.

The refusal of the losing party to accept a Presidential election result long
enough to grant the country a little relief from the poisons of politics is
unusual, but this time the Republicans never relented.

We have had an endless Presidential campaign for two years past, with another
year and a half to look forward to. The Whitewater business has been around
almost as long as the charges that the President's taste in women ran to bimbos
and that he was an unmanly draft-dodger in the Vietnam years.

Notice I avoid explaining what "the Whitewater business" is about. This is
because, after saying it involved a losing real-estate investment by the
Clintons before he became President, I find the thing too incomprehensible to
summarize in fewer than 5,000 words.

This of course is the beauty part from a Republican viewpoint. If something is
inexplicable except to lawyers, a politician commanding a noisy newsmaker
committee with plenty of lawyers to make it even more confusing can create the
impression that something very sinister indeed went on.

In short, more sourness ahead. Prepare to feel even more depressed about the
state of the country. Keeping you in sour spirits is thought to be good politics
these days.

The Waco affair also aims at Mr. Clinton's eventual overthrow by highlighting
his Justice Department's apparently bad management of the misbegotten F.B.I.
raid that killed so many. The dark side of this show, however, may be the
spectacle of Republicans encouraging the paranoidal militias' hatred of Federal
law enforcers.

LOAD-DATE: July 22, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              82 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 23, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

BEST SELLERS: July 23, 1995

SECTION: Section 7; Page 18; Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1471 words



          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Fiction

 1      1   2   BEACH MUSIC, by Pat Conroy. (Talese/Doubleday, $27.50.) An
                American living in Rome returns to South Carolina and tries to
                cope with his troubled past.

 2      2   4   ROSE MADDER, by Stephen King. (Viking, $25.95.) Fleeing an
                abusive husband, a woman seeks happiness in a strange city by
                creating her own myth.

 3      3  154  THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner,
                $17.95.) A photographer and a farmer's lonely wife in Iowa.

 4      4  13   THE RAINMAKER, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $25.95.) A young
                man barely out of law school tries to expose a corporation's
                multibillion-dollar scam.

 5      6   4   THE WITNESS, by Sandra Brown. (Warner, $21.95.) A public
                defender who seems happy in her work and her marriage is
                plunged into a morass of bigotry and hate.

 6      5  73   THE CELESTINE PROPHECY, by James Redfield. (Warner, $17.95.) An
                ancient manuscript, found in Peru, provides insights into
                achieving a fulfilling life.

 7      7   8   THE APOCALYPSE WATCH, by Robert Ludlum. (Bantam, $24.95.)
                Tracking a neo-Nazi movement with designs on American and
                European officials.

 8*     8  11   LET ME CALL YOU SWEETHEART, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Simon &
                Schuster, $24.) An unusual murder case haunts a prosecutor's
                career and her private life.

 9      9   2   DISNEY'S POCAHONTAS. (Mouse Works, $6.98.) The romance of an
                American Indian princess and an Englishman, told in words and
                pictures.

 10    10  57   POLITICALLY CORRECT BEDTIME STORIES, by James Finn Garner.
                (Macmillan, $8.95.) Classic tales respun to avoid offending
                current sensibilities.

 11    11  13   LADDER OF YEARS, by Anne Tyler. (Knopf, $24.) At 40, a woman
                leaves her physician husband and children to start a new life
                in a strange town.

 12    12  10   ONCE UPON A MORE ENLIGHTENED TIME, by James Finn Garner.
                (Macmillan, $9.95.) Eight more "politically correct bedtime
                stories."

 13    13   2   AFTER DARK, by Phillip Margolin. (Doubleday, $23.95.) A
                thriller about murder and corruption in an Oregon court.

 14    14   4   REDEMPTION, by Leon Uris. (HarperCollins, $25.) In a sequel to
                "Trinity," the Larkin family continues to fight for Irish
                independence.

 15    15   7   STRANGE HIGHWAYS, by Dean Koontz. (Tartikoff/Warner, $23.95.) A
                collection of suspense tales, including novels, novellas and
                short stories.

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Nonfiction

 1      9   2   TO RENEW AMERICA, by Newt Gingrich. (HarperCollins, $24.) The
                Speaker of the House describes his solutions to the country's
                problems.

 2      1   5   NEW PASSAGES, by Gail Sheehy. (Random House, $25.) How changing
                social conditions and longer life expectancies are affecting
                our lives.

 3      5  72   MIDNIGHT IN THE GARDEN OF GOOD AND EVIL, by John Berendt.
                (Random House, $23.) The mysterious death of a young man in
                Savannah, Ga.

 4      3   5   A GOOD WALK SPOILED, by John Feinstein. (Little, Brown,
                $23.95.) A sportswriter reports on the P.G.A. Tour in 1993 and
                1994.

 5      2   8   SPONTANEOUS HEALING, by Andrew Weil. (Knopf, $23.) A physician
                explains the ways in which the body heals itself.

 6      6   8   DAVE BARRY'S COMPLETE GUIDE TO GUYS, by Dave Barry. (Random
                House, $21.) A humorist describes the strange ways of a species
                of males called "guys."

 7      7  30   SISTERS. Essays by Carol Saline. Photographs by Sharon J.
                Wohlmuth. (Running Press, $27.50.) The relationships of 36 sets
                of sisters.

 8      4  41   THE HOT ZONE, by Richard Preston. (Random House, $23.) The
                discovery of the deadly Ebola virus in Virginia and the efforts
                to keep it from spreading.

 9      8  23   THE DEATH OF COMMON SENSE, by Philip K. Howard. (Random House,
                $18.) How governmental rules and regulations are fettering the
                lives of all Americans.

 10    13  83   THE BOOK OF VIRTUES, by William J. Bennett. (Simon & Schuster,
                $30.) Moral stories adapted from the Greeks, the Bible,
                folklore and elsewhere.

 11    10   2   WHEN ELEPHANTS WEEP, by Jeffrey Moussaieff Masson and Susan
                McCarthy. (Delacorte, $23.95.) The emotional lives of animals.

 12    15  14   FROM BEGINNING TO END, by Robert Fulghum. (Villard, $20.) The
                rituals we practice and the spiritual journeys we take, from
                childhood to old age.

 13    12   7   KATO KAELIN, by Marc Eliot. (Harper Paperbacks, $20.) A friend
                of O.J. Simpson's on events surrounding the murders of Nicole
                Simpson and Ron Goldman.

 14*   11   6   SLEEPING AT THE STARLITE MOTEL, by Bailey White.
                (Addison-Wesley, $20.) A Georgia schoolteacher tells about her
                adventures while traveling and at home.

 15*       12   IN RETROSPECT, by Robert S. McNamara with Brian VanDeMark.
                (Times Books/Random House, $27.50.) The author recalls his role
                in the Vietnam War.

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous

 1      1  113  MEN ARE FROM MARS, WOMEN ARE FROM VENUS, by John Gray.
                (HarperCollins, $23.) Communicating.

 2      2  18   THE SEVEN SPIRITUAL LAWS OF SUCCESS, by Deepak Chopra.
                (Amber-Allen/New World Library, $14.) How to "generate wealth
                in all its forms."

 3      3  10   HOW TO ARGUE AND WIN EVERY TIME, by Gerry Spence. (St.
                Martin's, $22.95.) A lawyer describes ways to win arguments at
                home and at work.

 4      4  10   MARS AND VENUS IN THE BEDROOM, by John Gray. (HarperCollins,
                $22.) Maintaining passion.


Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending July 8, at 3,050 bookstores
plus wholesalers serving 28,000 other retailers (gift shops, department stores,
newsstands, supermarkets), statistically weighted to represent sales in all such
outlets nationwide. An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely
distinguishable from those of the book above.
And Bear in Mind
(Editor's Choices of other recent books of particular interest)

COLD SNAP: Stories, by Thom Jones. (Little, Brown, $19.95.) A collection that
turns a merciless, ironic gaze on the organic trap called life, in which
spiritual beings -- humans -- are forever in jeopardy of mere chemical accidents
or biological insults.

THE ENGINE OF REASON, THE SEAT OF THE SOUL: A Philosophical Journey Into the
Brain, by Paul M. Churchland. (Bradford/MIT, $29.95.) A philosopher's argument,
clear, witty and scientifically up-to-date, that all of human mental life,
however subjective it feels, is reducible to material activity taking place in
the brain.

FIREBRAND: The Life of Horace Liveright, by Tom Dardis. (Random House, $27.50.)
A brisk, concise, unpedantic biography of the salesman turned publisher who
created the modern style of aggressive book promotion and advertising.

JOHN SLOAN: Painter and Rebel, by John Loughery. (John Macrae/Holt, $37.50.) A
thoughtful, absorbing life of an illustrious member of "The Eight," artists who
rebelled against the stodgy academic standards of American art at the beginning
of this century.

THE LIARS' CLUB: A Memoir, by Mary Karr. (Viking, $22.95.) A haunting memoir of
growing up in East Texas while trying to figure one's parents out, especially a
hugely enigmatic mother who says little, reads Camus and Sartre and tries to
throw herself from cars while drunk.

THE LOVE LETTER, by Cathleen Schine. (Houghton Mifflin, $19.95.) Helen is 42,
capable and loves Edith Wharton. Johnny is 20, acne-spotted and -- like,
excellent! -- a big Tom Robbins fan. In this comic novel they fall in love.

MOVING VIOLATIONS: War Zones, Wheelchairs, and Declarations of Independence, by
John Hockenberry. (Hyperion, $24.95.) Swaggering in a wheelchair isn't easy, but
this candidly aggressive National Public Radio correspondent is up to the job
(or any other).

THE NEXT AMERICAN NATION: The New Nationalism and the Fourth American
Revolution, by Michael Lind. (Free Press, $25.) An intelligent, industrious, not
very cheerful look at possible futures. Balkanization through identity politics?
Stratification, Brazilian style?

THE PRICE OF A CHILD, by Lorene Cary. (Knopf, $23.) A sensual, funny first novel
that transposes to pre-Civil War Philadelphia the theme of the author's 1991
memoir, "Black Ice": the duty of an escapee toward the oppressed she leaves
behind.

SECRET LIFE: An Autobiography, by Michael Ryan. (Pantheon, $25.) The biggest
secret was Mr. Ryan's sex addiction, from which he says he is recovering; this
disturbing, amazingly risky work of self-exposure by an accomplished poet is a
portrait of the artist as a young misfit.

THERAPY, by David Lodge. (Viking, $22.95.) An exceedingly funny novel (the
author's 10th) of midlife crisis, whose 58-year-old hero, Tubby, is an awfully
nice guy but unhappy in a vague way that none of his many therapies seem to
help.

LOAD-DATE: July 23, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              83 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 23, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THIS WEEK;
Elephant, Ho!

SECTION: Section 2;   Page 23;   Column 1;   Arts and Leisure Desk

LOAD-DATE: July 23, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Ray Liotta, left, Danny Glover and Dinh Thein Le star in
"Operation Dumbo Drop," a comedy set in Vietnam in 1968 and directed by Simon
Wincer. The film, about returning an elephant to a remote Montagnard village,
opens on Friday. (Buena Vista Pictures)

TYPE: Caption

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              84 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 23, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

TRAVEL ADVISORY: MALL;
T-Shirts Don't Count

SECTION: Section 5;   Page 3;   Column 4;   Travel Desk

LENGTH: 123 words


Anyone looking for a tacky T-shirt on his next trip to Washington will have to
shop some place other than the Mall.
 The long strip of parkland between the Capitol and the Washington Monument was
cleared of most T-shirt vendors on July 2 when a Federal judge ruled that the
only items that may be sold there are printed materials -- books, pamphlets,
bumper stickers and the like -- pertaining to a political cause.

Sandra Alley, a National Park Service spokeswoman, said that the Mall was
starting to look like -- well, a mall. But eight groups, including the Friends
of the Vietnam Veterans Memorial and the Hare Krishnas, can keep selling
T-shirts pending rulings on two lawsuits against the Park Service over the Mall
ban.

LOAD-DATE: July 23, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              85 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 23, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

PEOPLE;
Vietnam to New Jersey: A Family's 20-Year Quest

BYLINE: By KAREN DeMASTERS

SECTION: Section 13NJ;   Page 8;   Column 3;   New Jersey Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 679 words

DATELINE: HAWORTH


It has been 30 years since D. Jacqueline Lee left South Vietnam with her new
husband, a Korean businessman. They moved to Hong Kong, then Switzerland, then
Korea, and finally this affluent town in northern Bergen County, where they
brought up two children.

Back home in Vietnam, of course, everything was changing rapidly and violently.
Mrs. Lee, who is now in her 50's, did not know whether her family -- her father,
who had been leader of the opposition in the National Assembly of South Vietnam;
her stepmother, sister and four brothers -- were dead or alive. And so for
years, she has enlisted every politician and human rights group she could collar
to help find them and get them out.

Now, just as the Clinton Administration has decided to extend full recognition
to Vietnam, the final chapter in the family's journey to freedom is about to be
written. Mrs. Lee's 46-year-old brother Tran Vong Quoc -- in and out of
Vietnamese jails as a political prisoner since 1975 -- has received a passport
with the help of Senator Frank R. Lautenberg. If all goes well, he will join
Mrs. Lee and their sister, Lananh Ngo of Cherry Hill, by the end of the year.

After the fall of Saigon, the four brothers and sister left in Vietnam had no
intention of fleeing.

"We had not done anything wrong," Mrs.  Ngo (pronounced no) said in an
interview. "We thought we had nothing to fear." But the authorities imprisoned
her husband, her brothers and her father and confiscated their property. Their
father, Tran Van Tuyen, died in a "re-education camp" in 1976.

Mrs. Ngo left Vietnam in 1979 with her husband and their four children, who were
then 4 to 9 years old, in a 60-foot-long fishing boat with more than 300 other
people. After four days and five nights they landed on a beach in Malaysia.

That was their home for two months while they pleaded with the Red Cross and
other relief agencies to get them out. With her sister working on their behalf,
Mrs. Ngo and her family made it to the United States, staying for a time in a
Baptist church in Bergen County before moving to Cherry Hill, where her husband
had found work as an electrical engineer. Over the years, three of the brothers
and their stepmother also escaped, to the United States and France.

Mrs. Lee found work in New York City and took up the life of a commuter from
North Jersey. Her children went on to college and law school, and now both are
lawyers in New York. It was a typical life -- interrupted by press conferences
and petitions to foreign governments to try to get the rest of her family out of
Vietnam.

"I could have lived anywhere -- Europe or the United States. You do whatever you
have to to survive," she said in an interview last week. "But the United States
is still the best place to settle down. You find your way, but even to this day,
I still find little things I have to adjust to."

Still, both Mrs. Lee and her sister said they found nothing but generosity and
kindness in New Jersey when they needed it. And as the children of Tran Van
Tuyen, they had learned when they were young to adapt to whatever life threw at
them.

Mr. Tuyen (pronounced TOO-yin) was always a dissident, often under dangerous
circumstances. A teacher and lawyer, he fought for Vietnam's independence
against the French in the 1940's and 50's. Then he fought the Communists. Even
within the South Vietnamese Government, he led the opposition party in the
National Assembly.

"One minute I was treated like a princess," Mrs. Lee remembered. "The next thing
I knew we were in a concentration camp, watching tigers walk by our hut. You may
have everything today and nothing tomorrow."

Her sister added: "People here don't understand what it can be like. If I wanted
to go see my brother who lived five miles away, I had to fill out papers for
permission." And when she returned, she said, she had to report to the
authorities.

When she arrived in New Jersey, Mrs. Ngo went on softly, "I would go outside at
midnight and there would be people still out." And tears of gratitude would run
down her face.

LOAD-DATE: July 23, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: D. Jacqueline Lee of Haworth carried on a one-woman campaign to
free close relatives from Vietnam. Her brother, Tran Vong Quoc, is to be
released from prison this year. (Julio A. Ibarra Jr. for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              86 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 23, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

ON THE TOWNS

SECTION: Section 13NJ;   Page 11;   Column 1;   New Jersey Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 3462 words



MUSIC

BRIDGETON'S RIVERFRONT In a series of free Sunday night concerts, the Brown
Street Chowder Society performs today at 7 P.M. Country Blue plays next Sunday.
Routes 49 and 77 in Bridgeton. (609) 451-9208.

COUNT BASIE THEATER The Metro Lyric Opera of New Jersey presents "La Boheme."
Saturday at 8:15 P.M. Tickets: $15-$35. 99 Monmouth Street, Red Bank. (908)
531-2378.

DUKE ISLAND PARK, BRIDGEWATER The Somerset County Park Commission continues its
free summer concert series with Johnny Maestro and the Brooklyn Bridge. Today at
7 P.M. (908) 722-1200, extension 221.

GARDEN STATE ARTS CENTER Queensryche with Type O Negative. Tomorrow at 8 P.M.
Tickets: $20-$37.50. REO Speedwagon, Pat Benatar and Fleetwood Mac. Thursday at
8 P.M. Tickets: $18-$38.50. Clint Black with Faith Hill and John Berry. Friday
at 8 P.M. Tickets: $20-$38.50. Peter, Paul and Mary. Saturday at 8 P.M. Tickets:
$18-$32.50. Exit 116 on the Garden State Parkway, Holmdel. (908) 442-9200.

EAST ORANGE CONCERT SERIES "Jazz at the Plaza," with the River Rats. Tuesday at
6 P.M. Free. East Orange High School Annex, North Walnut Street, East Orange.
(201) 266-5147.

FAIR LAWN SUMMER MUSIC FESTIVAL The Sunday evening concerts continue. The
Knights of Pythias sponsors an international dance program with community
dancing directed by Harold Lieberman. Today at 8:30 P.M. The Philharmonic
Symphony Orchestra plays next week. Free, but bring your own chairs. Memorial
Park and Berdan Avenue, Fair Lawn. (201) 796-6746.

FLOOD'S HILL, MEADOWLAND PARK Arts in the Park presents the Nields. Wednesday at
7:30 P.M. Free. Ridgewood Road and Meadowbrook Lane, South Orange. (201)
378-7754.

GREAT AUDITORIUM, OCEAN GROVE The Summer Stars Music Festival concludes with
Philip Smith, principal trumpeter of the New York Philharmonic, and Gordorn
Turk, organist. Thursday at at 8 P.M. Tickets: $10. The Ocean Grove Summer
Concert Series continues with Frankie Valli and the Four Seasons. Saturday at 8
P.M. Tickets: $20-$25. Pilgrim Pathway, Ocean Grove.
(908) 775-0035.

HART ST. PARK, RAHWAY The Department of Recreation of Rahway presents the Ebony
Brass Quintet. Tuesday at 7:30 P.M. Free. Hart Street, Rahway. (908) 827-2044.

KASSCHAU MEMORIAL SHELL The free summer concerts continue with the Irine Fokine
Ballet Company. Tuesday at 8:30 P.M. The Ridgewood Village Band, conducted by
Roger Guccione. Thursday at 8 P.M. Veterans Field on North Maple Avenue,
Ridgewood. (201) 670-3924.

MIDDLESEX COUNTY CONCERTS Danny Mecca Dixieland Band. Today at 3 P.M. Free.
Johnson Park, River Road in Piscataway. Ed Szymborski and Just Us, and John
Kulpa and the Garden State Brass Quintet. Today at 6 P.M. Warren Park, Florida
Grove Road in Woodbridge. Chris Pedersen and the Garden State Symphonic Band.
Today at 7 P.M. Spring Lake Park, Maple Park and South Plainfield. Pete Korey
and the Big Band Sound. Wednesday at 2 P.M. All performances are free. (908)
745-3936.

NEWARK MUSEUM The "Noontime Jazz in the Garden" series continues with the Eli
Yamin Trio. Thursday at 12:30 P.M. Free. Through Aug. 10. Dreyfuss Memorial
Garden, 49 Washington Street, Newark. (201) 596-6550.

NEW JERSEY SYMPHONY ORCHESTRA Zdenek Macal, artistic director and conductor,
leads the orchestra in the Amadeus Festival, a new summer series. Today at 7
P.M. at Temple B'nai Jeshurun in Short Hills. Tickets: $15-$35. (201) 624-8203
or 800-ALLEGRO.

PAPER MILL PLAYHOUSE The summer concert series concludes with the Preservation
Hall Jazz Band of New Orleans. Tuesday at 8 P.M. Tickets: $25 and $30. Brookside
Drive, Millburn. (201) 379-3636,
extension 2644.

RIVERSIDE GARDENS PARK, RED BANK Comcast Cablevision and the Borough of Red Bank
continue their series of free Thursday outdoor jazz concerts with Jim Josselyn.
The Jazz Lobsters perform next week. Thursday at 7:30 P.M. West Front Street in
downtown Red Bank. (908) 851-8849.

RUTGERS ARTS CENTER The Rutgers Summerfest concludes this week. Larry Ridley and
the Jazz Legacy Ensemble. Today at 2 P.M. Tickets: $16. The Summerfest Chamber
Players. Tuesday and Wednesday at 8 P.M. Tickets: $16. The Billy Taylor Trio.
Thursday at 8 P.M. Tickets: $22. William Bolcom and Joan Morris. Friday at 8
P.M. Tickets: $22. The Rutgers Festival Orchestra, conducted by Carl St. Clair.
Saturday at 8 P.M. Tickets: $22. George Street at Route 18, New
Brunswick. (908) 932-7511.

WATCHUNG ARTS CENTER The jazz series continues with a performance by Ken
Peplowski, Dan Barrett, Howard Alden and Frank Tate featuring freewheeling jazz
from traditional to swing. Today at 2 P.M. Tickets: $10. 18 Stirling Road,
Watchung.
(908) 753-0190.

THEATER

BICKFORD THEATER, MORRIS MUSEUM In "Love Letters," a relationship is revealed
through a lifetime of correspondence. Today at 2 P.M. 6 Normandy Heights Road,
Morristown. (201) 538-8069.

BLACK RIVER PLAYHOUSE The Chester Theater Group presents "Nunsense II: The
Second Coming," by Dan Goggin. Friday and Saturday at 8 P.M. Through Aug. 5.
Tickets: $15. Grove Street, Chester. (908) 879-7304.

CAPE MAY WELCOME CENTER The Cape May Stage presents "Last of the Red Hot
Lovers," by Neil Simon. Tuesday through Saturday at 8:30 P.M. Through Aug. 26.
Tickets: $15, or $12 for students and the elderly. 405 Lafayette Street, Cape
May. (609) 884-1341.

EAST LYNNE COMPANY "A Counterfeit Presentment." Today at 3 P.M. The Meadowlands
Center for the Arts, Rutherford. Also, Wednesday through Saturday at 8:30 P.M.
at Lyle Hall of the First Methodist Church, Cape May. Through Aug. 5. Tickets:
$14, or $12 for the elderly. (609) 884-6900.

FOUNDATION THEATER "Sleuth," by Anthony Shaffer. Wednesday and Thursday at 2 and
8 P.M., Friday and Saturday at 8 P.M. and Sunday at 2 PM. Through Aug. 6.
Tickets: $15, or $13 for students and the elderly. Burlington County College,
Route 530, Pemberton. (609) 894-2138.

GUGGENHEIM SUMMER THEATER "Light Up the Sky," by Moss Hart. Today at 7:30 P.M.
Tickets: $17, or $15 for students and the elderly. Monmouth University, West
Long Branch. (908) 571-3475.

HUNTERDON COUNTY COURTHOUSE Century Productions presents "Lindbergh and
Hauptmann: The Trial of the Century." Friday and Saturday at 8 P.M. and Sunday
at 2 P.M. Through Aug. 13. Tickets: $17. Main Street, Flemington. (908)
782-2610.

MAURICE LEVIN THEATER "Milk and Honey," a musical comedy. Monday and Tuesday at
8 P.M., Wednesday at 2 and 8 P.M. and Thursday at 8 P.M. Tickets: $15, or $12
for the elderly. Jewish Community Center of Metropolitan New Jersey, 760
Northfield Avenue, West Orange. (201) 736-3200, extension 253.

NEW JERSEY SHAKESPEARE FESTIVAL "The Country Wife," by William Wycherley;
directed by Dylan Baker. Wednesday at 2 and 8 P.M., Thursday and Friday at 8
P.M, Saturday at 2 and 8 P.M. and next Sunday at 2 and 7 P.M. Through Aug. 12.
Tickets: $16 to $30. Bowne Theater, Drew University, 36 Madison Avenue, Madison.
Also, "Macbeth," in a nontraditional interpretation. Through Saturday. Tuesday
through Friday at 8:15 P.M. and Saturday at 2:30 and 8:15 P.M. Tickets: $15.
Shakespeare Festival's Other Stage, 33 Green Village Road, Madison. (201)
408-5600.

PAPER MILL PLAYHOUSE "The Secret Garden," a musical by Marsha Norman and Lucy
Simon, based on the novel by Frances Hodgson Burnett. Today at 3 and 8 P.M.
Tickets: $29 to $44. Brookside Drive, Millburn. (201) 376-4343.

RAMAPO COLLEGE The summer season of Shakespeare in the Garden continues with
"Romeo and Juliet." Today, Saturday and next Sunday at 6 P.M. Free, but bring
your own chairs or blankets. 505 Ramapo Valley Road, Mahwah. (201) 529-7368.

RITZ THEATER "Oliver!," a musical. Friday and Saturday at 8 P.M and Sunday at 2
P.M. Through Aug. 5. Tickets: $12 and $14. 915 White Horse Pike, Oaklyn. (609)
858-5230.

SOMERSET VALLEY PLAYHOUSE "You Can't Take It With You," by Moss Hart and George
S. Kaufman; directed by Richard Dobrowolski. Today at 7 P.M., Friday and
Saturday at 8:30 P.M. and next Sunday at 7 P.M. Tickets: $10; $12 on Saturdays.
Route 514 and Amwell Road, Hillsborough. (908) 369-7469.

SUMMERFUN THEATER "Oleanna," by David Mamet; directed by Rebecca Strum. Tuesday
and Wednesday at 8 P.M. Thursday at 2 and 8 P.M. and Friday and Saturday at 8
P.M. $7. Weiss Arts Center, Lloyd Road off Bloomfield Avenue, Montclair. (201)
256-0576.

THEATERFEST "A Chorus Line." Today at 3 P.M., Tuesday at 8 P.M., Wednesday at 2
and 8 P.M., Thursday, Friday and Saturday at 8 P.M. and next Sunday at 3 P.M.
Tickets: $23 and $25, or $12.50 for the elderly. Montclair State University,
Valley Road and Normal Avenue, Upper Montclair. (201) 655-5112.

WASHINGTON CROSSING STATE PARK The Open Air Theater series continues with
"Nunsense." Thursday, Friday and Saturday at 8:30 P.M. Tickets: $6.50 and $7.50.
Hopewell Township, Mercer County. (609) 737-1826.

MUSEUMS AND GALLERIES

ARTISTS SHOWCASE "Angels and Guardians in Metal: Garden Sculpture and Other
Decorative Works," by R. C. Thomas and Edward Casagrande. "Flowers of Summer:
Watercolors and Oils," by Ida Butterfield, Cathy Lang and Barbara Przytuska.
Through Aug. 27. Wednesday through Friday, noon to 6 P.M., Saturday 10 A.M. to 6
P.M. and Sunday, 11:30 a.m. to 5 P.M. 10 Budd Avenue, Chester. (908) 879-9552.

ART MUSEUM, PRINCETON UNIVERSITY "Collaborative Landscape Photographs by Laura
McPhee, Class of 1980, and Virginia Beahan," an exhibition of 20 color
photographs. Through Aug. 20. Free. Tuesday through Saturday, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.,
and Sunday, 1 to 5 P.M. Princeton. (609) 258-3788.

BERGEN MUSEUM OF ART AND SCIENCE "Edward Walsh Sculpture," nine abstract and
traditional sculptures created from stainless steel, granite and bronze. Through
tomorrow. "John Schettino: Drawings and Paintings," through next Sunday.
"Photographic Drawings" by David Horton. Through next Sunday. Tuesday through
Saturday, 9:30 A.M. to 4:30 P.M.; Sunday, 1 to 5 P.M. Suggested admission:
adults, $2.50; children, $1. 327 East Ridgewood Avenue, Paramus. (201) 265-1248.


BERLEX LABORATORIES GALLERY "Moments in Time," original photographs by Janet
Engeman and Dwight Hiscano. Through Aug. 10. Monday and Friday, 9 A.M. to 5
P.M.; Tuesday through Thursday, 9 A.M. to 6 P.M., and Saturday, 9:30 to 5 P.M.
300 Fairfield Road, Wayne. (201) 540-1195.

BLACKWELL STREET CENTER FOR THE ARTS "Summer Daze," an exhibition of works by
all members of the center. Through Aug. 20. Thursday through Sunday, noon to 4
P.M. 32-34 West Blackwell Street, Dover.
(201) 328-9628.

EVERHART GALLERY "Summer Group Show" with architectural renderings by Lauren V.
Walling and photographs by Bill Vandever. Though Aug. 30. Tuesday through
Saturday, 11 A.M. to 6 P.M. 117 South Maple Avenue, Basking Ridge. (908)
221-9007.

EXTENSION GALLERY "Sadness or Euphoria" features the drawings of Richard James
Runas. Through Aug. 3. Monday through Thursday, 10 A.M. to 4 P.M. 60 Ward Avenue
Extension, Mercerville. (609) 890-7777.

HUNTERDON ART CENTER "NYC
Underground," 17 oil canvas paintings of New York City's subway system and
tunnels by
Alexandra Dell'amore. Through Aug. 27.
Tuesday through Sunday, 11 A.M. to 5 P.M.
7 Lower Center Street, Clinton.
(908) 735-8415.

JERSEY CITY MUSEUM "Albizu Lives," a
visual commemoration. Through Sept. 16.
"The Nation Is Its People: Body and Soul of Lolita Lebron." Through Aug. 18.
"Joan Fine: Wall Reliefs." Through Aug. 18. Tuesday, Thursday, Friday, 10:30
A.M. to 5 P.M. and Wednesday, 10:30 A.M. to 8 P.M. 472 Jersey Avenue, Jersey
City. (201) 547-4514.

LONG BEACH ISLAND FOUNDATION OF ARTS AND SCIENCE "Artists Alliance," an
exhibition and art sale, including paintings, sculptures and mixed media by
Michigan artists. Starts today. Monday through Saturday, 9 A.M. to 5 P.M. and
Sunday, noon to 4 P.M. Free. 120 Long Beach Boulevard, Loveladies. (609)
494-3169.

MEADOWLANDS CENTER FOR THE ARTS "Images, Dreams, Words and Marks," a solo show
of paintings and drawings by Lisa Pressman. Through Aug. 4. Monday through
Friday, 9 A.M. to 6 P.M., and Saturday and Sunday, 10 A.M. to 6 P.M. 1 Williams
Plaza, Rutherford. (201) 939-6969.

MONMOUTH MUSEUM "Artists With Physical Disabilities" includes paintings,
photography, printmaking and sculpture. Through Aug. 17. Tuesday through
Saturday, 10 A.M. to 4:30 P.M., and Sunday, 1 to 5 P.M. Brookdale Community
College campus, Lincroft.
(908) 747-2266.

MONTCLAIR ART MUSEUM "Still Life Works From the Collection" offers 13 paintings
by American artists ranging in style from 19th-century realism to 20th-century
modernism. Through September. "Elizabeth Berdann," a self-titled installation
featuring portraits of elderly women in a nursing home. Through Oct. 1.
"Affinities and Influences: Native American Art and American Modernism," through
Oct. 1. Tuesday, Wednesday, Friday and Saturday, 11 A.M. to 5 P.M.; Sunday and
Thursday, 1 P.M. to 5 P.M. Admission: $4, or $3 for the elderly and students
with ID. 3 South Mountain Avenue, Montclair. (201) 746-5555.

NABISCO GALLERY "Crossing Over," an exhibition of 80 mixed-media works by 20
contemporary Russian artists. Through Sept. 7. Daily, noon to 4 P.M. River Road
and DeForest Avenue, East Hanover. (201) 503-3238.

NEWARK MUSEUM "New Jersey Arts Annual: Celebrating Diversity in Crafts" takes a
look at traditional and modern crafts in New Jersey. Through Oct. 15. "American
Art Pottery: An Uneasy Evolution, 1880-1930." Through Oct. 22. "Astronauts: The
Star Travelers" features photographs of the Apollo XI flight. Through Dec. 31.
Wednesday through Sunday, noon to 5 P.M. 49 Washington Street, Newark. (201)
596-6550.

NEW JERSEY HISTORICAL SOCIETY "Moving Through Memory: Caribbean Folk Arts in New
Jersey." Through April 1996. Tuesday through Friday, 10 A.M. to 4 P.M. 230
Broadway, Newark. (201) 483-3939.

NEW JERSEY STATE MUSEUM "Echizen: 800 Years of Japanese Stoneware," an
exhibition celebrating the history and art of potters. Through Aug. 7. "Baseball
in New Jersey: The Game of History." Through Aug. 27. Tuesday through Saturday,
9 A.M. to 4:45 P.M., and Sunday, noon to 5 P.M. 205 West State Street, Trenton.
(609) 292-6308.

NOYES MUSEUM "Drawing Outside the Lines: Works on Paper by Outsider Artists,"
presents a selction of drawing in pencil, crayon, and other media with work by
Eddie Arning, Minnie Evans, Bill Traylor and Martin Ramirez. Through Sept. 17.
Wednesday through Sunday, 11 A.M. to 4 P.M. Admission, $3; the elderly, $1.50;
students and children under 18, 50 cents. Free admission on Fridays. Lily Lake
Road, Oceanville. (609) 652-8848.

STEAMROLLER GALLERY "Implied Dissent," paintings and assemblages by Michelle
Henkin Bader. Through Aug. 20. Tuesday, noon to 2 P.M.; Friday and Saturday,
noon to 9 P.M. and Sunday, noon to 7 P.M. 52 Bridge Street, Frenchtown. (908)
996-7279.

WATCHUNG ARTS CENTER The New Jersey Photo Forum sponsors a show of photographic
prints in the upstairs gallery. "Vietnam: 20 Years After the Fall" features the
silkscreen photography of Richard Gerstner in the downstairs gallery. Monday
through Saturday, 1 to 4 P.M. 18 Stirling Road, Watchung. (908) 753-0190.

ZIMMERLI ART MUSEUM The George Riabov Collection of Russian Art includes
medieval icons, 19th-century landscapes and 20th-century costume and stage
design. The Kusakabe-Griffs Japonisme Gallery showcases Western art from the
late 19th and early 20th centuries, documenting the Japanese influence on
Western art. Tuesday through Friday, 10 A.M. to 4:30 P.M.; Saturday and Sunday,
noon to 5 P.M. Rutgers, corner of George and Hamilton Streets, New Brunswick.
(908) 932-7237.

SPOKEN WORD

FOSTERFIELDS HISTORICAL FARM Robert Bramhall demonstrates how to make herbal
oils, vinegars, wines, jellies and skin care products. Next Sunday at 1 P.M.
Admission: $4, or $3 for the elderly. Kahdena Road and Route 510, less than two
miles west of Morristown. (201) 326-7645.

SOUTHERN OCEAN COUNTY HOSPITAL Samuel Epstein, orthopedic surgeon, will offer
information on recognizing carpal tunnel syndrome. Tuesday at 2 P.M. Barbara
Broadt will demonstrate low-cholesterol and low-salt meals in "Cooking for a
Healthy Heart." Thursday at 2 P.M. Scott Sattan, physical therapist, will
discuss back-pain management and demonstrate helpful exercises in "Managing Back
Pain." Thursday at 7 P.M. The Conference Center, 1140 Route 72 West, Manahawkin.
(609) 978-8999.

TRENTON CITY MUSEUM "The Future of Arts," a panel discussion with Robert
Birmelin, an artist and professor at Queens College; Dan Aubrey, a critic and
playwright; Pablo Medina, a novelist and poet, and others. Today at 2:30 P.M.
Free. Next week, a panel discussion with artists about their work. Cadwalader
Park, Trenton. (609) 989-3632.

FOR CHILDREN

BERGEN MUSEUM OF ART AND SCIENCE "Treasures of the Sea Workshops" will help
children identify shell types and learn about the creatures that live in the
shells and the environment the creatures once lived in. Saturday at 11 A.M. Fee:
$4. 32 Ridgewood Avenue, Paramus. (201) 265-1248.

BICKFORD THEATER, MORRIS MUSEUM The Saturn Summer Theater Series for Children, a
selection of plays, musicals and variety shows, continues with "Jack and the
Beanstalk." Tuesday at 11 A.M. and 1:30 P.M. "Tot Rock." Gary Rosen, singer and
songwriter, performs a variety of musical styles raning from rock-and-roll to
Caribbean rhythms. Thursday at 11 A.M. and 1:30 P.M. Tickets: $6.25. 6 Normandy
Heights Road, Morristown. (201) 538-8069.

NEWARK MUSEUM Mr. Hustler shares the power of knowledge as he teaches about
galaxies, stars and nebulae in "The Power." Wednesday through Friday at 2:30
P.M. and Saturday and Sunday at 1 and 3 P.M. Learn African myths and legends
behind the constellations in "African Skies." Wednesday through Friday at 1:30
P.M. and Saturday and Sunday at 2 and 4 P.M. Adults, $2; children under 12, $1.
49 Washington Street, Newark. (201) 596-6550.

NEW JERSEY STATE MUSEUM Join Sandy, a golden retriever, in teaching Pepper, a
beagle, about lunar and solar eclipses. Saturday and Sunday at 1 and 3 P.M.
Travel to mysterious worlds of our solar system and beyond with Patrick Stewart
in "To Worlds Beyond."
Saturday and Sunday at 2 P.M. Tickets: $1.
205 West State Street, Trenton.
(609) 292-6308.

RARITAN VALLEY COMMUNITY COLLEGE The college's planetarium offers "Mystery! Who
Stole the Night," a show that is part
legend, fairy tale, science documentary
and classic mystery yarn, for the entire
family. Monday and Wednesday at 2 P.M.
Through Aug. 16. Admission: $4.50. Route
28 and Lamington Road, North Branch.
(908) 231-8805.

STOCKTON PERFORMING ARTS CENTER "Marvelous Mostly Midday Matinees" features a
different professional children's theater company each Wednesday in July. The
Shoestring Players presents a series of international tales. Travel to Italy in
the "Magic Pasta Pot," journey to Japan in "Three Strong Women," and take a trip
to Ghana in "Talk." Wednesday at 10:30 A.M., 2 P.M. and 6 P.M. Tickets: $5 and
$6.50. Jim Leeds Road, Pomona. (609) 652-4607.

WAYNE PUBLIC LIBRARY The Perky Puppeteers present "Frog Prince." Tuesday at 10
and 10:45 A.M. Bob Brooks gives a magic show with audience participation.
Thursday at 10:30 A.M. Free, but registration is required. 12 Nellis Drive,
Wayne. (201) 694-4272.

ETC.

ENGLEWOOD PUBLIC LIBRARY Penny Colman, author of "Rosie the Riveter: Women
Working on the Home Front During World War II, presents a writing workship for
teenagers. Wednesday at 1:30 P.M. Free. 31 Engle Street, Englewood. (201)
568-2215.

MURDER TO GO "Murderous Crossings," an interactive wedding and Agatha
Christie-style mystery that challenges the audience to solve "whodunit."
Saturdays, 8 P.M. Through Sept. 30. Il Giardino Restaurant, Cedar Knolls.
"Killing Mr. Withers," an Alfred Hitchcock-style comic mystery thriller set in
the 1950's. Through Dec. 30. Woodbridge Sheraton, Woodbridge. The $42 ticket
price includes a four-course meal. (201) 301-0562.

NEW JERSEY FESTIVAL OF BALLOONING Enjoy fireworks, musical acts, life-sized
marionettes, stunt shows, a skydiving Elvis, magic shows and, of course, balloon
rides on Friday, Saturday and next Sunday. Tickets: $15, or $10 for children.
Solberg Airport, Readington. (201) 882-5464.

PETERS VALLEY CRAFT FAIR In a juried show, more than 165 crafts people from
around the country will sell their work in clay, jewelry, leather, wood,
photography, glass, paper, fibers, weaving, clothing, and metal. Saturday, 10
A.M. to 6 P.M., and next Sunday, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M. Tickets: $5 or $4 for the
elderly. 19 Kuhn Road, Layton. (201) 948-5200.

LOAD-DATE: July 23, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Feel the Heat -- Singing hits like "Hot Stuff," "Last Dance"
and "Enough Is Enough," Donna Summer continues the Summer Sounds '95 concert
series. GARDEN STATE ARTS CENTER Wednesday at 8 P.M. Tickets: $18-$37.50. Exit
116 on the Garden State Parkway, Holmdel. (908) 442-9200. Keys to the Hudson
Hundreds of antique Hudson automobiles dating from 1909 through 1957 will be on
display as part of the 36th annual meeting of the Hudson-Essex-Terraplane Club.
-- PRINCETON FORRESTAL VILLAGE MALL. Friday and Saturday. Free. Route 1,
Princeton. (609) 452-7720.

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              87 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 23, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Word for Word / Conspiracy Theories;
The Unending Search for Demons In the American Imagination

BYLINE: By MARC D. CHARNEY

SECTION: Section 4;   Page 7;   Column 1;   Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1482 words


WHISPERS are stalking the land: The United Nations is poised to take over the
United States. The Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms wants to disarm the
country. Black helicopters are spying on the citizenry.

If today's conspiracy theories provoke a shiver in the night, some bedtime
reading may help. A vast array of Cassandras echo through American history --
usually on the fringes of politics but occasionally accepted by the mainstream.
Through the centuries the villains of the pieces have shifted -- from Masons to
Catholics to Jews, for example -- but the alleged plots also have a lot in
common: a foreign (or otherwise alien) connection, a tie to big money, a secret
organization more powerful than any state.

Three decades ago, the historian Richard Hofstadter wrote the classic essay,
"The Paranoid Style in American Politics," describing a tendency to see vast
conspiracies as the key to history. Here is a sampling of suspicions that have,
from time to time, captured imaginations in the United States.   MARC D. CHARNEY


 SAMUEL F. B. MORSE, who later perfected the telegraph, got his start in
communications as an anti-immigration polemicist. In 1835, he warned in a book,
"Imminent Dangers to the Free Institutions of the United States," of an Austrian
plot to wreck democracy by promoting Catholicism (which was supposedly amenable
to monarchy):

Austria has followed out her words into actions. . . . But how shall she attack
us? She cannot send her armies, they would be useless. . . . I say, is it not
her most obvious act to send Popery to this country if it is not here, or give
it a fresh and vigorous impulse if it is already here? At any rate she is doing
it. . . . Let us examine the operations of this Austrian Society, for it is hard
at work all around us. . . . Its emissaries are here. And who are these
emissaries? They are JESUITS . . . . Their workings are before you in every
day's events: they are a secret society, a sort of Masonic order, with
superadded features of most revolting odiousness, and a thousand times more
dangerous. . . . They can assume any character, that of angels of light, or
ministers of darkness, to accomplish their one great end, the service upon which
they are sent, whatever that service may be.


A century later, America was swept by a popular longing for a scapegoat at whose
feet to lay the carnage of World War I. Much as some Americans today see
sinister meaning in the genuine power and ties of international business
leaders, earlier Americans focused on international munitions makers as the most
important cause of war. Fortune magazine seemed to join them, in an article in
March 1934 that shows that cranks aren't the only ones to see cabals:

There is nothing that could, in any strict accuracy, be called an "Armament
Ring" in Europe today. There is no perfectly homologous group of single-purposed
individuals that sits down before a polished table in a soundproof room and
plots new holocausts in Europe. Search through the armament makers as you will,
you will find neither a Machiavelli nor a Dr. Fu Manchu. But that's all you
won't find.

For without a shadow of a doubt there is at the moment in Europe a huge and
subversive force that lies behind the arming and counterarming of nations: there
are mines, smelters, armament works, holding companies, and banks, entangled in
an international embrace, yet working inevitably for the destruction of such
little internationalism as the world has achieved so far. The control of these
myriad companies vests, finally, in not more than a handful of men whose power,
in some ways, reaches above the power of the state itself.


The image of an international cabal of industrialists and financiers became
something else in the hands of the radio preacher The Rev. Charles E. Coughlin,
who combined feed-the-poor oratory with claims that "atheistic Jews" had
financed the Bolsheviks and that Nazism "was conceived as a political defense
mechanism against Communism." In a broadcast Feb. 6, 1938, he outlined a theory,
sympathetic to Japan, that the threat of a new war could be traced to British
bankers' ambitions in Asia:

Today, I repeat, America is in the midst of a needless, man-made depression. It
is the business of the warlords and their masters of international high finance
to maintain this depression with its want in the midst of plenty, its poverty
and its useless, needless idleness. It is their business to keep the minds of
our own people concentrated upon these evils until such time as the floodgates
of billions of dollars for shells and gas and battleships and instruments of
destruction are opened wide. Then will come the long talked of prosperity that
has been just around the corner, ever since the last world war. Then the
factories will reopen; then the silk shirt era will return.

Then the wolf of war, dressed in the sheep's clothing of good times, shall raise
its voice in some pulpit of patriotism, to enlist millions of Americans in the
greatest conflict this world has ever known. That is their program, that is
their policy with which they hope to win popular support -- a policy which, when
the last gun will have been fired and the last dough-plow-boy buried, will prove
to future generations its unsoundness. Following the world war, some 50 or 80
billions of dollars of debts, represented by bonds held in the hands of the few,
will be borne upon the backs of your sons or daughters to their destruction.
Farewell, then, democracy; farewell, liberty; farewell to the precepts of
Washington, for the future then will hold forth for us no sane hope. Is that
patriotism to enlist our support for war, which will destroy the little children
growing to manhood and womanhood tomorrow?


The post-World War II years, a time as confusing as now, saw a real adversary,
Soviet Communism, became blurred in some minds with a wider conspiracy; in this
view, the United Nations and foreign aid and integration were all part of a
Communist plot. Robert Welch, leader of the John Birch Society, published "The
Politician" in 1963, in which he noted President Eisenhower's support for these
and concluded that Eisenhower must be a Communist himself:

For the Communists can now use all the power and prestige of the Presidency of
the United States to implement their plans, just as fully and even openly as
they dare. They have arrived at this point by three stages. In the first stage,
Roosevelt thought he was using the Communists, to promote his personal ambitions
and grandiose schemes. Of course, instead, the Communists were using him; but
without his knowledge or understanding of his place in their game. In the second
stage, Truman was passively used by the Communists, with his knowledge and
acquiescence, as the price he consciously paid for their making him President.
In the third stage the Communists have installed in the Presidency a man who,
for whatever reasons, appears intentionally to be carrying forward Communist
aims. And who, in situations where his personal effort and participation are
needed, brings to the support of those aims all of the political skill,
deceptive cunning, and tremendous ability as an actor, which are his outstanding
characteristics.


At about the same time, the California Republican Thomas H. Kuchel, minority
whip in the Senate, took notice of a trend that sounds familiar today: Of 60,000
or so letters he was getting a month, 10 percent were what he called "fright
mail," describing plots to overthrow America. In an article in The New York
Times Magazine July 21, 1963, the Senator wrote:

Water Moccasin III, last March, was one in a continuing series of field
exercises conducted by the Army's Special Warfare Center at Fort Stewart, Ga.,
to provide realistic training for guerrilla and counterguerrilla warfare, such
as is now going on in South Vietnam against the Communist Vietcong. It involved
600 officers and men, including 124 officers from 17 foreign countries of the
free world; four of these were Africans from Liberia.

The first Water Moccasin fright letters arrived in my office in late February
and early March. Accompanying several of them were printed copies of a letter
purportedly written by one P. A. Del Valle, president of something called the
Defenders of the American Constitution, and national defense chairman of
something else called the American Coalition of Patriotic Societies. The letter
said, in part:

"The undersigned is convinced this [Water Moccasin] . . . signified rehearsals
of the U.N. take-over of the U.S.A. under the Disarmament Treaty [sic]
promulgated under Public Law No. 87-297 . . . The Urgency of this message is
obvious. This appears to be the beginning of a crash program to disarm the
U.S.A. and make us a province of the U.N. May God in His mercy help us prevent
this catastrophe!"

LOAD-DATE: July 23, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Today's militia members aren't the first to warn that plots are
eating at America. There's a familiar ring to much of their fear. (John L.
Russell for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              88 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 23, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

The Other Sides of Paradise

BYLINE: By Brooke Allen;   Brooke Allen reviews frequently for The New Criterion
and The Wall Street Journal.

SECTION: Section 7;  Page 12;  Column 1;  Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1713 words



SCOTTIE
The Daughter of . . .:
The Life of Frances Scott Fitzgerald Lanahan Smith.
By Eleanor Lanahan.
Illustrated. 624 pp. New York:
HarperCollins Publishers.
$30.

INTIMATE LIES
F. Scott Fitzgerald and Sheilah Graham:
Her Son's Story.
By Robert Westbrook.
Illustrated. 502 pp. New York:
HarperCollins Publishers.
$30.

THE story of F. Scott and Zelda Fitzgerald has been of obsessive interest to the
public for more than 70 years -- not surprisingly, for it contains every
ingredient that a public always voracious for scandal requires: beauty, glamour,
drink, violence and madness, glittering success and degrading failure. Scores of
biographical works have been written about Fitzgerald, and the unhappy Zelda has
become of interest in her own right. Two new books throw light on the well-known
material by telling the life stories of supporting actors in the drama: the
Fitzgeralds' daughter, Frances Scott, and the woman with whom Fitzgerald spent
the last three years of his life, the Hollywood gossip columnist Sheilah Graham.
Both books, oddly enough, are written by their subjects' children.

In "Scottie," Eleanor Lanahan, an artist and illustrator, describes her mother
as a "completely extraordinary" woman, but the facts don't bear this out. The
only demonstrably extraordinary thing about Scottie was the fact that she
succeeded in being quite ordinary: a modest achievement, but one that in her
case must have demanded great effort, for she could so easily have been crushed,
a casualty of her parents' feckless rush through life.

Scottie, who from the age of 9 had had to deal with her mother's mental illness
and her father's narcissism and violent alcoholic binges, was pre-eminently a
survivor. As such she became at an early age a master of what we now call
denial: publicly she always promoted the image of her "golden childhood," spent
in Baltimore, Paris and the south of France, but in private she preferred never
to discuss her parents or her early years. "My mother never willingly introduced
the subject of her parents," Ms. Lanahan writes. "For one of us children to ask
a question about her childhood provoked her almost automatic anger." Scottie
herself usually referred to her parents with guarded irony, going only so far as
to allow that "people who live entirely by the fertility of their imaginations
are fascinating, brilliant and often charming, but they should be sat next to at
dinner parties, not lived with."

DURING her teen-age years in the 1930's, Scottie was fortunate enough to have
surrogate parents in the form of Fitzgerald's agent, Harold Ober, and his wife,
Anne. She attended Vassar, wrote short stories for several magazines (including
The New Yorker) at a precocious age, and in 1943 married Samuel Jackson Lanahan,
a law student who came from a well-to-do Baltimore family. The couple moved to
Washington, where Lanahan joined the Justice Department. There they became one
of the best-and-brightest glamour couples of the heady 50's and 60's. Scottie
soon settled into the role she was to play for most of her life: fashionable
hostess, mother of four, guardian of the Fitzgerald estate and keeper of the
flame, passionate campaigner and fund-raiser for the Democratic Party. She was
also a part-time journalist who wrote for the women's pages of The New York
Times and The Washington Post and provided political coverage for various
Democratic publications.

It wasn't entirely a success story: the Lanahans' marriage did not survive, and
Scottie was to marry and divorce a second time. The social upheavals of the 60's
were particularly destructive to the Lanahan family, and Scottie's eldest son,
Tim, who had apparently inherited his grandmother's schizophrenia, killed
himself in 1973 at the age of 27 after a troubled tour of military duty in
Vietnam. But Scottie had been brought up in a very hard school: her way of
coping with tragedy was to suppress it, presenting an impassively cheerful front
to the world. To a large extent this worked.

Scottie's story is interesting less in itself than as a coda to that of her
parents. It is worth telling, but Eleanor Lanahan is the wrong person for the
job. She treats every detail of her mother's life, from her fund-raisers for the
Multiple Sclerosis Society to her squabbles with her neighbors, as items of
weighty significance. Every angry letter between Scottie and her children is
printed in full. Ms. Lanahan's resentment and baffled love for her mother cloud
her judgment to the point where real insight is impossible, and the result is a
book overstuffed with raw material for the psychoanalyst rather than carefully
considered and edited for the general reader. It provides an unpleasantly
voyeuristic look into the heart of a troubled family, and it is ironic that
Scottie, who worked so hard to free herself from her parents and their
persistent myth, who valued personal privacy so dearly, should finally have
every detail of her life exposed by her well-intentioned but somewhat
uncomprehending daughter.

If Robert Westbrook had a problematic relationship with his mother, Sheilah
Graham, it is not apparent in "Intimate Lies." Born to Graham five years after
Fitzgerald's death in 1940, Mr. Westbrook is the author of several novels,
including "Rich Kids" and "The Magic Garden of Stanley Sweetheart." He is a racy
and readable writer who occasionally allows his prose to slide into the
enthusiastic gush of the romance novel. But one can excuse Mr. Westbrook a great
deal, for he has a fascinating tale to relate. Much of it was told long ago in
Graham's own memoir, the 1958 best seller "Beloved Infidel," but Graham had to
censor herself in accordance with 50's mores, while Mr. Westbrook works under no
such constraints.

Though her interest to posterity lies chiefly in her status as Fitzgerald's last
love, Sheilah Graham's pre-Scott life was at least as interesting as her three
years of ministering to the spoiled genius, for she was as self-created as Jay
Gatsby. She was born Lily Shiel, the youngest of six children of impoverished
Jewish parents in London's East End. Her father died early and her mother, an
illiterate laundress unable to feed her many children, delivered the 6-year-old
Lily in 1910 to the Jews Hospital and Orphan Asylum in south London, where she
was to remain for the next eight years. Lily distinguished herself in the
orphanage school and won a scholarship that would have enabled her to continue
her education and go on to university, but she was compelled to give up this
opportunity and go home to care for her dying mother and boorish brother.

She worked for a short time as a housemaid, then took a job demonstrating
toothbrushes in a department store. Here her story leaves its Dickens phase and
turns into the improbable fantasy of early H. G. Wells: in 1921, at the age of
17, she was "discovered" touting her wares at the counter by Maj. John Graham
Gillam, a charming but impecunious fellow 25 years her senior who recognized
talent when he saw it. Soon the two were married, and Gillam set about turning
the attractive, ignorant young woman into a paying asset. He renamed her Sheilah
Graham and sent her to the Royal Academy of Dramatic Arts, where she shed her
cockney accent; soon she went on the stage and became one of the more popular
chorus girls of the Noel Coward period.

GILLAM was impotent, and in any case he had no wish to stand in the way of
Graham's chances. He suggested that she would do better if she pretended to be
single, and encouraged her "friendships" with influential men. With her new
accent and ready charm she quickly made friends in London society, where she
posed, precariously, as upper-class. Well aware that she had none of the makings
of a stage star, she wisely segued from the theater into light journalism, and
it was as a fledgling gossip columnist that she arrived in the United States in
1935, eager to make a fresh start in a country where neither her husband nor her
origins would be a handicap.

She and Fitzgerald, then 40 years old, met in Hollywood in 1937. Though Graham
was later to exploit her years with Fitzgerald for the maximum in personal
publicity, her attachment to him cannot be seen as opportunistic: she threw over
a rich and glamorous beau, the Marquess of Donegall, for Fitzgerald, by then a
washed-up alcoholic whose books were out of print and who was scrabbling for a
living as a hack screenwriter (Fitzgerald himself provided a brilliantly
sardonic view of his Hollywood travails in the Pat Hobby stories, written for
Esquire during his years with Graham).

By most accounts Fitzgerald was lucky to spend his last years with someone like
Sheilah Graham. She provided a steadying influence he badly needed. Under her
sharp eye he eventually kicked the bottle, at least intermittently, and produced
most of his final novel, "The Last Tycoon." He depended on Graham but remained
ambivalent about her, and the ambivalence is evident in "The Last Tycoon," in
its central romance between Monroe Stahr and Kathleen, the heroine inspired by
Graham. However desirable Graham was, she represented to Fitzgerald his own
fallen state, the second-rateness to which he believed he had descended -- all
his life he had entertained the adolescent fantasy of being the privileged
possessor of the "top girl," the woman all the other men want. Zelda had been
top girl in her day; Lily Shiel, however expertly made over, could never be. In
some unsavory way it soothed Fitzgerald's self-love to conceive of Graham as a
whore, and after his death she was devastated to find a photograph of herself
with "Portrait of a Prostitute" written on the back.

For all his famous charm, Fitzgerald's Mr. Hyde side tended to predominate.
Again and again he proved himself to be manipulative, sadistic and brutish.
Graham had a lot to put up with, and on the whole she comes across as a
tremendously sympathetic character. Mr. Westbrook shows surprising balance as he
manages to covey her strengths without losing his objectivity or his sense of
humor about his colorful, opportunistic mother. What is attractive about Sheilah
Graham is that like Scottie, she was what Scott and Zelda Fitzgerald so
manifestly were not: a survivor.

LOAD-DATE: July 23, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Frances Scott Fitzgerald and her father, F. Scott Fitzgerald,
in Baltimore, 1935. (FROM "SCOTTIE"); F. Scott Fitzgerald and Sheilah Graham in
California, 1939. (FROM "INTIMATE LIES")

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              89 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 24, 1995, Monday, Late Edition - Final

CONFLICT IN THE BALKANS: AMONG AMERICANS;
Bosnian War Bewilders a Midwestern Town

BYLINE: By SARA RIMER

SECTION: Section A;  Page 1;  Column 3;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1226 words

DATELINE: MERRILLVILLE, Ind., July 22


Donna Stath was embarrassed. "I try to follow the war in Bosnia, but it's so
confusing," she said. "It's been going on for 300 or 400 years. I know there are
atrocities going on. I understand Serbs are raping Muslim women, and kidnapping
their sons.

"I think it's sad," Mrs. Stath, the secretary of the Merrillville Community
School Board, went on. "I think, 'Golly, is this a similar situation to Nazi
Germany?' And everybody ignored that for how many years?"

But when it comes to the question of American involvement in Bosnia, Mrs. Stath
said she feels deeply reluctant. "I think it would be another Vietnam," she
said. "I don't think our sons and fathers should be losing their lives over it."

Most people expressed similar feelings in interviews conducted over two days in
this blue-collar town, a traditional Republican stronghold where the steel mills
of Gary loom to the north and strip shopping centers give way to cornfields in
the south.

Most said they had not been paying close attention. The war seems to be a
burning issue here only among the Eastern European community, which includes
many Serbian- and Croatian-Americans who came here in the 1960's, as they did to
Gary and Chicago, and found work in the steel mills. But no one interviewed in
this town of 30,000 expressed indifference to the war.

The recent television images of misery in Bosnia have horrified them, people
said. They talked about reports of rapes of Muslim women, the young men with
their throats slit, the homeless children. As sharply focused as the television
images are, this war bewilders people.

They want to understand it better, they said. They don't know what the United
States should do, they said. In the next breath, they said they did not think
that it was the responsibility of the United States to resolve what seems to
them an endlessly complicated -- and endless -- war. Their views reflect recent
surveys in which a substantial majority of Americans polled said this country
had no moral obligation to intervene in Bosnia.

"I'm not really following it that closely," Ruben Alcala, a 64-year-old retired
steelworker, said in his front yard, where there were miniature American flags
stuck in flowerpots. "I can't understand why it's going on so long, or why. It's
a shame so many people are suffering."

Asked if the United States should step in, Mr. Alcala, who said he votes
Republican or Democrat depending on the candidate, hesitated.

"Sometimes I think maybe we should," he said. "Then I think, 'No, let them take
care of their own.' Let someone else solve it. The U.S. is the greatest country
in the world. Should we be the world's policeman? No, that's what we got the
U.N. for.

"Why should our kids go over there and get killed? There's been wars ever since
time began. If it goes on, maybe we should step in, and help one of them. I
don't know which one is wrong. I don't know that much about the country."

In his house across the street, the Rev. Sammie Maletta, the priest at the
neighborhood Catholic church, St. Joan of Arc, said he felt anguished by the
war. "I don't have any clarity in my mind about what's right," Father Maletta
said, seated in his living room, surrounded by books on theology.

"I see what's going on there. You feel so helpless. You see these children
getting butchered. Part of me thinks there's a lot of racism. If if it weren't
Muslims taking the brunt, would the world sit by?"

He does not know what his stand should be, Father Maletta said. "If I condone
the bombing of the Serbs, or the arming of the Bosnians, am I not saying 'it's
O.K.' to violence?" he said. "If nothing is done, am I not being passive to
genocide? I don't have the answers. It's painful."

In church on Sundays, he said, he asks his parishioners to pray for the
Bosnians. "One of my primary jobs is to get people to think about it," he said.
Mostly, he said, they don't think about the war in Bosnia.

At the American Legion post in town, Lou Wojcik, a bank vice president,
overheard Bill Ward, the post commander, talking to a reporter about the war.
"There are too many other things to worry about," Mr. Wojcik, 53, broke in.
"Your family, employment, things at home."

Behind the bar, with the American flag on the wall, Kim Jurasevich, 31, the
bartender, was apologetic. "I should know more about it," she said. "I just know
there's problems going on."

Jim McKay, who drives a fire truck, has strong opinions about what should be
done. "I say, 'Move, stop it,' " he said, sipping his beer. "I don't want to see
any of our ground troops in Bosnia. Use air power to back up the U.N. forces."

There are plenty of people who, like Father Maletta, do worry about the war.
Debbie Shurr is one of them. Partly, she said, it is because of her job. She is
a reception manager at the Croatian community center. Still, she has not taken
sides.

"I see the pictures on television of the homeless children, the ones that are
starving," she said Friday evening at the community center, where she was
setting up tables for a wedding. "The other day I read about the young men they
had taken away. The first thing I thought was that the Nazis had done the same
thing when they killed the Jews."

Ms. Shurr, who says she is of Irish and German ancestry, looked as if she were
about to cry. "Is this that all over? What can the U.S. do? What is the reason
they're fighting? Does anyone even know?"

But when she considers the idea of the United States becoming involved, she
said, she is reminded of another war. "I'm torn," said. "What if it's another
Nam and there are no winners? What was the point of all those thousands of boys
being killed?"


Across the field from the Croatian center is the Serbian Orthodox church, with
its onion dome, and community center. On the surface, at least, there is little
tension between the groups. At the Friday evening fish fry at the Serbian
church, everyone wanted to talk about the war. "I have brother and sister
there," said the bartender, Ilija Manojlovic, who arrived here in 1966. "I don't
understand American politics."

Few people here seemed to take seriously the allies' new threat of massive air
strikes against the Serbs -- if they were aware of it at all. They had heard too
many threats before, they said, from the allies and from President Clinton.

"He hasn't taken a firm position," Rosalie Berger-Levinson, a Democrat, who is a
constitutional law professor at the Valparaiso University School of Law. "He's
been wishy-washy. Until it actually happens, I don't know if it will happen."

Professor Berger-Levinson's parents are Holocaust survivors. Her mother was at
Auschwitz. "My mother saw the cruelty of the Croats to the Jews in World War
II," she said. "But I don't think that justifies genocide today. I'm concerned
about the comments of Croatian leaders and Muslims that sound anti-Semitic. I
don't know how much of it is true. I'm confused. I've been reading about this on
and off for months."

Should the United States get involved? "That's a real tough call," she said.
"Would this be another Vietnam? We're learning more and more that F.D.R. knew a
lot more before he intervened in World War II. Morally, that leads me to think
we should be involved. Certainly, we have U.N. troops just watching. It's
upsetting. It's so emotionally divisive."

LOAD-DATE: July 24, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: "I try to follow the war in Bosnia, but it's so confusing," said
Donna Stath, with her husband, Angelo, in Merrillville, Ind. Reflecting common
American views about whether the United States should intervene, she added, "I
don't think our sons and fathers should be losing their lives over it." (Steve
Kagan for The New York Times) (pg. A7)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              90 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 24, 1995, Monday, Late Edition - Final

BOOKS OF THE TIMES;
Lure of Entanglements Home-Grown and Lasting

BYLINE: By CHRISTOPHER LEHMANN-HAUPT

SECTION: Section C;  Page 14;  Column 1;  Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1006 words



BEACH MUSIC
By Pat Conroy
Illustrated. 628 pages. Nan A. Talese/ Doubleday. $27.50.

The title of Pat Conroy's latest extravagant novel, "Beach Music," refers to the
songs that Jack McCall and Shyla Fox danced to as high-school seniors in a
falling-down house on the coast of South Carolina the night they fell in love.
Especially their favorite, "Save the Last Dance for Me," by the Drifters.

But the title of "Beach Music" also refers to whatever it is that draws the
newly hatched loggerhead turtles that Jack's mother is trying to save out of
their nests in the sand and back to the ocean. So "Beach Music" echoes that
frightening speech by Mrs. Venable in Tennessee Williams's "Suddenly, Last
Summer" about the "terrible Encantadas," the Galapagos Islands and the hatched
sea turtles that "made their dash for the sea while the birds hovered and
swooped to attack and hovered and -- swooped to attack!"

In a deeper sense, then, "Beach Music" is about the awful struggle for survival
in the 20th century, particularly in America during the last 30 years.

Like Williams, Mr. Conroy is verbosely eloquent, imaginatively violent and a
superior yarn spinner, sometimes to a fault. In "Beach Music," he narrates how
Jack McCall gives up his exile in Rome, where he was driven by the suicide of
Shyla, his wife, and returns to his home in Waterford, S.C., where his mother,
Lucy, is dying of leukemia. Once home, Jack gets involved again with his four
affectionately contentious younger brothers, the youngest of whom, John Hardin,
is schizophrenic, and with his alienated father, Judge Johnson McCall, a chronic
alcoholic.

He also becomes entangled with the parents of his dead wife, George and Ruth
Fox, Holocaust survivors who have never forgiven him for not being Jewish, but
who now want to get to know their granddaughter, Leah. And he is painfully drawn
back into the circle of his closest childhood friends, one of whom has become a
successful Hollywood producer and wants to film a mini-series that will explain
what drove the friends apart during a time of protest over the Vietnam War.

Mr. Conroy cleverly exploits the lingering enmity among these characters,
particularly between Jack and Capers Middleton, a politician who wants Jack to
forgive him for a past offense and thus help his campaign for the state
governorship.  Equally abrasive is the conflict between a military father and
his rebellious son, a subject Mr. Conroy has explored in all its sadomasochistic
extremes in such previous novels as "The Great Santini," "The Lords of
Discipline" and "The Prince of Tides."

Out of these various relations he concocts a series of powerfully melodramatic
set pieces. In the story of Jack's mother's upbringing, Mr. Conroy tries to
out-Faulkner "Sanctuary." In a tale about how Jack and his friends harpooned a
gigantic manta ray, he tries to out-Hemingway "The Old Man and the Sea." And in
the Foxes' horrifying accounts of their Holocaust experiences, he tries to
out-Styron "Sophie's Choice."

After all, Mr. Conroy's hero and narrator, despite settling for a career as a
cookbook and travel writer, is right at home with literature. One day, while
rummaging through the attic of his childhood home with his daughter, he comes
upon his old books, beginning with Thomas Wolfe's "Look Homeward, Angel": "
'Hello, Eugene. Hello, Ben Gant,' I said quietly, for I knew these characters as
well as I knew anyone in the world." He goes on: "Greetings, Jane Eyre. Hello,
David Copperfield. Jake, the fishing is good in Spain. Beware of Osmond, Isabel
Archer. Be careful, Natasha. Fight well, Prince Andre. The snows, Ethan Frome.
The green light, Gatsby. Be careful of the large boys, Piggy. I do give a damn,
Miss Scarlett. The woods of Birnam are moving, Lady Macbeth.' "

What betrays Mr. Conroy too often are his flights of lyrical prose.  True, now
and then he catches the lightning instead of the lightning bug. Jack's father's
hair was "thick and silver, as though it were made from a tarnished tea
service." Jack relates that when he was off on a camping trip, "moose observed
us as calmly as philatelists when we moved past their quiet foraging in deep
water." Self-contemptuously describing his experience at Auschwitz, George Fox,
a musician, explains, "Because I live in my head I survive by concentrating on
the great silos of beauty I have stored up. I hear music amid the squalor."

But just as often, Mr. Conroy's prose seems merely wordy and self-conscious:
"Fantasy is one of the soul's brightest porcelains," Jack says. "As the day
rapidly approached when I would take Leah into the forsaken realms of my past, I
felt the floodgates of recall open up in a ceaseless flow. As a travel writer I
had specialized in the artistry of my own escape from what was most intimately
mine. I had kept my eye on the horizon and fled all calls for the careful study
of my own nest."

Most damaging of all, "Beach Music" builds to a disappointing climax that is
quite literally staged and rings as false as Eugene O'Neill at his most wooden.
"That's your son there," Jack berates the military father in one of the many
speeches that sound as if it could only be spoken in a novel. "It's not a flag,
or an M-1, or a guidon, or a parade ground, or a foxhole -- yet you've shown
more love and devotion to all these things than you've ever shown your son."

Jack perorates: "Oh, Brave General of the Republic, who sits in judgment of his
son tonight . . . you're not half the man your son is and you never were. You're
a child-beater and a wife-beater, a lightweight thinker, a first-class bully,
and the only reason you're not a full-fledged Nazi is you can't speak German and
we've got this Constitution that keeps . . . you in check."

Through stagy speeches like this, the novel does admittedly succeed in recalling
the agonizing dilemmas of the Vietnam era and their foreshadowing in Nazi
Germany. But when all is said and overdone in "Beach Music," Mr. Conroy leaves
you begging for less.


LOAD-DATE: July 24, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Pat Conroy. (Joyce Ravid/Doubleday)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              91 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 25, 1995, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Reviving Kitty Genovese Case, and Its Passions

BYLINE: By JOE SEXTON

SECTION: Section B;  Page 1;  Column 2;  Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1238 words


The killing of Kitty Genovese was first a tragedy, then a symbol, then a bit of
durable urban mythology. Yesterday, more than 30 years after the slaying of the
28-year-old barmaid in Queens prompted painful soul-searching over whether her
neighbors should have done more to help, the Kitty Genovese case was back in
court.

In Federal District Court in Brooklyn, the man convicted of the murder, Winston
Moseley, 60, walked out of the past, through a door and to the witness stand,
where he claimed he should be granted a new trial. His original defense lawyer
-- who Mr. Moseley now says had a conflict of interest because he had once
represented Miss Genovese -- was also there, 82 years old but still practicing
law. So, too, was one of the prosecutors who tried the case in 1964.

And as one, the surviving family of Kitty Genovese -- three brothers, a sister,
two aunts -- stood in the first row of seats, angry, numb, curious, but
together.

"It's surreal," said Frank Genovese, who was 12 when his sister was killed, with
the circumstances of her death and her cries for help provoking a national
debate about civic apathy and human indifference to violence.

"We have lived with this for 31 years, through movies and books and newspapers,"
he said. "We had chosen to live it alone, removed. But now, we are here, with
the gloves off, because we will not let her be the victim again."

On March 13, 1964, Kitty Genovese was assaulted as she made her way from a
parking lot to her apartment in Kew Gardens. When he was arrested, Mr. Moseley
confessed to the police that he had set out that night to find a woman to kill,
that he had stalked Miss Genovese and that, after sticking a knife into her 17
times, he had returned to sexually attack her.

It soon became clear that any number of neighbors had heard the woman's screams
or seen her attacker, and it became a widely accepted fact that no one had so
much as telephoned the police. Thus, the outrage over the murder itself
eventually was dwarfed by the sense of regret and embarrassment about a city's
collective failure of will. The Kitty Genovese Syndrome became an entry in
sociology textbooks.

Today, the specifics of the neighborhood's reaction to the murder are in
dispute, and several residents who were alive at the time of the attack
maintained yesterday that the screams were not that easy to hear and that in
fact, some people did call for help or seek to find out what was going on.

"The media never took into consideration the noise from the bar, that we had a
different clientele then -- women yelling at their husbands," said Tony Corrado,
who in 1964 owned a furniture shop on the block of Austin Street where the
killing occurred. "They only showed one side."

Mr. Moseley and his new court-appointed lawyer, Barry Rhodes, argued yesterday
that a retrial should be ordered because Mr. Moseley's original defense lawyer,
Sidney Sparrow, had once represented Miss Genovese. Mr. Sparrow had served as a
lawyer for Miss Genovese in a minor gambling case in 1961, and worked on her
appeal in 1962.

Mr. Moseley was convicted and sentenced to death by a Queens jury, but his
punishment was later reduced on appeal to life imprisonment.

Mr. Rhodes yesterday questioned whether Mr. Sparrow had presented an adequate
defense; whether he should have sought a delay so that the publicity surrounding
the case might abate; whether he should have asked that the trial take place
elsewhere, and whether Mr. Sparrow's decision to pursue an insanity defense,
complete with Mr. Moseley's testimony that he had committed numerous other rapes
and killings, was intended mainly to garner public notoriety for himself.

In calling for a retrial, Mr. Rhodes focused on remarks that Mr. Sparrow made to
the jury during the sentencing phase of the 1964 trial. Then, according to a
transcript of the trial, Mr. Sparrow said that he had not "objectively" or
"calmly" defended Mr. Moseley and that he had once represented Miss Genovese.
Mr. Sparrow's comments, however, were broken off when the trial judge
interrupted him.

"A lawyer at trial said he had a conflict of interest, and it affected his
performance, and the judge did nothing about it," Mr. Rhodes said. While he
conceded that he did not consider the conflict serious, Mr. Rhodes nonetheless
said current case law requires that the conviction be voided.

Yesterday, Mr. Sparrow testified that he had informed both the trial judge, J.
Irwin Shapiro, and Mr. Moseley of his previous representation of Miss Genovese
before the the case began. And he said Mr. Moseley had continued to allow him to
represent him in both a subsequent motion to set aside the guilty verdict and in
his successful appeal of the death sentence.

"I represented Mr. Moseley to the best of my ability," Mr. Sparrow said.

Indeed, prosecutors with the Queens District Attorney's office, who are seeking
to block Mr. Moseley's request, said Mr. Sparrow's legal work had spared Mr.
Moseley his life.

"Mr. Sparrow is the reason Mr. Moseley is in a chair in court today and wasn't
put in the electric chair 30 years ago," said Gene Reibstein, a prosecutor.
"It's an outrage Mr. Moseley is even here today."

Mr. Reibstein argued that the trial judge in 1964 had acted in accordance with
the laws of the times, and he pledged that if the conviction was overturned, the
case would be brought again. "We still have the two detectives and prosecutor
Mr. Moseley confessed to," he said.

The judge, Frederic Block, ordered both sides to submit additional papers and
indicated he would not rule for at least three weeks.

The proceedings yesterday were unusual and often awkward. A handful of the
principals involved in the original case are now dead. One of the prosecutors is
now a judge. Mr. Moseley, who once escaped from prison and was convicted of
assaulting other women when out, was largely quiet, though he occasionally
smiled and laughed. Vincent Genovese, a brother who is a sales manager for an
electronics company, had to testify that his family was not connected to the
Mafia. Mr. Sparrow, while defending his performance, called Mr. Moseley a liar
who was trying to "get out of prison any way he can."

Through it all, the family of Kitty Genovese, none of whom had attended the
first trial or ever encountered Winston Moseley, remained intent. The four
siblings had put together significant and varied lives since the killing. Susan
Wakeman is a mother. Frank Genovese, who said he had read about his sister's
death in textbooks in both high school and college, owns a restaurant in
Atlanta. William Genovese served in the Marine Corps, losing both legs in a
land-mine explosion.

"We don't blame the people who were there that night and might have heard her
crying," Mrs. Wakeman said. "Only one person killed my sister, and he should die
the way that she did."

When the six hours of testimony and argument were over, William Genovese
appeared exhausted.

"The question of apathy was with me throughout my time in Vietnam, and I came to
be known for taking too many risks because I couldn't let anything go without
trying to act," Mr. Genovese, 47, said. "The irony of being here today, 30 years
later, is that maybe you begin to understand why no one wanted to get involved.
I appreciate the sensitivity of constitutional law, but, watching this
proceeding here, I fear for the cynicism of the general populace."


LOAD-DATE: July 25, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Winston Moseley, shown in a 1968 photograph, maintained
yesterday he should be given a new trial in the killing of Kitty Genovese,
right. He was convicted of the murder, as reported in The New York Times on June
12, 1964. (United Press International, The New York Times); Sidney Sparrow, the
original lawyer for Mr. Moseley, speaking with reporters yesterday outside
Federal District Court in Brooklyn. Mr. Moseley now contends that Mr. Sparrow
had a conflict of interest because he once represented Miss Genovese. (Andrea
Mohin/The New York Times) (pg. B1); Vincent Genovese testified yesterday at a
hearing at which the man convicted of murdering his sister Kitty sought a new
trial. Mr. Genovese, a sales manager for an electronics company, spoke with
reporters during a break in the hearings outside Federal District Court in
Brooklyn. (Andrea Mohin/The New York Times) (pg. B4)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              92 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 25, 1995, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Vernon I. Cheadle, 85, Botanist And U. of California Chancellor

BYLINE: By WOLFGANG SAXON

SECTION: Section A;  Page 13;  Column 5;  National Desk

LENGTH: 360 words


Vernon I. Cheadle, a former Chancellor of the University of California at Santa
Barbara whose 15-year tenure was marked by rapid campus growth as well as
student unrest, died on Sunday at Cottage Hospital in Santa Barbara. He was 85.

Dr. Cheadle, who lived in Santa Barbara, was an internationally known botanist.
He was Chancellor from 1962 to 1977. In that time, the number of disciplines
taught on the campus rose to 100 from 36, master's programs to 42 from 15, and
Ph.D. programs to 27 from 2. Enrollment grew to more than 12,000 from 4,700.

Student unrest over civil rights, the Vietnam War and a feeling of powerlessness
against political and economic institutions swirled around Dr. Cheadle when he
was Chancellor. In 1969, members of the Black Students Union occupied a campus
building and pressured the administation into creating a black studies program.

In February 1970, youths battled the police for three nights in Isla Vista, a
college town of about 13,000 people, including 9,000 students, adjacent to the
Santa Barbara campus. The violence left 1 student dead and more than 100 injured
or arrested, and resulted in the destruction of several buildings, including a
bank that was burned to the ground. The violence ended after Ronald Reagan, then
Governor of California, declared an "extreme emergency" and called in the
National Guard.

After his retirement Dr. Cheadle returned to his botany laboratory, where he
studied water-conducting cells in higher forms of plant life, like corn and
grasses. His specialty was the morphology of vascular plants.

Vernon Irving Cheadle was born in Salem, S. D., and received a bachelor's degree
from Miami University in Ohio in 1932 and a master's degree and Ph.D. in botany
from Harvard University.

He taught at Harvard and Rhode Island State College before joining the
University of California at Davis as chairman of the botany department in 1952.
He was acting vice chancellor at Davis when Santa Barbara named him as
Chancellor.

He is survived by his wife, Mary; a son, Dr. William Cheadle of Louisville, Ky.,
a twin sister, Mrs. Joseph Ruden of Billings, Mont., and two grandsons.

LOAD-DATE: July 25, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              93 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 25, 1995, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

On My Mind;
The Document Of May 30

BYLINE: By A. M. ROSENTHAL

SECTION: Section A;  Page 15;  Column 1;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 714 words


The "safe areas" in Bosnia were demilitarized zones from which the Muslim
Bosnian Government had removed its forces long before the Bosnian Serbs began
conquering them. The Serbian attacks have been against areas deliberately made
defenseless by international agreement.

Almost every American and foreigner I have talked with about Bosnia believes
this to be true, and a strong legal and moral reason for the West to bomb the
Bosnian Serbs. But Western governments know it to be false.

In their pronouncements about Bosnia, the reality about the "safe areas" is not
mentioned and in the Western press only rarely and in passing.

But historians will have to deal with U.N. document S/1995/444, a report of
Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali to the Security Council, dated May 30,
1995.

The Secretary General writes that there never was an enforcement concept behind
the "safe areas" -- six towns surrounded by Serb-held territory. The Security
Council did not require the Bosnian Government to withdraw its forces from the
areas but muttered about how naughty it would be to carry out attacks against
them or from them.

On page 18 there is this passage from the Secretary General:

"In recent months, Government forces have considerably increased their military
activity in and around most safe areas, and many of them, including Sarajevo,
Tuzla, and Bihac, have been incorporated into the broader military campaign of
the Government's side.

"The headquarters and logistics installations of the Fifth Corps of the
Government Army are located in the town of Bihac and those of the second Corps
in the town of Tuzla.

"The Government also maintains a substantial number of troops in Srebrenica (in
this case a violation of a demilitarization agreement), Gorazde and Zepa, while
Sarajevo is the location of the General Command of the Government Army and other
military installations. There is also an ammunition factory in Gorazde.

"The Bosnian Serb forces' reaction to offensives launched by the Government Army
from safe areas have generally been to respond against military targets within
those areas, often at a disproportionate level."

The question for non-Bosnians, then, is: Does it matter?

Measured against the refugees driven from their homes by the Bosnian Serbs, does
it matter that the "safe area" concept was a cynical fraud perpetrated by all
parties -- military havens that were also supposed to be civilian havens?

Contacts in the American Government say that it does not matter, not anymore.
The U.S. has to be seen doing something about the "safe areas." Otherwise
Republicans will force the U.S. to arm the Muslims.  U.N. troops will then be
withdrawn and the U.S. will have to send 25,000 troops to get them out.
Republicans and Democrats share a bipartisan emotion -- terror at having to
fulfill President Clinton's own promises.

The story of the "safe areas" inevitably leads to the fundamental question.
Against the whole history of Bosnian Serbs' brutality in the civil war, does it
matter that they had a strong political case, that the Muslims of Bosnia knew
that the Serbs of Bosnia would fight to the end rather than be part of their new
state, and that if the West and the Muslims had gone slower and paid more
attention to the demands of the Bosnian Serbs the war might have been avoided?

It does matter, for four reasons, no matter how hard to swallow. One is that
unless the Bosnian Serbs get the degree of freedom that the Bosnian Muslims have
claimed and won -- the right to separate from a government they fear and detest
-- they will go on fighting, decade after decade.

The second is that there is no moral or strategic reason for Westerners to kill
Bosnian Serbs to prevent them from having that right.

The third is that if the West put a small fraction of the time and brain power
into the long-suspended negotiations on Bosnia that it did on the Middle East,
Ireland or Vietnam, a settlement could be attained.

And the last is that if it is not attained a certain list will get longer and
longer -- the list of men, women and children killed in Bosnia by the arrogance
and errors of diplomats and politicians in their own country, in Western Europe
and the United States, before the war began, and to this day.

LOAD-DATE: July 25, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              94 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 26, 1995, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

In a Ranking of Maternal Health, U.S. Trails Most Developed Nations

BYLINE: By PHILIP J. HILTS

SECTION: Section C;  Page 8;  Column 4;  National Desk;  Health Page

LENGTH: 653 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 25


The United States ranks 18th in an index measuring maternal health, lower than
most other developed nations in the world, a new study says.

The study reviewed the data in 10 categories of maternal health and gave each of
the 118 countries surveyed a score based on its performance in those areas.
Areas rated included the number of women who die during childbirth, teen-age
pregnancy, contraceptive use, prenatal care and availability of safe abortions.

The study, released on Monday, shows that the chance of dying from pregnancy or
childbirth varies dramatically in different parts of the world, from 1 in 7 in
Mali to about 1 in 17,000 in Italy. The rate in the United States is 1 in 5,669.
The study was done by the research group Population Action International in
Washington.

The countries with the best overall rankings were, in order, Italy, Denmark,
Norway, Sweden and Belgium. Ranked the worst were Mali, Congo, Somalia, Angola
and Zaire.

Although an important factor affecting the ranking is a country's relative
wealth, said Dr. Shanti R. Conly, director of policy research for the group,
some quite poor countries have worked on women's health issues and ranked well,
while other nations of great wealth scored relatively poorly.

Last year, at the International Conference on Population and Development in
Cairo, 180 nations reached an agreement urging all countries to make
reproductive health services and contraceptives available to all by the year
2015.

The United States did not rank higher largely because of teen-age pregnancies --
its rate is about six times that of European nations -- and a relatively low
rate of contraceptive use.

Although it still fell in the study's "very low risk" group of countries, the
United States ranked behind such emerging countries as Taiwan and Singapore. And
Dr. Conly contended that it "is likely to drop even farther if this Congress
continues as it has started." A proposal to end public contraceptive services in
the United States has been approved in committee, and another to cut aid to
developing nations in Africa by one-third may be an indication of what is to
come, she said.

Some relatively poor countries have made long-term commitments to health care
and family planning, Dr. Conly said, and have succeeding in several important
measures. "Their programs may not be the Cadillac models," she said, "but they
give all people access to health care of some kind."

Costa Rica, Cuba and Sri Lanka have maternal death rates lower than 100 per
100,000 births, whereas about half the world's nations have rates of 200 to
1,750 per 100,000. The study also cited Tunisia and Vietnam as having made
unexpected progress.

The report contained at least two surprises for researchers. One was that Italy
ranked best in reproductive health in the world.

"We didn't expect this," Dr. Conly said, "because while use of family planning
in Italy is high, over half of Italian couples use traditional methods like
withdrawal and rhythm, which experts generally consider less effective. However,
Italian women appear able to use these methods effectively, largely because safe
abortion is available on request."

Another surprise, Dr. Conly said, was that countries like Indonesia and
Bangladesh, which have become exemplary nations in offering family planning
broadly, nevertheless fall in the "high risk" category because their death rates
from pregnancy and childbirth remain high.

The study looked at three areas for each country: family planning, which the
researchers said reduced the risks associated with frequent childbearing and
reliance on unsafe abortion; pregnancy and childbirth, including such related
health concerns as AIDS and anemia, and post-pregnancy issues like infertility.

The nations of the former Soviet Union were not included in the survey because
some data for those nations were not available in comparable form.


LOAD-DATE: July 26, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Table: "Reproductive Risks: Range Worldwide" lists estimated risk from
complications of pregnancy, childbirth or abortion in a woman's lifetime in
selected countries. (Source: Population Action International)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              95 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 27, 1995, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

George Romney Dies at 88; A Leading G.O.P. Figure

BYLINE: By DAVID E. ROSENBAUM

SECTION: Section D;  Page 22;  Column 1;  National Desk

LENGTH: 775 words


George W. Romney, an automobile executive who became a three-term Governor of
Michigan, a Republican Presidential candidate and a member of the Nixon Cabinet,
died yesterday at his home in Bloomfield Hills, Mich., a Detroit suburb. He was
88.

His wife, Lenore, whom he married in 1931, found him collapsed yesterday morning
on the treadmill in the exercise room of their home, their son G. Scott Romney
said. The office of the Oakland County Medical Examiner issued a statement
saying only that Mr. Romney had died of natural causes.

Mr. Romney was chairman and president of the American Motors Corporation when he
resigned in 1962 to run, successfully, for Governor. He ran for the Republican
Presidential nomination in 1968 but dropped out of the race just before the New
Hampshire primary. He then served as Secretary of Housing and Urban Development
in President Richard M. Nixon's first term.

Mr. Romney represented the liberal wing of the Republican Party, supporting
civil rights initiatives and Government social programs and opposing the war in
Vietnam. His politics proved successful in Michigan, where he was elected
Governor three times, by increasingly large margins.

But as a politician on the national stage, he seemed wooden. He was ridiculed
because of a remark in 1967 that he had originally supported the war in Vietnam
because he had been "brainwashed" by generals and diplomats during a visit there
in 1965. As Housing Secretary, he was outside President Nixon's inner circle and
was relegated to pleading in vain for an expansion of urban and other domestic
programs.

Mr. Romney resigned after Mr. Nixon was re-elected in 1972 and essentially
retired from public life. But he re-emerged last year to campaign actively for
his other son, Mitt, who ran for the Senate in Massachusetts and lost to the
incumbent, Edward M. Kennedy.

George Wilcken Romney was born in 1907 in a Mormon colony in Chihuahua, Mexico.
His parents were American citizens and monogamists, but they had moved to Mexico
along with many other Mormons when Congress outlawed polygamy in the 1880's.

His parents moved back to the United States when he was a child, and he was
reared in Idaho and Utah. He served two years as a Mormon missionary in England
and Scotland. He also attended several colleges but never graduated.

As a young man, Mr. Romney worked in Washington as a speechwriter for a
Democratic Senator from Massachusetts, David T. Walsh. He then became a
Washington lobbyist for the aluminum industry and an official of the Automobile
Manufacturers Association.

In 1948, he joined the Nash-Kelvinator Corporation. Six years later,
Nash-Kelvinator merged with the Hudson Motor Car Company to create American
Motors, and Mr. Romney became president of the company. He managed to rescue
American Motors from near collapse with a successful promotion of the company's
Rambler as a midget mightier than Detroit's "gas-guzzling dinosaurs."

He also became engaged in civic affairs, heading a citizens' committee for
Detroit's schools and organizing a political group, Citizens for Michigan, to
study Detroit's problems.

In 1962, after weeks of agonizing and a 24-hour prayerful fast, Mr. Romney
resigned from American Motors to run for Governor against the Democratic
incumbent, John B. Swainson. With an appeal to labor unions unusual for a
Republican, Mr. Romney won by 78,000 votes and became the first Republican
Governor of Michigan in 14 years.

He was re-elected in 1964 and 1966. In 1967, he became the first announced
candidate for the 1968 Republican Presidential nomination.

In the early campaigning in New Hampshire, Mr. Romney was a front-runner. But as
the weeks went by, he was increasingly dogged by his remark about having been
brainwashed. The perception grew, fairly or not, that he was a witless candidate
with his foot in his mouth.

Mr. Romney always maintained that his real problem had been that there was not
room for both him and Gov. Nelson A. Rockefeller of New York as candidates to
the left of Mr. Nixon. But Mr. Rockefeller did not enter the race in earnest
until the Romney candidacy had faltered.

As Housing Secretary, Mr. Romney tried to expand public housing and move some of
it into the suburbs. He did increase somewhat the amount of federally subsidized
housing, but others in the Administration blocked his efforts to place it in
suburbs.

In retirement, Mr. Romney remained physically active, walking several miles a
day and playing golf.

In addition to his wife and two sons, he is survived by two daughters, Lynn
Keenan and Jane Romney; 23 grandchildren, and 33 great-grandchildren.

NAME: George W. Romney

LOAD-DATE: July 27, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: At a meeting of governors in October 1967, George Romney,
center, chatted with two other leading Republicans: Nelson A. Rockefeller of New
York, left, and Ronald Reagan of California. (Associated Press)

TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              96 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 27, 1995, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

World News Briefs;
23 Vietnamese Refugees Flee Camp in Hong Kong

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A;  Page 11;  Column 3;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 127 words

DATELINE: HONG KONG, July 26


Twenty-three Vietnamese refugees escaped today from a detention center here, the
second such incident in two weeks, a Government spokesman said.

The spokesman said that four refugees were recovered but that the rest managed
to swim half-a-mile to dry land. Of those, 7 were quickly picked up by the
police in Hong Kong's western district, but 12 are still at large.

Hong Kong has about 22,000 Vietnamese refugees, the largest group in Asia, and
plans to repatriate them and close the camps by late next year.

Earlier this month, 90 refugees fled High Island camp after cutting through a
barbed-wire fence during a storm, but only 11 are still at large.

Many of the recaptured refugees said they feared they were about to be deported
to Vietnam.

LOAD-DATE: July 27, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              97 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 28, 1995, Friday, Late Edition - Final

War in Korea, Fast Receding, Gets Memorial

BYLINE: By TODD S. PURDUM

SECTION: Section A;  Page 1;  Column 3;  National Desk

LENGTH: 692 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 27


Under a sweltering sun worlds away from the cold war combat being commemorated,
President Clinton and President Kim Young-sam of South Korea dedicated a new
national memorial today intended to assure that the long-gone Korean War does
not remain forgotten.

"The Korean War veterans endured terrible hardships: deathly cold, weeks and
months crammed in foxholes and bunkers, an enemy of overwhelming numbers, the
threat of brutal imprisonment and torture," Mr. Clinton said of a conflict in
which more than 54,000 Americans died, but which has faded in the public mind
between the triumphs of World War II and the turmoil of Vietnam. "They set a
standard of courage that may be equaled but never surpassed in the annals of
American combat."

Marking the signing of the armistice that ended the war 42 years ago today, Mr.
Clinton and Mr. Kim joined in dedicating the stone and steel memorial on former
marshland at the west end of the Mall near the Lincoln Memorial. It features 19
lead-gray sculptures of a ghostly group of weary G.I.'s advancing across a
triangular field in ponchos as if on eternal patrol.

In a White House meeting this morning, Mr. Clinton assured the South Korean
leader that American troops would remain on the Korean peninsula as long as they
were wanted, and pledged that improvement in Washington's relations with North
Korea would remain contingent on increased dialogue between North and South
Korea.

But for the tens of thousands of veterans and their families who gathered on the
Mall, it was a day to remember a conflict that once made place-names like
Heartbreak Ridge and Pork Chop Hill, the real-life drama of Gen. Douglas
MacArthur's firing and -- a generation later -- the situation comedy of
"M*A*S*H" a part of the national consciousness.

"It's been a long time coming," said John Winter of Bloomington, Minn., a Marine
Corps veteran of Korea, summing up the feelings of vindication.

The memorial, authorized by Congress in 1986 but delayed by arguments over its
design and planning, cost $18 million and was paid for by private contributions.
It also features a black granite wall with a mural of sandblasted images of
support troops -- drivers, medics, nurses, chaplains.

An extension of the granite wall, representing the Korean peninsula, slices into
a pool of water, bearing the words, "Freedom is Not Free."

Mr. Kim, who was honored at a state dinner tonight at the White House before
spending the night across the street in Blair House, where President Harry
Truman lived when the war began in 1950, made that point in his speech.

Both presidents also argued that the war, which ended in bitter stalemate, was
the first step toward the end of the cold war. "The Korean War was the war that
heralded the collapse of the Berlin Wall and the demise of communism," Mr. Kim
said.

Today, in an air-conditioned tent pitched near the memorial, visitors could use
a computer database to search the service records of veterans who died during
the war. Memorial organizers are still collecting information from families of
the 54,000 Americans who died in Korea (nearly 34,000 in action and another
20,000 in noncombat deaths) and the more than 8,000 missing.

Ed Hanrahan, who served with the Third Infantry Division, wiped away tears as he
held a printout bearing the name, rank and serial number of his comrade Ronald
Bradley, who died of wounds.

"He was in my company," said Mr. Hanrahan, who came from his home in
Massachusetts. "I'm going to give this to his daughter, who never saw him."

August Hammer, 65, of Whitehall, Pa., came with his sisters Theresa Brocun and
Cecelia Tremba, to commemorate the death of their brother, Carl, on the last day
of the war in 1953. "This is something great that they finally put up the
memorial," said Mr. Hammer.

Wayne Ballew of Lummi, Wash., said, "It's about time there was a memorial;
finally Korea is being recognized as a war." Mr. Ballew, 63, who served in the
Marines, said that at the time, the war was described as a "police action."

"When people got killed they didn't get killed for policing," he said. "We got
killed because it was a war."

LOAD-DATE: July 28, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: President Kim Young-sam of South Korea and president Clinton
marked the 42d anniversary of the armistice that ended the Korean War at
ceremonies yesterday in Washington to inaugurate the memorial (David Scull/The
New York Times) (pg. A1); A Korean War Veterans Memorial that cost $18 million
and was paid for with private contributions was dedicated yesterday in
Washington. Many in the crowd saluted during the playing of the national anthem.
(Stephen Crowley/The New York Times) (pg. A18)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              98 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 28, 1995, Friday, Late Edition - Final

FILM REVIEW;
An Elephant, a Chocolate Bar and Vietnam

BYLINE: By JANET MASLIN

SECTION: Section C;  Page 12;  Column 1;  Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 683 words


In 1968, a group of Green Berets arranged the delivery of an elephant to a small
Vietnamese village. The delivery was airborne. According to production notes for
"Operation Dumbo Drop," Disney's cheery account of that mission, "Were it not
for the fateful day the Dumbo Drop mission took place -- the day Dr. Martin
Luther King Jr. was assassinated -- this would have been a newsworthy event."

Well, better late than never. Now "Operation Dumbo Drop" turns what cannot have
been strictly a sunny story into blithe family entertainment, largely
overlooking the fact that there was a war going on.  The model for this is a lot
closer to "McHale's Navy," which is mentioned here, than it is to "Platoon." But
in the end, this generally lighthearted Vietnam caper does try to teach a lesson
of sorts, since the gift of an elephant becomes a form of war reparations. As
one of the film's American officers puts it, "Maybe we all need to do one good
thing before we go."

"Operation Dumbo Drop," from Simon Wincer, the director of "Free Willy," is at
its most pleasantly innocuous when it doesn't strain itself with that kind of
moralizing and instead concentrates on the logistical nightmare of
elephant-moving. Beyond that, it doesn't have much plot, but the idea of tossing
an elephant out of an airplane certainly makes for adequate suspense.

Based on a story recalled by Jim Morris, a retired United States Army major, and
written by Gene Quintano and Jim Kouf, the film begins in the village of Dak
Nhe, where an elephant is the people's beloved mascot.  Then the mascot dies,
for reasons that involve Capt. T. C. Doyle (Ray Liotta) and his candy bar.
Nestle's Crunch is featured prominently. But since the sequence involves
elephant killing and the North Vietnamese, this may not be the ideal product
plug.

Afterward, Capt. Sam Cahill (Danny Glover), the local officer whom Doyle is
supposed to replace, advises him that American military personnel come up with a
new elephant. It is a matter of both honor and strategy, since the Dak Nhe
villagers live strategically near the Ho Chi Minh trail.  So the Americans are
off and running, assembling "a mismatched team of would-be heroes" (according to
production notes again) to get the job done. The good news is that "Operation
Dumbo Drop" has a much better cast than such a movie mission would ordinarily
warrant.

That cast is a lively remembrance of Disney films not far past. Doug E. Doug is
again a nimble comic cutup, as he was in "Cool Runnings," and Mr. Glover's kind,
fatherly presence brings "Angels in the Outfield" to mind. Denis Leary has most
of the best lines here as the crafty, wisecracking supply officer David Poole,
and makes a much more palatable comic actor that he did in "The Ref." Mr. Liotta
plays an appealingly gruff good guy as he did in "Corrina, Corrina," a film that
felt like Disney's though it was released by New Line.

These actors band together (along with Corin Nemec as a farm-boy recruit and
Dinh Thien Le as a young elephant driver) to coax the elephant onto an airplane,
administer elephant suppositories, chase the runaway elephant through a crowded
street and occasionally get nuzzled by that friendly trunk. "Operation Dumbo
Drop" is painlessly good-humored by any lights, but the viewers most likely to
enjoy all this are those most easily driven to giggles by the idea of elephant
poop. That also figures in the story.

"Operation Dumbo Drop" is rated PG (Parental guidance suggested).  It includes a
few swear words.


OPERATION DUMBO DROP

Directed by Simon Wincer; written by Gene Quintano and Jim Kouf, based on the
story by Maj. Jim Morris; director of photography, Russell Boyd; edited by O.
Nicholas Brown; music by David Newman; production designer, Paul Peters;
produced by Diane Nabatoff and David Madden; released by Walt Disney Pictures.
Running time: 108 minutes. This film is rated PG.

WITH: Danny Glover (Sam Cahill), Ray Liotta (Captain Doyle), Denis Leary (David
Poole), Doug E. Doug (Harvey Ashford), Corin Nemec (Lawrence Farley) and Dinh
Thien Le (Linh).

LOAD-DATE: July 28, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              99 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 28, 1995, Friday, Late Edition - Final

World News Briefs;
Four M.I.A.'s in Vietnam Are Identified, U.S. Says

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A;  Page 5;  Column 1;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 158 words

DATELINE: HANOI, Vietnam, July 27


Military investigators have identified human remains found in Vietnam as
belonging to four American servicemen missing in action since the Vietnam war.

A spokesman in Hanoi for the joint search force working to identify remains said
two sets of remains had been identified as those of Capt. Jack P. Dove, of
Bluefield, Va., and Lieut. Col. Boyd Squire, of Sacramento, Calif. The
spokesman, Maj. Randall Garrett, said the men were crew members on a T-28
aircraft shot down over Vietnam on July 12, 1967.

A third set was identified as those of Col. Joseph Chestnut, of Murfreesboro,
Tenn., who was the pilot of a T-28 that crashed on Oct. 13, 1970, during a night
mission over Laos.

The identity of the fourth serviceman is being withheld at the request of
relatives.

Seventy sets of remains have been identified since joint search efforts began in
1992, but 2,198 servicemen are still listed as missing, 1,615 of them in
Vietnam.

LOAD-DATE: July 28, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              100 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 29, 1995, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

BUSINESS DIGEST

SECTION: Section 1; Page 35; Column 1; Business/Financial Desk

LENGTH: 678 words



Environmental Groups Prevail in the House

Environmentalists won a big victory in the House, where Democrats and moderate
Republicans joined together to reject a proposal by the Republican leadership to
limit the E.P.A.'s ability to enforce pollution laws.

The vote suggests there is an emerging reluctance to undo the environmental
policies put in place during a generation of Democratic control of Congress.
More than a dozen Republicans warned their party that the voters would strike
back if they felt environmental protections were being undermined in Congress.
[Page 1.]

The Senate voted to give up unlimited lobbyist-paid lunches and free trips to
sporting weekends. Civic groups were pleased. [1.]


Stocks Slip, Ending Strong Week

Stocks fell as investors took profits after a strong week. The Dow Jones
industrial average declined 17.26 points, to 4,715.51, but improved earnings
lifted the Dow 73.96 points for the week. Newly issued technology stocks did
well, but Microsoft lost 3 7/8 points, closing at 92 5/8, on speculation that
the Justice Department would sue to block the company's plans for its on-line
service. [39.]

Treasury securities prices fell when a report showed consumer sentiment was
stronger than had been expected. The yield on the 30-year bond rose to 6.90
percent. [38.]

Computer Merger Advances

Computer Associates won a victory in its effort to take over Legent for $1.74
billion. The Justice Department's antitrust division cleared the way to the
acquisition without requiring the sale of some of Legent's more valuable
software lines. [37.]

AT&T Redirects Tech Line

AT&T plans to shrink its computer subsidiary drastically and focus on the
financial, retail and communications industries. An unspecified number of jobs
will be cut in the restructuring. AT&T stock rose $1.375, to $53.625. AT&T
acquired the operation when it bought NCR for $7.4 billion in 1991. [37.]

Salomon Under Investigation

Salomon Brothers and the Swiss Bank Corporation are under investigation by
French stock market authorities in connection with possible insider trading in
shares of Eurotunnel, which went public in a $1.2 billion stock sale in May
1994. [37.]

More Risk Seen at Japan's Banks

Japan's banks carry more bad debt than previously believed, a senior Government
official suggested in Tokyo. His estimate grew 25 percent, to the equivalent of
$572 billion. But the official said the Government would not let a big
money-center bank fail. [36.]

Investor Funds for Russia

Russia adopted new rules to create a network of mutual funds, which could
attract much of the money that investors have preferred to squirrel away at
home. [36.]

Treasury Proposes Merging Funds

The Treasury proposed merging the funds that insure deposits at commercial banks
and savings institutions by 1998. The Administration warned that the savings
fund that protects 66 million accounts was in danger of collapse. A merger would
eliminate the most important distinction between the two types of institutions.
[38.]

Vietnam Joins Asean

Vietnam became the first Communist nation to join Asean, the group that includes
most of Asia's fastest-growing economies. The association has emerged as the
premier diplomatic grouping for the region, and it has championed the creation
of a Southeast Asian free-trade area early in the next decade. In the region,
only Cambodia, Laos and Myanmar, formerly Burma, are not yet full members of the
association, and their inclusion appears to be only a matter of time. [3.]

Coffee Prices Decline Again

Coffee futures prices fell for a second day on skepticism that producers would
be able to reduce exports. The decline also followed moves by two big American
marketers cut the retail prices of their ground and instant coffees. This week,
coffee futures prices reached a six-week high after producing countries agreed
to reduce exports about 12 percent over the next 12 months in an effort to
bolster prices. [34.]

LOAD-DATE: July 29, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Table: "YESTERDAY"
Dow industrials                4,715.51    -17.26
30-yr. Treasury yield             6.90%     +0.06
The dollar                    88.11 yen     +0.01

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              101 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 29, 1995, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

CONFLICT IN THE BALKANS: THE STRATEGIST;
Bosnia Uncertainty Dims Top U.S. General's Image

BYLINE: By ERIC SCHMITT

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 1;  Column 1;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1389 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 28


John Shalikashvili was picked to fill the formidable shoes of Colin L. Powell
two years ago largely because he is what his predecessor was not: low-key,
self-effacing and apolitical. This is a man whose ambition after he retires from
the Army is to own a country hardware store.

As Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and President Clinton's senior military
adviser, General Shalikashvili has brought his own strengths to the job. A
meticulous military planner, he has won accolades for American-led missions to
fight starvation among Rwandan refugees, to restore democracy in Haiti and to
stare down Iraq's Saddam Hussein on the Kuwaiti border in 1994.

That all changed with Bosnia. The American military that was so overwhelming in
the Persian Gulf looks impotent in the Balkans, despite its dominant role in
NATO. General Shalikashvili's consensus-building style, admired when he was
military commander of the 16-nation NATO alliance, now seems indecisive.

Some Republican senators plan to question the general closely next month when
the Senate considers his nomination for a second two-year term, and they are
even hinting they may oppose him.

The general, whose name is pronounced shah-lee-kahsh-VEE-lee but who is known as
Shali to nearly all, concedes that he has proved as incapable as everyone else
of bringing peace to the Balkans. Although he criticized the Clinton
Administration when he was at NATO for its early inaction on Bosnia, he has
found himself dragged into the Administration's seemingly impossible mission:
attempting to end the war without entering it.

A four-star general whose defining arena has been Europe and NATO, General
Shalikashvili seemed a good choice for tackling the Balkans problem. As the
alliance's military boss, he drafted the initial plan to enforce peace in the
former Yugoslavia two years ago. But he has had to contend not only with
disputatious allies but with a Commander in Chief who has hesitated again and
again in Bosnia.

"Obviously, when you're involved in a Desert Storm-type operation, it's a
totally different dynamic that allows you in an unfettered way to use decisive
force to get the job done," the general said in an interview this week,
referring to the operation in the Persian Gulf. "In Bosnia particularly, we're
really in a murky world between peacekeeping and peacemaking where the rules
have not yet been written, and we're all feeling our way."

General Shalikashvili opposes sending American ground troops to Bosnia as
combatants, but he has been more flexible than General Powell's all-or-nothing
approach in using military force: he favors bombing to back up United Nations
ultimatums. The general has agonized, however, as the military credibility of
NATO and the United States has eroded with each ineffective pinprick air attack
against the Bosnian Serbs.

"I am of the view, and was from the very beginning, that if you use military
force, and if you are hesitant and you are timid, you would have all the ill
effects of having used military force and probably none -- or very few -- of the
benefits," General Shalikashvili said. "That is the dilemma we are facing today
in Bosnia. It's very frustrating for me, and has been for nearly two years."

Doing more in Bosnia without committing what he called the "unforgivable
blunder" of fracturing NATO is testing General Shalikashvili's diplomatic
skills. He is torn between a personal passion to see a just settlement and the
recognition of the military risks that could entail. He also well understands
the political constraints imposed by European allies, whose ground troops could
become sacrificial hostages if NATO carries out air strikes.

"When the U.S. is in the position to lead, we've been able to do the right
things, and do them correctly," he said. "Where we are so frustrated is when
we're not in the lead."

The Administration's latest plan, adopted with the allies in London last Friday,
is a threat of intensive air strikes to deter the Bosnian Serbs from waging war
against the Gorazde enclave, one of six "safe areas" so designated by the United
Nations. But the West has threatened bombing before and has always backed down.
If the West loses its nerve this time, NATO and General Shalikashvili could both
lose credibility.

"As frustrated as I am that many of those errors have been made in the past, all
I can do is keep talking," the general said.

While the general keeps his own counsel, his caution has supported President
Clinton's political instincts to keep American ground troops out of Bosnia. "His
recommendations have profoundly influenced our policy in Bosnia, and reflect his
concern about not seeing another Vietnam," said Defense Secretary William J.
Perry.

Even Administration officials who want broader American involvement in Bosnia
come away impressed by General Shalikashvili's military realism. Madeleine K.
Albright, the American representative to the United Nations, recalled flying
into Sarajevo, the Bosnian capital, with the General in April 1994. He was
pointing at the mountainous terrain and describing the difficulty of hitting
targets. "I don't always like to hear what he's saying, but I respect it because
it's coming from someone with a humanist perspective and a realistic military
appraisal," Ms. Albright said.

But some Republican senators grumble that General Shalikashvili's knack for
hammering out compromises has kept him from taking stronger stands.

"I don't believe he has weighed in forcefully on the Bosnia issue," said Senator
John McCain, Republican of Arizona. "I think he knows better."

The general dismisses such criticism. "The problem has not been with my
colleagues in this Administration," he said. "The problem has been in the
inability to convince our international partners."

Of course that is exactly what one would expect to hear from the ruddy-faced
artilleryman who values loyalty over the limelight. "Clinton has a team player
in Shali who's comfortable doing things the way the President likes things done:
jawboning things to death," said one White House official.

But even General Shalikashvili's long-fused patience has been tested by the
Administration's deliberative style, his friends say.

"Bush and Powell could relate to each other as military men," said Senator John
W. Warner, Republican of Virginia. "Shali has a greater challenge to work with a
President and others in this Administration who have not had military
experience."

By heritage, General Shalikashvili seemed destined for a military career. He is
a grandson of a Czarist general and son of an officer from the Georgian republic
who became a nationalist and fought the Red Army during World War II. He and his
family fled to Germany from Poland in 1944, running ahead of the advancing
Russians.

At 16 he and his family, like many other refugees seeking a new life, left for
America, settling in Peoria, Ill., and perfecting his English by watching John
Wayne movies.

General Shalikashvili did not plan to join the military; he wanted to design
heavy equipment. But the Army drafted him in 1958, and he earned an officer's
commission the following year.

The young officer rose quickly, serving in Vietnam (where he won a Bronze Star),
Europe and the Pentagon. But he became a public figure with his handling of the
refugee crisis in northern Iraq after the Persian Gulf war, airlifting food and
supplies to 450,000 Kurdish refugees.

He returned to Washington, serving as General Powell's senior military
assistant, and became his boss's choice to replace him.

As chairman, he had found the challenges coming fast and furious. The general
oversaw detailed battle plans for Haiti, North Korea and a second Persian Gulf
conflict, which evaporated when American troops rushed to Kuwait last October.

If the gulf war was General Powell's defining moment, Bosnia is General
Shalikashvili's. And he knows it.

"There are probably people in hindsight who will say that we all should have
jumped up and down and insisted on the way we wanted to do it earlier," he said.
"That's probably a valid criticism, because obviously we didn't get our way.
It's not something we woke up to. While it was going on, I thought I was doing
the counseling, the arguing and the persuasion, but clearly not successfully."

NAME: John Shalikashvili

LOAD-DATE: July 29, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Gen. John Shalikashvili. (pg. 1); John Shalikashvili, Chairman
of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, followed by Defense Secretary William J. Perry,
leaving the Capitol after the two met with Democrats to discuss Bosnia policy at
their weekly luncheon. (Stephen Crowley/The New York Times) (pg. 4)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              102 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 29, 1995, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section 1; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 779 words



International 2-4

SHALIKASHVILI'S BOSNIA CRISIS

He won praise for the American-led missions in Rwanda and Haiti, but the Balkan
conflict has proven a frustrating challenge for Gen. John Shalikashvili,
Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. 1

CROATIAN TROOPS ADVANCE

Croatian forces were reported to be pressing forward through Serbian-held
territory in a possible campaign to regain their own land. 4

AMID WAR, ORDINARY LIFE

A Croatian town near the front between Government forces and Serbian rebels
tries to maintain a semblance of normalcy. 4

HUNGARIAN PARTY ASCENDANT

By expressing nationalist yearnings in an uncertain post-Communist world, a
small, century-old political party is making a comeback. 2

U.S. OVERTURES TO CHINA

Hoping to halt the deterioration in its relations with China, the Clinton
Administration has offered two positive gestures but ruled out the one
concession Beijing wants. 3

VIETNAM ENTERS ASEAN

Vietnam was admitted to the Association of Southeast Asian Nations, the first
Communist nation granted membership since it was founded 28 years ago. 3

ISRAEL TARGETS HAMAS LEADER

Israel would like to see the extradition from the United States of a man
identified as a leader of the militant Islamic movement Hamas. 3

Moscow Journal: Infertility clinics seek a few, very good men. 2

National 5-8

JURY REJECTS EXECUTION

A jury in Union, S.C., quickly rejected the death penalty for Susan Smith, who
was convicted of drowning her two young sons. She was sentenced to life in
prison and will be eligible for parole in 30 years. 1

GOODBYE TO FREE LUNCH

The Senate voted to prohibit its members from getting unlimited lunches and
trips from lobbyists. In a unanimous vote, the new rules were adopted to set a
$50 maximum for any single gift or meal. 1

ENVIRONMENTALIST VICTORY

Environmentalists won their first big victory in the House this year as
lawmakers narrowly rejected a Republican proposal to limit enforcement of
pollution laws. 1

WHAT CLINTON KNEW ABOUT RAID

Webster L. Hubbell, the former Justice Department official, testified at a
Congressional hearing that the President never pushed officials to use tear gas
in the assault on the Branch Davidians in 1993. 6

SHUTTLE FLIGHT DELAYED

The next flight of a space shuttle, scheduled for Aug. 5, has been postponed
indefinitely because of scorching of critical seals in the booster nozzles.  8

CHICAGO PREPARES FOR HEAT

Chicago's Mayor is ready to declare a heat emergency if temperatures soar, as
expected, into the upper 90's this weekend.  5

ANOTHER FAMILY MANIFESTO

President Clinton outlined a 14-point "American Family Values Agenda" including
a higher minimum wage and a national crusade against teen-age pregnancy. 6

HITTING THE ROCK PILE

Felons in chains will again be breaking rocks under a searing sun in Alabama as
part of the state's get-tough policy on convicts. 5

Metro Digest 21

DISNEY'S 42d STREET DEAL

Officials, development experts and real estate executives shed light on how the
Walt Disney Company was able to get government subsidies to renovate the New
Amsterdam theater and also influence other projects planned for 42d Street. 1

HYDE PARK TO F.D.R.: NO SMOKING

Residents are objecting to a plan to adopt the famous silhouette of Franklin D.
Roosevelt with a cigarette holder clenched between his teeth as Hyde Park's
symbol. 1

Business Digest 34

Arts/Entertainment 9-15

 Writers in World War II.  9

Music: Patti Smith.9

Dog Star and Keanu Reeves.  11

Saxophone improvisation.  11

Rage from Filter.  11

Six pianists for Mozart.  13

Dance: Alternative moves.13

Television: "Sahara" remake.  14

Sports 28-32

Baseball: Yanks get Cone and Sierra in separate trades.  29

Mets trade Bonilla.  29

Columns: Rhoden on boxing.  29

On Baseball.  31

Football: Cross plays in pain.  29

Jets wait on receiver.  32

Tennis: The Seles reception.  32

Sports People: 28 Obituaries 27

Miklos Rozsa, composer for movies

Ted Hook, dancer and restaurateur

Editorials/Op-Ed 18-19

Editorials Rezoning the sex shops.

Too hot to cool down.

Fear in the sky.

Megan's law, rewritten.

Letters

Frank Rich: Bob Dole's bod.

Russell Baker: If not Vegas, L.A. maybe?

Shirley D. Peterson: Death to the tax code.

Robert V. Levine: Rude? Yeah, you are.

Chris Stern Hyman: New York protects bad doctors.

Chronicle 20

Bridge 15

Crossword 12

LOAD-DATE: July 29, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              103 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 29, 1995, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Hanoi Joins a Club Created to Blackball It

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHENON

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 3;  Column 1;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 379 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, July 28


Vietnam was admitted today to the Association of Southeast Asian Nations, the
first Communist nation granted membership since it was founded 28 years ago, in
part as a bulwark against Communism.

The admission of Vietnam is a critical step in Hanoi's integration into a region
that includes most of Asia's fastest-growing economies. Its membership was
formalized at a ceremony in which the Vietnamese flag was raised at the
association's annual ministerial meeting, in Brunei.

The association, known by the acronym Asean, was founded in 1967, at the height
of the Vietnam War, to promote political and economic solidarity among the
non-Communist nations of the region.

But today it seems well on its way to becoming a partnership of all 10 nations
in the area. The association has emerged as the premier diplomatic grouping for
the region, and it has championed the creation of a free-trade area early in the
next decade.

Only Cambodia, Laos and Myanmar, formerly Burma, are not yet full members, and
their inclusion appears to be only a matter of time. The military junta that
runs Myanmar announced on Monday that it would take the first step toward
membership.

Vietnam and its non-Communist neighbors still have broad ideological
differences. But the other members appear willing to overlook them for now in
hopes of cooperation in trade and investment.

Vietnam's rapid economic growth -- about 8.8 percent in 1994 -- and an educated,
low-wage work force have made it an attractive market for foreign investors,
especially since the United States ended the trade embargo it imposed at the end
of the war.

At today's ceremony, Vietnam's Foreign Minister, Nguyen Manh Cam, signed the
association's membership declaration as foreign ministers of the other member
nations watched. "You are just across the water from us, and for too long we
have been distant strangers," Foreign Minister Mohamed Bolkiah of Brunei told
the Vietnamese.

It has been a heady summer of diplomatic triumphs for Vietnam, which won full
recognition from the United States earlier this month. Secretary of State Warren
Christopher is to participate in the summit talks in Brunei next week and then
travel to Hanoi, the first American Secretary of State to visit Vietnam in 25
years.

LOAD-DATE: July 29, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              104 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 29, 1995, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Beliefs

BYLINE: By Peter Steinfels

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 25;  Column 4;  National Desk

LENGTH: 1016 words


Fifty years later, the question will not be put to rest. What went into the
decision to drop the atomic bomb?

The debate is about morality as well as history, but often the history is
written as though it settled the morality. Opinions collide, for example, over
how many American lives President Harry S. Truman and other high officials
thought might be lost if the Allies had invaded Japan. Estimates from American
military sources from before August 1945 range from 16,000 to 46,000 deaths,
with four times as many wounded.

Writing after the bomb was dropped (on Hiroshima on Aug. 6 and Nagasaki on Aug.
9), Truman said he had feared 500,000 deaths and Secretary of War Henry Stimson
said he had envisioned more than one million casualties.

The unstated moral premise in much of this historical fencing is this: the right
decision would have been what brought victory with the least loss of life.

But not everyone agrees that this principle was the essential one. Survey the
literature, or simply listen to a dinner conversation where Hiroshima and
Nagasaki are considered more compelling topics than Hugh Grant, and at least
five basic moral arguments are heard:

ALL WAR IS WRONG. For the pacifist, it does not matter whether killing is done
by a bomb, a bayonet or a bow, or whether the victim is a pediatrician or a
pilot. The atomic bomb simply made clear on a horrific scale the evil of all
war.

NUCLEAR ARMS ARE DIFFERENT. They represent a quantum leap in destructiveness.
From the beginning, some scientists and statesmen sensed that to develop and
then to use such weapons was to sign a pact with the devil. Nothing should be
done to diminish the taboo surrounding these weapons or the dread they inspire,
not even suggesting that they fall within our normal rules of morality.

CIVILIANS ARE DIFFERENT. It is immoral to attack, directly and indiscriminately,
civilian populations of men, women and children, the young and the old, the
healthy and the disabled. This is the principle that condemns terrorism, that
declares passengers on a subway or families in a restaurant not fair targets, no
matter the justice of the cause. In World War II, first the Germans, then the
Allies had already crossed this line. Hiroshima and Nagasaki were massive,
single-bomb versions of the fire-bombings of Dresden, Hamburg, Tokyo and scores
of smaller Japanese cities. The atomic bomb represented not so much the evil of
all war as the evil of total war.

DO THE LEAST HARM POSSIBLE. Death, casualties and destruction should be no more
than necessary and somehow proportionate to the objective. The distinction
between civilian and combatant is not essential in this argument: A life is a
life. Less clear is how enemy lives are weighed against one's own, but
presumably they are part of the calculation. If dropping the atomic bombs was
likely to save lives, not dropping them would have been the immoral deed. This
is the principle that fuels the debate between those who defend the bombing and
those who maintain it was unnecessary or disproportionate.

WAR IS HELL. No nation should go to war except as a last resort, but once in
war, morality gives way to efficiency. Minimize one's own losses, whatever it
takes. Condemnation of what happens in the heat of battle -- indeed, any notion
that the reality of war can be squeezed into moral boundaries -- is home-front
hypocrisy, an effort to prettify the horror with armchair ethics.

After 50 years, does it matter which of these arguments we embrace? Are we doing
anything more than still trying to convict or acquit Truman?

Yet the debate matters because nations and civilizations, like individuals, do
not live by abstract principles. Moral principles arise from experience; they
are tested and revised in the face of new experience, and they must be embodied
in experience and the collective memories that result.

Children may learn to be good by heeding the Ten Commandments or the Five
Precepts of Buddhism. But long before that, they learn goodness by modeling
themselves on parents, teachers, saints and heroes.

Nations, likewise, live by formative events far more than by formal principles.
Americans imbibe their fierce attachment to self-determination and redress of
rights with their accounts of the Revolution. The principles of nationhood and
equality are embodied in the Civil War; appeasement, in Munich; radical evil, in
the Holocaust; Western resolve, in the Berlin airlift; adroit crisis diplomacy,
in the Cuban missile crisis, and tragic overreaching in Vietnam. These events
are landmarks on the mental and moral geography of the United States and of the
West in general.

And Hiroshima and Nagasaki?

In 1945, in the midst of the great national sigh of relief that the war was
over, only a few public voices denounced the atomic bombings. Polls showed that
not only did the vast majority of Americans approve of the bombings, but also
that those who questioned them or thought the bomb should have been dropped
first on an unpopulated area as a demonstration were outnumbered by those who
wished that more atomic bombs could have been dropped on Japan before it had a
chance to surrender.

Many of those protesting voices were religious: the liberal Protestant weekly
The Christian Century, theologians like Reinhold and H. Richard Niebuhr, leading
Roman Catholic journals like Commonweal and The Catholic World and, somewhat
later, America. They spoke in terms of sin, shame, guilt and contrition.

But widespread moral misgivings did not really begin until August 1946, when The
New Yorker published John Hersey's understated but excruciatingly detailed
account of the human devastation at Hiroshima.

Those misgivings, even a half century later, have never jelled into a consensus,
as proved by the inability of the National Air and Space Museum to mount an
exhibition that raised serious questions about the bombing. Will the United
States ever integrate the bombs of August into its moral self-understanding? Or
will they continue to haunt and torment us like ghosts?

LOAD-DATE: July 29, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              105 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 30, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

MUSIC;
Young Performers in Recital

BYLINE: By ROBERT SHERMAN

SECTION: Section 13CN;  Page 15;  Column 1;  Connecticut Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 903 words


FOR the last six weeks, more than 100 youngsters have been steeped in the
Hartford Conservatory's fifth annual summer program, singing in chorus, dancing,
playing in a string ensemble or one of the three concert bands, improvising with
a jazz group. The results of these intensive coaching sessions and rehearsals
will be on display this week in several free concerts.

Three short ones are on the Trinity Episcopal Church agenda at 5, 6 and 7 P.M.
Thursday, A longer program begins 7 P.M. Friday in West Hartford's Masonic Hall,
and the grand "Jazz and Roses" finale is set for next Sunday afternoon at 2 in
Elizabeth Park. Along with the student ensembles, the jazz outing also features
Dick Oatts, as guest saxophonist, and members of the Conservatory artist
faculty. For more details, call 246-2588.

The virtuoso Dan-Wen Wei has been striding forward in his career since 1991 when
Zubin Mehta chose him to perform at the opening concert of the Mozart
Bicentennial series in Avery Fisher Hall. Now the Chinese-born pianist is coming
to New Canaan, closing out the 1995 Silvermine Guild Chamber Series with an 8
P.M. Friday recital. His program consists of sonatas by Haydn, Liszt and
Prokofiev, along with Schumann's "Kinderscenen" (966-9700).

If one prefers Brahms, the Music Shed at the Norfolk Festival is the place to be
next weekend, with both the Friday and Saturday recitals devoted entirely to
chamber works by the German master. An added fillip: the pianist Boris Berman
will be using an original Bechstein, dated 1867, the type of piano favored by
Brahms himself.

In addition to Mr. Berman, the roster of faculty and guest artists for the two
concerts consists of the violinists Gyorgy Pauk and Peter Salaff, the cellists
Ralph Kirshbaum and Ole Akahoshi, the violist Atar Arad and the clarinetist
David Krakauer. Friday's 8 P.M. program lists the F major Cello Sonata, the
Clarinet Trio and the G minor Piano Quartet; on Saturday, the F minor Viola and
D minor Violin Sonatas preface the A major Piano Quartet.

Also on the Norfolk honor roll are today's 3 o'clock performance of Bach's B
Minor Mass, with Jonathan Babbitt conducting soloists, orchestra and the
Litchfield County Choral Union, two Young Artists Recitals, starting at 7:30
Monday and Thursday evenings, and a daylong Conference on Medicine and the
Performing Arts beginning at 9 next Sunday morning (542-3000).

Brahms is on the Music Mountain menu this week too -- the String Sextet next
Sunday -- but otherwise the programming is far more varied. Today, for example,
the Cavani String Quartet begins its 3 o'clock recital with Haydn, continues
with Shostakovich -- the Quartet No. 14, a considerably more cheerful work than
most others dating from the composer's final years -- and concludes with Ernest
Bloch's Quintet No. 1, the last with Peter Takacs as guest pianist.

The Leontovitch String Quartet made its much-admired American debut at Music
Mountain a few years ago, and the members of the ensemble, now resident in the
United States, have made a point of returning to the Mountain every summer since
then. This time around they're making a whole weekend of it, playing one recital
8 P.M. Saturday and another next Sunday afternoon at 3.

On the first occasion, look for Beethoven's F minor Quartet (Op. 95), and
another Shostakovich, the early F major, No. 3, plus Mozart's K. 581 Quintet,
with Ethan Sloane as guest clarinetist. At the Sunday session, the Leontovitch
shares the stage with the Orlando String Quartet, each ensemble going it alone
-- the Orlando with Mozart, the Leontovitch with Tchaikovsky -- after which the
players are mixed and matched for the promised Brahms String Sextet in G.

The Orlandos have their own full day coming up at the Mountain on Aug. 13, when
they'll present works of Haydn and Schnittke plus, with Pamela Mia Paul, as
guest pianist, a second hearing of the Brahms A Major Quartet (824-7126).

Hue, Vietnam, is New Haven's sister city, and the connection has spawned what
should be a fascinating evening at 8 o'clock Thursday at the Educational Center
for the Arts. Led by the poet, singer and songwriter Vo Que, the 11-member
Perfume River Traditional Ensemble (based in Hue and named for the river that
runs through that former imperial capital) will present Vietnamese court music,
boat songs and ritual chants (787-2869).

Kathy Mattea, the country music star, is headlining the 8 P.M. Friday show in
the University of Connecticut's "Summerfest '95" series at Jorgensen Auditorium.
Credit card reservations may be made by phone at 486-4226 (tickets for the Aug.
24 concert by Harry Belafonte and his new band Djoliba can also be ordered at
the same number).

A jazz alternative Friday evening at 8 brings the saxophonist Grover Washington
Jr. to the Garde Arts Center in New London, where he plans samplings from his
latest compact disk (and 24th recording), "All My Tomorrows." For ticket
availability, call 444-7373.

"Six top jazz artists in two days" is the promise of the Duracell Jazz Festival
at the Charles Ives Center for the Arts in Danbury: the McCoy-Tyner Trio, Dave
Koz and Kurt Elling share the 5 P.M. Saturday stage, while next Sunday at that
same hour, the featured attractions are Tick and Patti, Grover Washington Jr.
and Bela Fleck with the Flecktones. The Ives Center is on the Westside campus of
Western Connecticut State University (837-9226).

LOAD-DATE: July 30, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: The pianist Dan-Wen Wei will perform in New Canaan. (Stephen
Anderson)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              106 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 30, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

The Path to Screenwriter of 'Prizzi's Honor'

BYLINE: By BRIDGET LeROY

SECTION: Section 13LI;  Page 11;  Column 1;  Long Island Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1071 words


ALTHOUGH "Prizzi's Honor" was her first screenplay, Janet Roach, who won an
Academy Award nomination for it, was by no means a stranger to the camera.

"I decided when I was in third grade," Ms. Roach recounted in her home on
Shelter Island, "that I was going to make documentaries for CBS News."
Eventually she did.

But Ms. Roach has no idea how she arrived at that decision. Her mother was an
embryologist who received a Ph.D. in 1938 at Yale "at a time when women didn't
get Ph.D.'s, and they certainly didn't get them in science," Ms. Roach said. Her
father was harbormaster in Old Lyme, Conn., where she grew up.

"It wasn't exactly 'Ozzie and Harriet,' " said Ms. Roach, the oldest of eight
children who will be talking about her screenwriting on Thursday as part of the
continuing summer film series "Starry Nights in the Hamptons." The event, which
includes dinner and a screening of "Prizzi's Honor," is produced by Michael
Edelson and Frances Ann Dougherty and will be shown at the LTV studios in
Wainscott.

By the time she graduated from Barnard after having majored in American studies
and receiving a master's in journalism from Columbia, Ms. Roach recalled, "I
owed a whole bunch of money, so I went to work for CBS, collecting moldy old
election statistics."

It was 1968, and CBS was just starting to compile its own statistics. So Ms.
Roach's first job had her visiting "out-of-the-way places, odd counties in the
middle of nowhere." After a year and a half of that, she became a researcher at
CBS, "working for a guy who would have hired a goat, if a goat worked as cheaply
as I did." At 25, Ms. Roach became a producer. The first episode of "Mary Tyler
Moore" on CBS in 1970 that had Mary Richards applying for a job as an associate
producer at WJM-TV and then being hired as producer for $25 less a week, was,
Ms. Roach said, "not so far from the truth."

Ms. Roach said she was "very much a child of the 60's."

"Acid and the Vietnam War were the central experiences of my generation." she
said. "I did one, and I wanted to do the other."

She laughed and then became serious, saying, "So I got myself sent to Cambodia,"
one of the first women CBS News sent to Southeast Asia.

When Pol Pot, the Khmer Rouge leader in Cambodia, was deposed, Ms. Roach, who
was producing and writing segments for Ed Bradley, prepared a report about
refugee camps along the Thai-Cambodian border for "Sunday Morning."

The segment won her an Emmy.  Other reports followed, but after 11 years with
CBS News, she realized that she had fulfilled her third-grade goal. "I was
scared out of my mind," she recalled. "The freelance world is such a freefall.
CBS was a lifetime proposition. But I knew I couldn't stay." With her retirement
money from CBS, Ms. Roach built a house in Shelter Island Heights, with
extensive gardens in back.

When Bill D. Moyers, with whom she had worked at CBS News, went to public
television, he recruited Ms. Roach. First were four broadcasts of "Creativity
With Bill Moyers," for which Ms. Roach was writer and director. After the
series, which won an Emmy in 1982 as outstanding informational series, Ms. Roach
wrote and directed four hours of "A Walk Through the 20th Century With Bill
Moyers" for PBS. That effort, too, won an Emmy, for outstanding informational
series, in 1984.

One segment, in which Mr. Moyers "totally indulged me," Ms. Roach recounted, was
"That's No Tomato, That's a Work of Art." It dealt with engineering of a more
perfect tomato by a California agricultural group.

"We shot things at U.C.-Davis," Ms. Roach said. "They have a vise that tortures
the tomatoes, because the tomatoes have to be able to take the pressures at the
bottom of a 10-ton trailer when they're harvested."

Another segment was a profile of the director John Huston, for whom she
eventually adapted the script for"Prizzi's Honor." "We were introduced in London
by the photographer Eve Arnold, and--" Ms. Roach searched for the words to
describe how close she felt to Mr. Huston -- "and then he was part of my life."

The writer of "Prizzi's Honor," Richard Condon, sent galley proofs of the novel
to Ms. Roach, and she took them to Mr. Huston at his compound in a Mexican
jungle. Their friendship entailed many trips to the compound, where she took Mr.
Huston items to read. One winter day she flew to Mexico, taking the first draft
of Mr. Condon's screenplay. She said Mr. Huston asked her, " 'How'd you like to
try your hand at rewriting this, honey?' "

"Up until that point I thought I was earning my keep as an amusing house guest,"
Ms. Roach said. "I would sit for John's paintings and talk to him. But now I was
sitting for John in the mornings and writing for John in the afternoons."

Mr. Condon was pleased that someone whom he knew was adapting his work, and Mr.
Huston, whom she described as "a wonderful tutor, never didactic," went over the
work.

The film, on which Ms. Roach shares screenwriting credit, won Ms. Roach the
British Academy Award, the Writers' Guild Award and the Oscar nomination.

"lt's hard enough for any civilian to understand what writers do," Ms. Roach
said. "That's one of the reasons Hollywood is so tough on writers. While you're
writing, they have no control over you. They have an upside-down witch's hat
that they put right on the crown of your head and pour all their hopes and
desires into it, all their expectations. But they can't see the mechanics the
way you can see an actor's performance."

She said that Mr. Huston's health was deteriorating and that he made "Prizzi's
Honor" as a gift for his daughter Anjelica, who starred in it.

A professor of screenwriting at Columbia University, Ms. Roach is also the
screenwriter on the film of Peter Matthiessen's "Men's Lives: Surfmen and Baymen
of the South Fork." Sidney Lumet is to direct the film, which is produced by
James D'Ambrosio. Ms. Roach would say only that the film would be "nothing" like
the play "Men's Lives," an adaptation of the book by Joe Pintauro, which was a
success at the Bay Street Theater in Sag Harbor.

There is a sense of documentary-style closure to Ms. Roach's life so far, from
Barnard student to professor of screenwriting at Columbia, from daughter of a
harbormaster to a screenplay on baymen. "The best thing I learned from John is
just to live life every day." she said with a grin. "And let the devil take the
hindmost!"

LOAD-DATE: July 30, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Janet Roach outside her house on Shelter Island. (Michael Shavel
for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              107 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 30, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

FOOD;
Flavor and Texture in Vietnamese Salads

BYLINE: By MOIRA HODGSON

SECTION: Section 13CN; Page 10; Column 1; Connecticut Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1009 words


SALADS are very much part of the cooking of Vietnam, much more so than in other
countries of Southeast Asia. Even their spring rolls are salad-like, made with
large leaves of lettuce rolled around a filling and served cold instead of
deep-fried in dough.

At Le Colonial, a Vietnamese restaurant at 149 East 57th Street in Manhattan,
the salads are among the most popular dishes on the menu, even in winter,
because they are so refreshing. They are light but highly spiced, combining
interesting contrasts of texture and flavor. The chef, Viet Tran, who is from
Saigon -- he worked at Indochine before going to Le Colonial -- uses traditional
ingredients like fresh mint, coriander, cucumber, bean sprouts and iceberg
lettuce, which adds crunch. The salads can be prepared ahead of time and put
together at the last minute, which makes them great for summer entertaining.

Mr. Tran's beef salad combines sauteed (or even grilled) sirloin steak, which is
sliced thin with basil leaves, lemon grass and onion in a spicy soy and chili
sauce, served with greens and topped with roasted unsalted peanuts. Grilled
chicken is tossed with rice vermicelli in a chili vinaigrette flavored with
fresh lime juice. Grilled shrimp comes with cucumbers, carrots and daikon radish
in a light dressing made with chilies, olive oil and a dash of Asian fish sauce.

Most of the ingredients are widely available, even in supermarkets. If you
cannot get fresh lemon grass, lemon thyme leaves work just as well. Asian basil
is similar to our purple basil and has a slight cinnamon flavor, but regular
basil leaves can be substituted. Mirin is a Japanese rice wine; an acceptable
substitute can be made by cooking together equal parts of sake, sherry or a
sweet white wine with sugar to make a syrup.

Beer or a full-bodied white wine like Gewurztraminer go well with these salads.

Goi Tom (Grilled Shrimp Salad)

Total time: 30 minutes

 8to 10 jumbo shrimp
 1clove garlic, minced
 3shallots, chopped
 4tablespoons vegetable oil
 1seedless cucumber
 1carrot
 1cup daikon radishes
 1small red onion, sliced
 Add coarse salt and freshly ground pepper to taste
 1/2cup fresh basil leaves, coarsely chopped
 1tablespoon fresh mint leaves, coarsely chopped
 2tablespoons unsalted roasted peanuts
 For the dressing:
 1tablespoon coarse salt
 2tablespoons Asian fish sauce
 1tablespoon sugar
 2tablespoons garlic, minced
 4tablespoons olive oil
 2tablespoons finely chopped, fresh chili peppers.

1. Shell and devein the shrimp. Marinate them in the garlic, with one chopped
shallot and two tablespoons of vegetable oil for 20 minutes. Meanwhile, fry the
remaining two shallots in the remaining two tablespoons of vegetable oil.

2. Thinly slice the cucumber, carrot, radishes and onion and mix them together
in a bowl. Make the dressing. Combine the salt, fish sauce, sugar, garlic, oil
and chili peppers and set aside.

3. Preheat grill. Season the shrimp with salt and pepper to taste and one
tablespoon of the chopped basil. Grill them for one to two minutes on each side
and remove them when they are cooked. Be careful not to overcook or they will
become tough.

4. Put the cucumber and carrot mixture in the middle of each of four plates.
Arrange the shrimp around, then sprinkle with the remaining chopped basil, mint,
peanuts and fried shallots.

Yield: 4 servings.

Bum Ga Nuong (Chicken and Vermicelli)

Total time: 20 to 60 minutes marinating, 30 minutes cooking

 2whole chicken breasts, split to
 make 4 pieces
 2cloves garlic, finely chopped
 2shallots, finely chopped
 Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper to taste
 1tablespoon vegetable oil
 1/2cup dry rice vermicelli (available in Asian grocery stores)
 1small head of iceberg lettuce, shredded
 2cucumbers, sliced
 1/4cup fresh mint, chopped
 1/4cup unsalted roasted peanuts, chopped
 For the chili-lime vinaigrette:
 1/2cup water
 Juice of 1 lime
 4tablespoons Vietnamese fish
 sauce
 1tablespoon sugar
 1clove garlic, chopped
 1tablespoon chopped red chili pepper
 2tablespoons vegetable or olive oil.

1. Marinate the chicken breasts in the garlic, shallots, salt, pepper and the
vegetable oil for 20 to 60 minutes.

2. Bring three quarts of water to a boil. Add the rice vermicelli and cook three
to four minutes or until it is almost soft. Strain in a colander and set aside.

3. Grill the chicken on both sides until done. Cut into bite-size pieces.

4. In each of four bowls, divide the lettuce and cucumbers. Top with the
vermicelli. Arrange the chicken on top of the vermicelli.

5. Combine the ingredients for the chili vinaigrette and mix together
thoroughly. Pour three to four tablespoons of the chili vinaigrette on each
salad. Sprinkle with fresh mint and peanuts and serve.

Yield: 4 servings.

 Goi Bo (Spicy Beef Salad)

Total time: 20 minutes

 2tablespoons soy sauce
 2tablespoons white or balsamic vinegar
 1tablespoon mirin
 2tablespoons chili sauce
 8ounces sirloin steak, seasoned to taste with salt and pepper
 1/4cup fresh basil leaves, preferably purple, coarsely chopped
 1stalk lemon grass (use the tender purple part) or 1 tablespoon lemon thyme
leaves
 1/8cup onion, thinly sliced
 1cucumber, thinly sliced
 1/2head of iceberg lettuce, shredded
 1/4cup bean sprouts
 Unsalted roasted peanuts to garnish (about 1/2 cup).

1. Combine the soy sauce, vinegar, mirin and chili sauce. Set the mixture aside.

2. In a saute pan or wok, sear the steak on both sides until rare or medium
rare. Remove from heat and slice thinly. Toss with the basil leaves, lemon grass
and onion. Set aside.

3. In a separate bowl, toss together the cucumber, lettuce and bean sprouts. Put
greens evenly divided on two plates. Top with sliced sirloin mixture. Pour the
sauce on top, and then sprinkle with the roasted peanuts.

Yield: 2 servings.

LOAD-DATE: July 30, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              108 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 30, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

FOOD;
Flavor and Texture in Vietnamese Salads

BYLINE: By MOIRA HODGSON

SECTION: Section 13LI; Page 10; Column 1; Long Island Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1009 words


SALADS are very much part of the cooking of Vietnam, much more so than in other
countries of Southeast Asia. Even their spring rolls are salad-like, made with
large leaves of lettuce rolled around a filling and served cold instead of
deep-fried in dough.

At Le Colonial, a Vietnamese restaurant at 149 East 57th Street in Manhattan,
the salads are among the most popular dishes on the menu, even in winter,
because they are so refreshing. They are light but highly spiced, combining
interesting contrasts of texture and flavor. The chef, Viet Tran, who is from
Saigon -- he worked at Indochine before going to Le Colonial -- uses traditional
ingredients like fresh mint, coriander, cucumber, bean sprouts and iceberg
lettuce, which adds crunch. The salads can be prepared ahead of time and put
together at the last minute, which makes them great for summer entertaining.

Mr. Tran's beef salad combines sauteed (or even grilled) sirloin steak, which is
sliced thin with basil leaves, lemon grass and onion in a spicy soy and chili
sauce, served with greens and topped with roasted unsalted peanuts. Grilled
chicken is tossed with rice vermicelli in a chili vinaigrette flavored with
fresh lime juice. Grilled shrimp comes with cucumbers, carrots and daikon radish
in a light dressing made with chilies, olive oil and a dash of Asian fish sauce.

Most of the ingredients are widely available, even in supermarkets. If you
cannot get fresh lemon grass, lemon thyme leaves work just as well. Asian basil
is similar to our purple basil and has a slight cinnamon flavor, but regular
basil leaves can be substituted. Mirin is a Japanese rice wine; an acceptable
substitute can be made by cooking together equal parts of sake, sherry or a
sweet white wine with sugar to make a syrup.

Beer or a full-bodied white wine like Gewurztraminer go well with these salads.

Goi Tom (Grilled Shrimp Salad)

Total time: 30 minutes

 8to 10 jumbo shrimp
 1clove garlic, minced
 3shallots, chopped
 4tablespoons vegetable oil
 1seedless cucumber
 1carrot
 1cup daikon radishes
 1small red onion, sliced
 Add coarse salt and freshly ground pepper to taste
 1/2cup fresh basil leaves, coarsely chopped
 1tablespoon fresh mint leaves, coarsely chopped
 2tablespoons unsalted roasted peanuts
 For the dressing:
 1tablespoon coarse salt
 2tablespoons Asian fish sauce
 1tablespoon sugar
 2tablespoons garlic, minced
 4tablespoons olive oil
 2tablespoons finely chopped, fresh chili peppers.

1. Shell and devein the shrimp. Marinate them in the garlic, with one chopped
shallot and two tablespoons of vegetable oil for 20 minutes. Meanwhile, fry the
remaining two shallots in the remaining two tablespoons of vegetable oil.

2. Thinly slice the cucumber, carrot, radishes and onion and mix them together
in a bowl. Make the dressing. Combine the salt, fish sauce, sugar, garlic, oil
and chili peppers and set aside.

3. Preheat grill. Season the shrimp with salt and pepper to taste and one
tablespoon of the chopped basil. Grill them for one to two minutes on each side
and remove them when they are cooked. Be careful not to overcook or they will
become tough.

4. Put the cucumber and carrot mixture in the middle of each of four plates.
Arrange the shrimp around, then sprinkle with the remaining chopped basil, mint,
peanuts and fried shallots.

Yield: 4 servings.

Bum Ga Nuong (Chicken and Vermicelli)

Total time: 20 to 60 minutes marinating, 30 minutes cooking

 2whole chicken breasts, split to
 make 4 pieces
 2cloves garlic, finely chopped
 2shallots, finely chopped
 Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper to taste
 1tablespoon vegetable oil
 1/2cup dry rice vermicelli (available in Asian grocery stores)
 1small head of iceberg lettuce, shredded
 2cucumbers, sliced
 1/4cup fresh mint, chopped
 1/4cup unsalted roasted peanuts, chopped
 For the chili-lime vinaigrette:
 1/2cup water
 Juice of 1 lime
 4tablespoons Vietnamese fish
 sauce
 1tablespoon sugar
 1clove garlic, chopped
 1tablespoon chopped red chili pepper
 2tablespoons vegetable or olive oil.

1. Marinate the chicken breasts in the garlic, shallots, salt, pepper and the
vegetable oil for 20 to 60 minutes.

2. Bring three quarts of water to a boil. Add the rice vermicelli and cook three
to four minutes or until it is almost soft. Strain in a colander and set aside.

3. Grill the chicken on both sides until done. Cut into bite-size pieces.

4. In each of four bowls, divide the lettuce and cucumbers. Top with the
vermicelli. Arrange the chicken on top of the vermicelli.

5. Combine the ingredients for the chili vinaigrette and mix together
thoroughly. Pour three to four tablespoons of the chili vinaigrette on each
salad. Sprinkle with fresh mint and peanuts and serve.

Yield: 4 servings.

 Goi Bo (Spicy Beef Salad)

Total time: 20 minutes

 2tablespoons soy sauce
 2tablespoons white or balsamic vinegar
 1tablespoon mirin
 2tablespoons chili sauce
 8ounces sirloin steak, seasoned to taste with salt and pepper
 1/4cup fresh basil leaves, preferably purple, coarsely chopped
 1stalk lemon grass (use the tender purple part) or 1 tablespoon lemon thyme
leaves
 1/8cup onion, thinly sliced
 1cucumber, thinly sliced
 1/2head of iceberg lettuce, shredded
 1/4cup bean sprouts
 Unsalted roasted peanuts to garnish (about 1/2 cup).

1. Combine the soy sauce, vinegar, mirin and chili sauce. Set the mixture aside.

2. In a saute pan or wok, sear the steak on both sides until rare or medium
rare. Remove from heat and slice thinly. Toss with the basil leaves, lemon grass
and onion. Set aside.

3. In a separate bowl, toss together the cucumber, lettuce and bean sprouts. Put
greens evenly divided on two plates. Top with sliced sirloin mixture. Pour the
sauce on top, and then sprinkle with the roasted peanuts.

Yield: 2 servings.

LOAD-DATE: July 30, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              109 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 30, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

FOOD;
Flavor and Texture in Vietnamese Salads

BYLINE: By MOIRA HODGSON

SECTION: Section 13WC;  Page 12;  Column 1;  Westchester Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1009 words


SALADS are very much part of the cooking of Vietnam, much more so than in other
countries of Southeast Asia. Even their spring rolls are salad-like, made with
large leaves of lettuce rolled around a filling and served cold instead of
deep-fried in dough.

At Le Colonial, a Vietnamese restaurant at 149 East 57th Street in Manhattan,
the salads are among the most popular dishes on the menu, even in winter,
because they are so refreshing. They are light but highly spiced, combining
interesting contrasts of texture and flavor. The chef, Viet Tran, who is from
Saigon -- he worked at Indochine before going to Le Colonial -- uses traditional
ingredients like fresh mint, coriander, cucumber, bean sprouts and iceberg
lettuce, which adds crunch. The salads can be prepared ahead of time and put
together at the last minute, which makes them great for summer entertaining.

Mr. Tran's beef salad combines sauteed (or even grilled) sirloin steak, which is
sliced thin with basil leaves, lemon grass and onion in a spicy soy and chili
sauce, served with greens and topped with roasted unsalted peanuts. Grilled
chicken is tossed with rice vermicelli in a chili vinaigrette flavored with
fresh lime juice. Grilled shrimp comes with cucumbers, carrots and daikon radish
in a light dressing made with chilies, olive oil and a dash of Asian fish sauce.

Most of the ingredients are widely available, even in supermarkets. If you
cannot get fresh lemon grass, lemon thyme leaves work just as well. Asian basil
is similar to our purple basil and has a slight cinnamon flavor, but regular
basil leaves can be substituted. Mirin is a Japanese rice wine; an acceptable
substitute can be made by cooking together equal parts of sake, sherry or a
sweet white wine with sugar to make a syrup.

Beer or a full-bodied white wine like Gewurztraminer go well with these salads.

Goi Tom (Grilled Shrimp Salad)

Total time: 30 minutes

 8to 10 jumbo shrimp
 1clove garlic, minced
 3shallots, chopped
 4tablespoons vegetable oil
 1seedless cucumber
 1carrot
 1cup daikon radishes
 1small red onion, sliced
 Add coarse salt and freshly ground pepper to taste
 1/2cup fresh basil leaves, coarsely chopped
 1tablespoon fresh mint leaves, coarsely chopped
 2tablespoons unsalted roasted peanuts
 For the dressing:
 1tablespoon coarse salt
 2tablespoons Asian fish sauce
 1tablespoon sugar
 2tablespoons garlic, minced
 4tablespoons olive oil
 2tablespoons finely chopped, fresh chili peppers.

1. Shell and devein the shrimp. Marinate them in the garlic, with one chopped
shallot and two tablespoons of vegetable oil for 20 minutes. Meanwhile, fry the
remaining two shallots in the remaining two tablespoons of vegetable oil.

2. Thinly slice the cucumber, carrot, radishes and onion and mix them together
in a bowl. Make the dressing. Combine the salt, fish sauce, sugar, garlic, oil
and chili peppers and set aside.

3. Preheat grill. Season the shrimp with salt and pepper to taste and one
tablespoon of the chopped basil. Grill them for one to two minutes on each side
and remove them when they are cooked. Be careful not to overcook or they will
become tough.

4. Put the cucumber and carrot mixture in the middle of each of four plates.
Arrange the shrimp around, then sprinkle with the remaining chopped basil, mint,
peanuts and fried shallots.

Yield: 4 servings.

Bum Ga Nuong (Chicken and Vermicelli)

Total time: 20 to 60 minutes marinating, 30 minutes cooking

 2whole chicken breasts, split to
 make 4 pieces
 2cloves garlic, finely chopped
 2shallots, finely chopped
 Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper to taste
 1tablespoon vegetable oil
 1/2cup dry rice vermicelli (available in Asian grocery stores)
 1small head of iceberg lettuce, shredded
 2cucumbers, sliced
 1/4cup fresh mint, chopped
 1/4cup unsalted roasted peanuts, chopped
 For the chili-lime vinaigrette:
 1/2cup water
 Juice of 1 lime
 4tablespoons Vietnamese fish
 sauce
 1tablespoon sugar
 1clove garlic, chopped
 1tablespoon chopped red chili pepper
 2tablespoons vegetable or olive oil.

1. Marinate the chicken breasts in the garlic, shallots, salt, pepper and the
vegetable oil for 20 to 60 minutes.

2. Bring three quarts of water to a boil. Add the rice vermicelli and cook three
to four minutes or until it is almost soft. Strain in a colander and set aside.

3. Grill the chicken on both sides until done. Cut into bite-size pieces.

4. In each of four bowls, divide the lettuce and cucumbers. Top with the
vermicelli. Arrange the chicken on top of the vermicelli.

5. Combine the ingredients for the chili vinaigrette and mix together
thoroughly. Pour three to four tablespoons of the chili vinaigrette on each
salad. Sprinkle with fresh mint and peanuts and serve.

Yield: 4 servings.

 Goi Bo (Spicy Beef Salad)

Total time: 20 minutes

 2tablespoons soy sauce
 2tablespoons white or balsamic vinegar
 1tablespoon mirin
 2tablespoons chili sauce
 8ounces sirloin steak, seasoned to taste with salt and pepper
 1/4cup fresh basil leaves, preferably purple, coarsely chopped
 1stalk lemon grass (use the tender purple part) or 1 tablespoon lemon thyme
leaves
 1/8cup onion, thinly sliced
 1cucumber, thinly sliced
 1/2head of iceberg lettuce, shredded
 1/4cup bean sprouts
 Unsalted roasted peanuts to garnish (about 1/2 cup).

1. Combine the soy sauce, vinegar, mirin and chili sauce. Set the mixture aside.

2. In a saute pan or wok, sear the steak on both sides until rare or medium
rare. Remove from heat and slice thinly. Toss with the basil leaves, lemon grass
and onion. Set aside.

3. In a separate bowl, toss together the cucumber, lettuce and bean sprouts. Put
greens evenly divided on two plates. Top with sliced sirloin mixture. Pour the
sauce on top, and then sprinkle with the roasted peanuts.

Yield: 2 servings.

LOAD-DATE: July 30, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              110 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 30, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

The World;
Trade's Bottom Line: Business Over Politics

BYLINE: By DAVID E. SANGER

SECTION: Section 4;  Page 5;  Column 1;  Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 976 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


EARLIER this month Henry A. Kissinger and a delegation of American business
executives and academics paid a visit to Li Peng, China's Prime Minister. As
would be expected at a moment when relations between the two countries has
reached a low point -- on human rights, missile proliferation and Taiwan -- the
opening minutes were spent with Mr. Li complaining about Taiwan's President
visiting the United States, and with the Americans pressing the case of Harry
Wu, the imprisoned human rights activist.

What surprised the visitors, however, was how quickly Mr. Li dropped those
issues and jumped right into business: Power projects that need foreign capital,
China's plans for buying and building new passenger aircraft, the giant Three
Gorges Dam project. "He made it very, very clear that he had no intention of
letting these huge diplomatic disputes affect the economic relationship," said
C. Fred Bergsten, a prominent economist and adviser to the Clinton
Administration, who was along on the trip. "It was as if we were talking about
two completely separate relationships."

These days America's economic stake in China's future is far too large to leave
to the vicissitudes of diplomatic relations, especially when Japanese and German
competitors are hardly about to pull out of the country every time the Chinese
jail another 100 dissidents. Yet "commercial diplomacy" -- a term once
enthusiastically used by some in the Administration to describe engaging the
Chinese in economic development, the arena they are most focused on -- has so
far done nothing to modify China's political behavior. Just the opposite: Mr. Li
is betting that the United States is not willing to lose deals with McDonnell
Douglas and Ford in the name of protecting human rights.

It is a taste of things to come, and one of the central dilemmas facing
Secretary of State Warren Christopher next week as he tours Southeast Asia and
ends up in Vietnam, the newest site of American efforts to use business as its
main diplomatic vehicle.




The Best Promotion

At its most basic level, commercial diplomacy has clearly been a success for the
Administration. For the first time in this century, the Government has regularly
put the promotion of business interests at the top of its foreign policy agenda.
Even the Republicans who want to eliminate the Commerce Department were
congratulating Secretary of Commerce Ron Brown last week for his department's
advocacy of those interests in the big emerging markets from Brazil to Poland.
And Mr. Brown seemed to win converts when he argued that this is no time for
"unilateral disarmament" in trade.

But when Mr. Clinton decided last year to remove the link between China's human
rights record and the renewal of trade benefits, and when he extended diplomatic
recognition to Vietnam two weeks ago, he suggested that economic engagement had
a deeper purpose: It would be the best way to change the nature of authoritarian
regimes. So far, that strategy has failed to work in China. In a widely
published essay last week Mr. Kissinger himself concluded that the two countries
are on "a collision course."

Commercial diplomacy works best with small countries reaching for America's
markets and capital. That is why Hanoi has been more cooperative than Beijing.
Even the North Koreans have begun to make concessions regarding their nuclear
program in hopes that the ultimate reward is Western investment. But China is a
special case, with the luxury of many suitors. Even while assuring Americans
that trade and politics are separate, China's first response in the dispute over
American relations with Taiwan was to sign a deal with Mercedes-Benz.

Jeffrey Garten, the Undersecretary of Commerce for International Trade, is among
the many officials who say that while there is little political leverage in the
commercial ties to China now, the power equation will change. "Over the next
decade, our links could easily expand geometrically." he said. "By that time a
new generation will be leading China, and their interests in economic prosperity
for China are likely to rank much higher in terms of China's international
priority. It may be a gamble, but it is the best shot we have."

Even with allies, though, the Administration is increasingly recognizing that
there is a fundamental complication when relations are based on business rather
than security. In Southeast Asia, the relationship with America was once a
matter of life and death. Today Asian countries say they want America's
continued military presence primarily because it keeps shipping lanes open.

Commercial alliances run by very different rules, in which political allies are
also fierce competitors. So the question -- today in China, tomorrow elsewhere
-- is whether and when America is willing to swallow its devotion to human
rights or concerns over nuclear proliferation to keep Mitsubishi from closing a
deal.

"Everyone acknowledges that economics now plays a central role in foreign policy
-- that battle is over," one of Mr. Clinton's top economic advisers said the
other day. "What no one has really grappled with is what happens when commercial
concerns push out other interests."

It will be interesting to see whether Mr. Christopher, who has rarely gone
beyond the platitudes of the new era, is ready to grapple openly with such
tradeoffs. During a speech on Asian policy on Friday, someone asked him if he
was concerned that Japan's banking crisis could mushroom into a worldwide
financial crisis -- an issue far closer to the hearts of the Asian leaders he
meets next week than the issue of how to contain the Serbs in Bosnia.

"Where are you, Bob Rubin, when I need you?" he asked, referring to the Treasury
Secretary. Then, the true diplomat, he said he hoped the Japanese would solve
their own problems.

LOAD-DATE: July 30, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Harry Wu, an American, filmed the above scene at a forced labor
camp in China. (CBS News/60 Minutes)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              111 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 30, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

July 23-29;
115 Years Late, He Won His Bars

BYLINE: By TODD S. PURDUM

SECTION: Section 4;  Page 2;  Column 1;  Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 191 words


When Johnson Chesnut Whittaker, a former slave, became one of the first black
cadets to enter West Point in 1876, his brass ring was the brass bars of a
second lieutenant's commission. Last week, his family finally got them -- nearly
115 years after the Army falsely accused him of staging a racist attack on
himself and expelled him.

In a White House ceremony, President Clinton told Whittaker's descendants that
he was "a pathfinder -- a man who, through courage, example and perseverance,
paved the way for future generations of African-American military leaders."

Whittaker became a high school principal in Oklahoma City (where his students
included the novelist Ralph Ellison) and, later, a psychology professor in South
Carolina. His two sons served as Army officers in World War I, a grandson joined
the all-black Tuskegee Airmen in World War II and a great grandson, Ulysses
Boykin, served as a first lieutenant in the Vietnam-era Army.

Last week, Mr. Boykin opened the black velvet case from the President, and
fingered the plain gold-plated bars, his eyes welling. "Just like the ones I
had," he said.   TODD S. PURDUM

LOAD-DATE: July 30, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              112 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 30, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Communism in Laos: Poverty and a Thriving Elite

BYLINE: By HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 10;  Column 3;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1400 words

DATELINE: VIENTIANE, Laos, July 25


As Laos, a vital but virtually forgotten battleground of the Vietnam War,
prepares to celebrate the 20th anniversary of its Communist "people's
democracy," it remains a place of harsh inequalities.

It is a country of 4.5 million people where a small class of entrepreneurs and
members of the Communist establishment has attained a level of prosperity
reminiscent of the privileged life of those who benefited from French
colonialism and the years of American dominance that ended with the Communist
victory.

"The social injustices, the growing differentiation among the few and the many
are enormous," said the Ambassador of a formerly Communist country.

After the Lao People's Democratic Republic was proclaimed in December 1975, the
Government practiced an austere brand of Communism, with low economic activity.
But in the late 1980's, following Vietnam's lead, it recognized a need to make
up for faltering Soviet assistance by gradually opening up to foreign investment
and appealing for broader international assistance.

The subsequent influx of businessmen, particularly from neighboring Thailand,
led to many joint ventures, which found their Laotian partners among the
existing elite, Communist and pre-Communist.

More of the former privileged classes survived in Laos than in Vietnam, where
repression was more ruthless, and in Cambodia, where most of the old elite were
killed during the Pol Pot regime. With the economic liberalization in this
country, overseas Laotians, mostly in the United States and France, along with
their relatives here, began playing an important role in business.

"Our hearts have always stayed here, and now it's also possible to do business,"
a frequent long-term visitor from France said.

But for the poor, there seems to be little such optimism in a country that is
classified by the United Nations as a "least developed" nation.

"Only 20 percent of the national budget goes to the social sector, and the same
is true for the aid of the donor Governments," said the head of a major United
Nations agency, speaking on the condition of anonymity because of its presence
here.  "They have accepted this imbalance. The gap is widening. They have done
nothing for the villages."

About 85 percent of the population is estimated to be peasant farmers, who enter
the money economy only marginally. They live from what they grow, augmented by
barter. Estimates of per capita annual income, ranging from $250 to $335 cited
by international organizations, are based on Government statistics in which the
organizations have little faith.

None of this appears to raise questions among the top leadership of this
single-party state. The party forswore its ideology of creating a classless
society when it began the "new economic mechanism" in 1986, but it continues to
swear by the tenets of Marxism-Leninism.

When asked whether his party had changed its goals, President Nouhak Phoumsavan
cited a need "to readjust" to "the reality of the situation."

"The aspirations and noble ideals of the Lao people of all ethnic groups are to
lead toward development of a prosperous country and create a life of affluence,
well-being and justice in society," the President said when asked whether
Communism remained the eventual aim.

Mr. Nouhak Phoumsavan is a revolutionary hard-liner believed to be in his 80's
and one of the few surviving leaders of the generation of disciples of Ho Chi
Minh, founder of Communism in Vietnam, Cambodia and Laos. While reading prepared
answers to questions submitted in advance, the President gave no indication how
his Government intended to realize its goals.

There was however, some apparent criticism of the Government's policies from
Sisana Sisane, who at 73 is the most outspoken of the early Communist leaders.

"We were a little dogmatic in the past and made a mistaken analysis," he said.
"Laos is not yet ready for Communism or capitalism. First we must reach the
point where we can opt for one or the other. We must be a little realistic. The
subsistence economy is the obstacle."

Despite an annual economic growth rate of 6 to 7 percent since 1990, most of it
concentrated in the capital, this progress is in part negated by a population
growth rate of 3 percent and a gross domestic product of about $1 billion.
Foreign assistance financed 44 percent of the 1994 budget, 40 percent of which
was devoted to the public payroll.

From 1990 until the end of 1994 the Government succeeded in cutting rampant
inflation, limiting it to single-digit rates for the last three years.

The country's principal exports are logs, hydroelectric power and garments and
motorcycles made here from imported materials, because of the cheap labor in
Laos.

Romeo A. Reyes, senior economist of the United Nations Development Program,
prescribed "more fiscal discipline," more tax collection, less use of the
money-printing press and cuts in the public payroll. But in the United Nations
Human Development Index, Laos remains near the bottom. It ranks 133d out of 173
countries. Life expectancy is steady at 50 years. Of 1,000 children born this
year, 182 are expected to die before the age of 5; the infant mortality rate is
at least 125 out of 1,000. The United Nations Children's Fund reports that only
one pregnant woman of 20 sees a health worker, and most births are unattended.

"There isn't really any functioning health-care system," said the head of the
United Nations agency. "There are hospitals, but there isn't really any reason
to go to them."

Visits to the hospitals of Xiengkhouang and Luang Namtha Provinces showed why.
They are rundown, unsanitary places virtually empty of functioning equipment and
medicines and receive electricity two or three hours an evening.

"Yes, from time to time people die here because we don't have what they need,"
said Dr. Sivay Vong Thongchit, deputy hospital director in Xiengkhouang.

Gov. Kuan Keomany of Luang Namtha, a mountainous province on the Chinese border,
said he was satisfied with the achievements of socialism. He said modern
diagnostic equipment in the military hospital in Vientiane had discovered he was
suffering from a lung ailment, and he was cured.

He is a member of the ruling elite of the Lao People's Revolutionary Party, with
access to the best. He acknowledged that at his provincial hospital not even the
simple X-ray machine was working. Few in his remote province have ever been far
from their villages.

A survey by the United Nations Food and Agricultural Organization last year
concluded that 47.3 percent of children under 5 were "stunted" from chronic
malnutrition and 10.5 percent "wasted" from acute malnutrition. The results
showed no change from a 1983 survey. Fewer than half the rural population have
access to safe drinking water.

"But I think poverty is even more serious," said Jan Mattsson, resident
coordinator of the large United Nations community. "The statistics are very
poor."

Underdevelopment is equally unchanging in education, according to international
officials. Estimates of the illiteracy rate range from 50 to 80 percent.

The United Nations reports 70 percent enrollment in primary grades in 1993-94,
with a dropout rate of 60 percent. Less than three years of schooling is the
mean, and most teachers have had less than five years of education. A result of
this is what some Laotians and most international officials, aid workers and
foreign businessmen call "the human-resource problem" and consider the principal
constraint on hopes for development.

The refugee exodus after the Communist takeover deprived Laos of about one-tenth
of its population, including a majority of its small educated elite. The vacuum
has not been filled and puts heavy strain on the few officials with whom the
large number of foreign donors and businessmen must deal.

Deputy Foreign Minister Souban Srithirath said in an interview, for instance,
that Laos did not aspire to join the Association of Southeast Asian Nations,
because it did not have enough qualified officials to take part in its work.

But despite the evident abandonment of Communist objectives, the governing party
does not provide any indication of willingness to dilute its monopoly on power,
which is anchored in the Constitution.

"When most people don't know how to read and write, how can you have democracy?"
the French-educated Mr. Souban Srithirath said.

LOAD-DATE: July 30, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Map of Laos showing location of Vientiane.

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              113 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 30, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

WAR WITHOUT END

BYLINE: By SEBASTIAO SALGADO

SECTION: Section 6; Page 24; Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 818 words


When President Clinton announced earlier this month that he was normalizing
relations with Vietnam, he spoke with care about the 2,202 United States service
personnel officially listed as missing in Southeast Asia. He said next to
nothing, however, about the million or more Vietnamese who became P.O.W's and
M.I.A.'s of a different kind after Saigon fell to North Vietnamese troops 20
years ago. The Communist victors violently repressed freedom of expression, of
commerce, of movement, of religion, of association. Hundreds of thousands of
Vietnamese were sent to "re-education" camps -- there to undergo a regimen of
forced labor, starvation rations and torture. Nearly a million others fled,
packing themselves into small boats that drifted over the South China Sea. Many
died on the waters. Nearly 800,000 survived, and most of them were eventually
settled in America.

Normalization "will advance the cause of freedom," the President declared, and
he promised that his Administration would discuss human rights issues with
Hanoi. But he was careful not to mention the 40,000 Vietnamese boat people who
remain in detention camps -- half of them in Hong Kong; the rest in Indonesia,
Malaysia, the Philippines and Thailand. Almost all these detainees have been
declared economic migrants, not political refugees, by the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, whose representatives screen the boat peole --
hostily and unjustly, the detainees and their human rights advocates maintain.
As a result, these boat people cannot receive asylum under international law.
They have been presented with a United Nations plan, endorsed by the
Administration, that seeks to close the camps by encouraging those remaining in
them to return to Vietnam voluntarily -- and, should this fail, by deporting
them to Vietnam forcibly.

The President spoke of how Vietnam's economy is liberalizing. The detainees I've
spoken with in camps in Hong Kong and the Philippines are all for economic
reform, but insist it is meaningless without political reform. They know that
the Communist Party in Vietnam remains all powerful, that Buddhist monks and
Government critics are often jailed and that free trade and a booming business
sector do not mean freedom and democracy.

As Sebastiao Salgado shows in his photographs, days in the camps are achingly
dull and depressing. There is nothing to do but worry. Men, women and children
lie shelved on bare-board bunks, fenced off from the world. Pam Baker, an asylum
lawyer I met in Hong Kong, observed: "The effects of prolonged detention,
especially on kids, is just devastating. You see them when they come out, this
line of snot-nosed kids staring at a dog. They've never seen one before.
Cockroaches and rats are the oly animals they know."

Still, detainees refuse to go back. In June, detainees in Hong Kong and Malaysia
who were faced with forced repatriation began to riot. Others who had agreed to
go back changed their minds. Later, a number of them said they had been
encouraged by reports of legislation, sponsored by House Republicans, that could
result in offers of asylum to as many as half the detainees. The bill faces a
Presidential veto; opponents of this asylum plan argue that there is not once
documented case of a returnee being politically persecuted. Human rights
monitors I've spoken with do not deny this, but say there are many reasons to
fear persecution. And so another battle looms in the war that will not end.

Salgado's images are more quietly unsettling than these we associate with the
Vietnam War. Yet they tell of people still reeling from decades of violence and
dread. Peasant flock to the big cities in search of more money and liberty. City
dwellers wend their way through a system that might -- just might -- get them
legally to the United States. Detainees at the Galang Island Camp in Indonesia
depart for Vietnam as part of a repatriation. Look at the expressions -- stony
or grief-stricken -- of the family members Salgado saw and photographed that day
at Galang. Look how he found them, abandoning the hopes that carried them across
the sea. These are people turning to face 20 years of defeat.

Studying these picutres, I found myself recalling a conversation I had last
winter with one detainee who was about to be repatriated. "These years in the
camp have been the most significant time of my life because I can sit here and
talk to you like this about anything I want," he said. "When I go back, I have
to put myself into the society and help myself survive. If I see you in Vietnam,
I will avoid you."   PHILIP GOUREVITCH

Sebastiao Salgado is a contributing photographer for the Magazine. His last
project, a photo essay of Russians immigrating to the Unitd States, appeared in
November 1994. Philip Gourevitch, a contributing editor of The Forward, wrote
recently about the boat people for Granta.

LOAD-DATE: December 6, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: HONG KONG -- Half of the 40,000 boat people who were not
resettled in the United States have been detained at camps in this British
colony. At Whitehead, on the preceding page, some 4,400 of the 11,000 Vietnamese
held are children, many of whom have never seen a live animal. At High Island,
right, daily life for the 5,000 Vietnamese who are stored there -- one family
per cubicle -- is akin to existence in an overflowing prison. (pg. 27); GALANG
ISLAND, INDONESIA -- In 1978, 130,000 Indochinese boat people, the vast majority
of them Vietnamese, arrived on this seven-mile-long island 40 miles southeast of
Singapore. Today, there are 5,000 boat people left on Galang. And like other
Vietnamese detainees, they are being encouraged by the United Nations and the
Clinton Administration to return to Vietnam voluntarily, a repatriation they
have greeted with dread. When a family does agree to return, it often dispatches
younger members first, delegating to them the responsibility of reconnoitering
the homeland before they decide whether to follow. Such separations are fraught
with torment; the leave-takings are anguished. This statue, carved by a detainee
and located at the camp's entrance, makes clear where they would rather go. (pg.
28); HO CHI MIHN CITY -- The journey back to Vietnam is a fearful one for the
boat people who decide to make it. Leaving a wretched existence behind, they are
heading toward the promise of not much more. At least in the detention camps,
there are family and friends. The country they are about to enter is not the one
they fled; if anything, things may have got worse. At the end of the war in
1975, the population of Saigon was about three million. Today, as Ho Chi Minh
City, it may be as much as double that, according to some recent visitors. In
the absence of any mass-transit system, thousands of motorbikes clog the city's
arteries, choking it with pollution. The Vietnamese Government may want the boat
people back, but where will it put them? How will it sustain them? HO CHI MIHN
CITY -- In 1979, the Vietnamese Government established the ongoing Orderly
Departure Program to counter the exodus of the boat people. Since 1980, more
than half a million Vietnamese have been allowed to leave, immigrating mostly to
the United States (and to a lesser extent, Australia, Canada and France). For
those whose departures have been approved, ID photographs and medical exams are,
of course, mandatory. PRECEDING PAGE: Even with the increasing urbanization of
Vietnam, some things don't change. Farmers who sat on their windowsills in the
countryside, awaiting prosperity, now sit on their windowsills in huge apartment
buildings in the big city, awaiting the same thing. (pg. 31-32)(PHOTOGRAPH BY
SEBASTIAO SALGADO FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              114 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 31, 1995, Monday, Late Edition - Final

China Hints Move to Settle Islands Dispute

BYLINE: By The New York Times

SECTION: Section A;   Page 3;   Column 1;   Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 193 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, July 30


China insisted today that it had "indisputable sovereignty" over a chain of
potentially oil-rich islands in the South China Sea but also opened the door to
negotiating a settlement over their ownership.

The statements, made at a summit meeting of Asian foreign ministers in the
sultanate of Brunei, were welcomed by Southeast Asian diplomats who had worried
that the island chain, the Spratly Islands, could become a military flash point.

"China is ready to work together with the countries concerned to resolve
appropriately the relevant disputes according to the recognized international
law," Shen Guofang, spokesman for the Chinese Foreign Ministry, told reporters.

In a speech today before his counterparts at the meeting, sponsored by the
Association of Southeast Asia Nations, the Chinese Foreign Minister, Qian
Qichen, said that "China has all along possessed indisputable sovereignty" over
the Spratlys "and their adjacent waters."

But he went on to suggest that China and all other claimants to the islands --
Brunei, Malaysia, the Philippines, Taiwan and Vietnam -- put aside the dispute
over sovereignty and jointly develop the area.

LOAD-DATE: July 31, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              115 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 31, 1995, Monday, Late Edition - Final

'Waterworld' Disappointment As Box Office Receipts Lag

BYLINE: By BERNARD WEINRAUB

SECTION: Section D;   Page 1;   Column 5;   Business/Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1158 words

DATELINE: HOLLYWOOD, July 30


"Waterworld," the most expensive movie ever made, opened this weekend and
managed to stay afloat. But barely.

With a staggering $235 million cost, "Waterworld" is a symbol of Hollywood-style
excess and ineptness, studio executives say.

Its weekend gross of $21.6 million would have been welcome news for a movie
budgeted at $40 million -- the industry's average cost. But "Waterworld" is
another matter. To earn back its money, analysts said, the movie had to open far
more powerfully, hauling in $40 million to $50 million on its first weekend to
give it the momentum of a true blockbuster. "Waterworld" failed to do so.

"To succeed they needed to do explosive business -- 'Jurassic Park' business --
double what they did," an executive at a rival studio said this morning. "This
film has to be a phenomenon. It isn't."

At this point, officials at Universal Pictures, part of the MCA Inc. unit of the
Seagram Company, have only a slender hope that the movie will earn back its
bloated cost, which includes marketing and distribution.

Privately, officials are merely seeking to avoid embarrassment, hoping the film
will perform respectably and not collapse at the box office. The most optimistic
view offered by Universal executives is that the film will gross more than $100
million at the domestic box office, then do far better abroad and ultimately
sell powerfully in the worldwide video and television markets.

The movie stars Kevin Costner as a solitary hero in a futuristic world where the
polar ice caps have melted, the earth is buried under water and survivors float
on man-made atolls. It was hampered by numerous accounts of production chaos in
Hawaii, where the film was made, and a soaring budget that top MCA executives
failed to control. Even after filming began, "Waterworld" was hastily rewritten
and altered, driving up costs even more.

Opening reviews were mixed, but conclusive judgments about the box-office
returns will not be reached for several weeks, after the film runs its course
and opens overseas. But several top studio executives said that the
less-than-stunning opening weekend domestically was an uneasy omen for overseas
business.

The top-opening film ever is "Batman Forever," which, on its first weekend last
month, grossed $52.7 million. The runner-up is "Terminator 2," which grossed
$52.3 million in the five-day July 4 weekend in 1991. At No. 3 is "Jurassic
Park," which opened in June 1993, to a gross of $50.1 million.

Coincidentally, "Terminator 2," is the most expensive film ever made after
"Waterworld." It cost about $110 million but more than recovered its investment
for Carolco Pictures Inc. (Studios only earn about half of a film's gross; the
rest goes to theater owners).

Universal executives put the best possible light on the weekend figure. Nikki
Rocco, the executive vice president of distribution, characterized the opening
box office as "tremendous." Ms. Rocco added: "The audiences clearly like it.
It's obvious the audiences weren't accepting what the press was trying to tell
them all these months. It's a perfect summer movie."

But within MCA, executives are treating "Waterworld" the same way that many
Government officials dealt with the Vietnam War -- saying, essentially, they
were not responsible.

Those who had involvement along the way include the film's producers, Lawrence
Gordon and his brother, Charles Gordon. They have been keeping a low profile
since the film's costs began drawing more publicity than the movie itself.

Among themselves, MCA executives are blaming Mr. Costner, who was given almost
complete control of the film, including choice of a director. He chose his
friend Kevin Reynolds, passing over Robert Zemeckis, the Academy Award-winning
director of "Forrest Gump." Mr. Reynolds and Mr. Costner had a well publicized
falling-out over the editing of the film, with Mr. Costner finishing the project
himself.

Mr. Costner, who has sought to sell the film almost nonstop on television news,
talk and variety shows over the last two weeks, refused to comment for this
article.

The film itself has already had a ripple effect across MCA and, for that matter,
Hollywood. It has damaged the career of Mr. Costner, whose last few films have
been financial flops, including "Wyatt Earp," which may have lost at least $50
million for Warner Brothers and was one of the disasters of 1994. It has
blemished the final year of the reign of Lew R. Wasserman, the former chairman
of MCA Inc. and one of Hollywood's elder statesmen, and of Sidney J. Sheinberg,
the former president, who controlled the company's costs.

And, despite their recent disavowals of responsibility, it has hurt the various
producers of the film as well as studio executives who, by all accounts, began
the movie when the script was incomplete and who failed to anticipate the huge
costs and trickiness of filming in the middle of Kawaihae Harbor, off the big
island of Hawaii. Bad weather, rough tides, incompetent planning, cost overruns
and lavish spending marked the making of the movie which was initially budgeted
at $100 million and was scheduled to be filmed in 96 days. In fact, it took
about 150 days.

To earn its investment, "Waterworld" must rank among the highest-grossing films
ever made. The top film is "E.T., the Extraterrestrial," which has grossed
$399.8 million; it is followed by "Jurassic Park," with $357 million and
"Forrest Gump" at $329.6 million. Universal executives acknowledge that it would
be improbable, if not impossible, for "Waterworld" to come even close to these
mega-hits.

Thanks to a shrewd accounting move by the Seagram Company, which acquired 80
percent of MCA Inc. shortly after filming of "Waterworld" ended, the cost of the
movie has essentially been passed on to MCA's former owners, the Matsushita
Electric Industrial Company of Japan.

Under the arrangement, Matsushuita agreed to keep more than $1 billion in MCA
debt, which includes most of the production costs of "Waterworld." Seagram
agreed to absorb only about $12 million in "Waterworld" costs, which are mostly
post-production expenses that were incurred after June 5, when Seagram, a
beverage and liquor company, took over MCA.

Consequently, many executives who made the catastrophic decisions involving
"Waterworld" feel they have been let off the hook, as if the lavish spending
never took place. Several Universal executives say that with the accounting
transaction, the movie's cost is viewed as $12 million. "Because of this
transaction we'll make money," said one Universal executive.

MCA itself is now under entirely new leadership. Edgar Bronfman Jr., the
chairman of Seagram, has appointed Ron Meyer, the former president of Creative
Artists Agency, the top talent agency in Hollywood, to serve as president of
MCA. Mr. Meyer, who is taking over on Tuesday, is expected to name a new team to
run the studio's film and television divisions.

LOAD-DATE: July 31, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Kevin Costner and Jeanne Tripplehorn are the main characters in
"Waterworld," looking for the mythical Dryland after the polar ice caps have
melted. The first weekend's box office receipts were disappointing. (Ben
Glass/Universal City Studios Inc.) (pg. D9)

Table: "Biggest Opening Weekends"

"Waterworld" opened over the weekend and took in and estimated $21.6 million at
box offices. But film-industry analysts said that to stand a chance of earning
back the estimated $172 million it cost to make, the moveing would have to randk
among the top openers of all time. "Waterworld" fell far short of the five best
opening weekends in movie history, which are listed in the table. (Source:
Exhibitor Relations Company) (pg. D9)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              116 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 31, 1995, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Essay;
An Orgy of Summer Advice

BYLINE: By WILLIAM SAFIRE

SECTION: Section A;   Page 13;   Column 2;   Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 679 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


What are newsmakers to do when pundits take summer vacations? Where will the
column-addicted leaders get their regular fix of advice?

Here is a month's supply of policy tips and moral strictures.

To Hillary-pilloried Bernard Nussbaum, who will be hauled before the Whitewater
committee to explain why he followed Clinton orders to keep Vincent Foster's
embarrassing files away from Justice Department investigators:

Advice: Take the offensive. Brand as a liar Philip Heymann, the Deputy Attorney
General whose contemporaneous notes show he called your stonewalling a "terrible
mistake." That's what Maggie Williams did to the Secret Service agent who
spotted her lugging away Foster files, and she got away with it. Take "executive
privilege" to new heights for the Clintons by bottoming it, with exquisite
irony, on U.S. v. Nixon.

To non-militant Gen. Colin Powell, Time Warner's candidate for President:

Only 12 more months of bobbing and weaving on the issues before you can be
anointed somebody's running mate. On your book tour, slip past questions about
your past advice to Presidents Bush and Clinton on Bosnia.

To Senator Arlen Specter, unabashedly pro-choice candidate for the Republican
nomination, who comported himself well in "Meet the Press" debate with newly
non-abrasive Pat Buchanan:

As a former prosecutor, you have the credentials to take on law enforcement when
it does wrong. Though Democrats will try to obfuscate House Waco hearings to
prop up Janet Reno, your Senate hearings on abuse of police power at Ruby Ridge
should provide incontrovertible findings of wrongdoing. Hit this scandal hard;
major TV coverage will also allow you to do "better than expected" in early
primaries.

To Singapore's anti-American dictator Lee Kuan Yew, determined to be father of
the next Singapore dictator, who directed his seat-warming Prime Minister to
challenge me to a debate on route to the local dungeon:

When I scorned this trap and upped the ante to a debate with Lee himself on
neutral ground, you ordered a flunky to accuse me of "chickening out." This
slang term is clearly libelous, conjuring a vision of a cowardly fowl, prepared
with ginger and cashew nuts. Transfer $680,000 for damage to my bruised ego from
your secret Swiss account to mine, thereby saving court costs.

To the House ethics committee, now badgering Speaker Newt Gingrich with a
farrago of charges aimed at crippling his propaganda machine:

Drop 'em all except the book income, and establish this principle: No public
official should earn more than one-fourth of his public salary in private work.
After leaving office, it's the American Way to cash in on the celebrity you
gained and the history you participated in; but while serving, serve the public
full time and be satisfied with the income of a public official. Instruct Al
Gore and Newt Gingrich to end their public-private double-dipping.

To SecState Warren Christopher, on his way to the Far East to ask his Chinese
counterpart why that nation keeps biting the hand that feeds it a lifesaving
trade surplus:

Don't kowtow. And while out there, tell Communist Vietnam that the unspoken
reason we established contact was to help them resist Chinese hegemony in East
Asia. (This may turn out to be as dumb as helping Iraq in the 80's to contain
Iran.) See if Vietnam wants Jane Fonda as our Ambassador to Hanoi, but be sure
the new U.S. Embassy has a big heliport on the roof.

To French President Jacques Chirac: France's return to grandeur would better be
attained when allied with the Germans, who want to help the Croatians, and the
Americans, who want to help the Bosnians, than with Britain's Tories, who want
to "stop the killing" by forcing the Muslims to surrender to the Serbs.

To Bill Clinton, who has left the "governing mode" to embrace the "campaign
mode":

Why do you want to run if you don't want to govern? Banish your pollster;
sometimes triangulation asks too much. Take charge or take a powder.

That does it for contingencies. If anything else comes up, you're all on your
own.

LOAD-DATE: July 31, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              117 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 1, 1995, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

CONFLICT IN THE BALKANS: IN ZAGREB;
U.S. Builds Influence In Croatia

BYLINE: By ALAN COWELL

SECTION: Section A;  Page 6;  Column 6;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 763 words

DATELINE: ZAGREB, Croatia, July 29


At the Defense Ministry here, 15 Americans, retired military men, are training
Croatian officers in what is termed "democracy transition."

When the Presidents of Bosnia and Croatia met last week and decided on joint
military action against rebel Serbs, the only foreign diplomat to attend was
Peter W. Galbraith, the American Ambassador in Zagreb.

At a time when Croatian forces, marching in neighboring Bosnia, are scoring
battlefield successes that threaten the region's military balance, such emblems
of American influence go far beyond a familiar relationship between superpower
and client.

As if drawn by a historical imperative, this small land of 4.5 million people is
reclaiming the role of ethnic and political buffer that it has played for
centuries, and is coming to be defined more and more as the West's outpost on a
frontier with the chaos of the post-cold-war era.

Here, historically, Roman Catholicism drew its line against the Eastern Rite and
Islam. Here empires that ruled from the West collided with those of the East.
And here the United States seems to be setting the markers for a new sphere of
influence where the currency is pegged to the German mark and the sense of
protection to Washington.

Last year, the United States and Croatia signed a military cooperation agreement
that provides for increased contacts between the American and Croatian armed
forces, including Croatian access to an Defense Department training program.

Western ambassadors looked on without dismay at a military parade here recently
as an array of missiles, tanks and artillery pieces showed just how effective
Croatia had been in breaking the United Nations arms embargo by importing former
East bloc equipment, including attack helicopters said by defense experts to
have come from Ukraine and MIG-21 warplanes widely believed to have come from
the former East German Air Force.

Croatia, moreover, is widely seen as a staging point for arms supplies to
Bosnia, again infringing the United Nations embargo. When a mysterious cargo
plane landed in besieged Bihac last week with arms for the Bosnian Government
forces there, it began its journey in Croatia, United Nations officials said.

The Western attitude suggests a long-term calculation that, ultimately, two
local powers will dominate this part of the world -- one in Zagreb, one in
Belgrade; one tied to Washington, the other locked into a Slavic bloc extending
to Moscow.

Asked which embassy here was the most influential, one Zagreb journalist thought
for barely a moment before saying: "The Americans."

NATO officials said that when Croatian Serbs went on the offensive against the
Bosnian Government forces in Bihac the other day, the United States Embassy here
sent a message to the insurgents saying it would reward an early military
withdrawal from Bihac with strong pressure to restrain the Croatian Army from
retaliation -- a clear signal of the Embassy's sense of its influence here.

For all that, the arrival of the 15 American military instructors raised
eyebrows in Zagreb, drawing comparisons to the way American advisers first
appeared in Vietnam or Central America.

In December, the State Department licensed Military Professional Resources Inc.
-- made up of high-ranking retired military officers and based in Alexandria,
Va. -- to act as instructors in a course supposed to woo Croatian officers away
from old, Communist habits and instill the values of a democratic army.

"We have a contract with the Croatian Defense Ministry to provide training in
transforming the army from an Eastern army to a Western army," said Ed Soyster,
also a retired lieutenant general and the former head of the Defense
Intelligence Agency. He is in charge of overseas operations at Military
Professional Resources.

In a telephone interview, however, he denied that his company was providing
training that would infringe the already porous United Nations embargo on
military goods and services throughout the former Yugoslavia.

He also denied published reports linking Croatia's recent military activities to
the presence of his company's representatives.

He said the purpose of the course was to teach Croatian officers such skills as
dealing with the legislature and civilian institutions. He said that another aim
of the course was to build a corps of noncommissioned officers as the backbone
of the new army, which scored its first important battlefield success in May
when it retook areas held by Croatian Serb rebels southeast of Zagreb.

"We told them to expect no miracles," he said.

LOAD-DATE: August 1, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              118 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 1, 1995, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

State Bottleneck Delays Heat-Wave Aid

BYLINE: By DON VAN NATTA Jr.

SECTION: Section B;  Page 3;  Column 4;  Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 888 words


The Federal Government has set aside $11.5 million to help poor New Yorkers
suffering from the oppressive heat wave, but state officials say they have not
finished a plan to use the money and may not be able to distribute it while the
weather is still hot.

Instead, state social service officials said yesterday, much of the money may be
used to warm homes next winter.

Even though the emergency money has been available to New York State for seven
days -- and temperatures are expected to rise near 100 later this week -- state
officials are still trying to work out a plan to distribute some of the money to
help elderly and poor New Yorkers buy fans and air-conditioners and pay for
energy bills.

"I imagine we are moving as expeditiously as possible with the plan," said Dan
Hogan, a spokesman for the state Department of Social Services. "Here's our
problem: By the time we have a plan and get it mobilized, we could be in the
middle of cool weather."

For now, however, state officials have decided this much: Some of the $11.5
million will be saved to help New Yorkers battle next winter's cold, officials
said.

"When this heat wave is forgotten, we're going to have a tough winter," Mr.
Hogan said.

The grant is part of a $100 million emergency grant announced by President
Clinton on July 21, just days after a devastating heat wave killed hundreds of
people in Chicago and in the Midwest. Fourteen deaths in New York City were
attributed to the heat.

Nineteen states were granted emergency assistance; New York's grant is the
second-largest, after Illinois's $15.7 million. The formula for distributing the
money takes into account the temperatures from July 9 to 15 and the number of
poor people in the state.

Officials said this was apparently the first time the Federal Government has
allocated emergency money to help poor people battle a heat wave. The grant is
intended to help the poor pay "cooling bills, buy fans or air-conditioners and
provide other emergency assistance," the White House said.

A spokesman for the Federal Department of Health and Human Services said
yesterday that the grant was intended to help the states' poor and elderly
residents beat the heat. But the spokesman, Michael Kharfen, said a provision in
the grant would allow the state to use the money for heating instead of cooling.

"They do have that option," Mr. Kharfen said. "This represents some of the
flexibility built into the program."

But some advocates for the poor and disabled were outraged yesterday to learn
that money that could help people stay cool during a summer of record heat would
be saved for next winter -- which may, they pointed out, end up being
comparatively mild.

"It seems to me that the state was caught off guard," said Anne E.  Erickson,
the legislative coordinator for the Greater Upstate Law Project in Albany. "They
applied for the money; now they've got the money. Instead of trying to squirrel
some away, they should spend their energies on how to get the money into the
streets, where it is desperately needed."

Federal officials said the $11.5 million had been available since last Tuesday,
the same day Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan announced that poor and elderly New
Yorkers could count on the money to help them survive this summer's record heat.
In the last 10 days, the temperature in Central Park has exceeded 90 degrees
every day except one.

The day after Senator Moynihan's press conference, The Times Union of Albany
published a front-page story with details of the emergency grant. The article
was read by John McKenna, a 48-year-old Vietnam veteran who lives in a
rent-controlled building for disabled veterans in Albany.

Mr. McKenna phoned several state agencies to inquire how he and his neighbors
could apply to buy fans and air-conditioners. Finally, he reached an
unidentified worker at the state Department of Social Services; that person told
him that all the money would be saved for this winter, Mr. McKenna said.

"He said New York is in a 'cold corridor' and we would need the money more this
coming winter," Mr. McKenna said. "I was absolutely aghast. There's a blind
veteran in this building who is afraid to turn on his air-conditioner. He's
afraid he won't have enough to pay his electrical bill."

Despite the news reports on Wednesday, state workers did not receive official
notification of the grant until 6 P.M. Thursday, said Mr. Hogan, the spokesman
for the state Department of Social Services.

The state's Home Energy Assistance Program primarily helps poor, elderly and
disabled people heat their homes. From November 1994 to last April, the program
spent $164 million assisting more than one million people. The program's offices
have been closed since June 23 and will not reopen until November, Mr. Hogan
said.

Meanwhile, Mr. Hogan urged people who need emergency assistance to get in touch
with their local social service offices immediately. To qualify, a family of
three would need to have a gross monthly income of $24,216 a year or less.

"I want to emphasize: If you have a real emergency, don't wait for this, O.K.?"
he said. "If you have a real emergency -- if you have parents and kids -- check
on them and make sure they are O.K. Even this money will not make up for the
lack of common sense on some people's part."


LOAD-DATE: August 1, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Beating the heat and high rents, John Bonilla, right, examined
an air-conditioner on 135th Street between Amsterdam Avenue and Broadway. He
used to rent a shop on the block but now works out of his truck. (Philip
Greenberg for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              119 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 1, 1995, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Severe Trauma May Damage The Brain as Well as the Psyche

BYLINE: By DANIEL GOLEMAN

SECTION: Section C;  Page 3;  Column 4;  Science Desk

LENGTH: 1769 words


SEVERE emotional trauma may put its victims in double jeopardy, not only searing
the psyche, but physically damaging the brain.

New studies in trauma victims as diverse as Vietnam combat veterans and victims
of childhood sexual abuse have found a shrinkage in the size of the hippocampus,
a brain structure vital to learning and memory. The very hormones that flood the
brain to mobilize it in the face of an overwhelming threat can be toxic to cells
in the hippocampus, the studies suggest.

"The idea that severe stress or trauma can actually damage the brain is
remarkable," said Dr. Dennis Charney, chief of psychiatry at the Veterans
Affairs Medical Center in West Haven, Conn.

The symptoms of post-traumatic stress include nightmares and vivid flashbacks of
the traumatic moment; being fearful and easily startled; having intrusive and
disturbing memories of the trauma; irritability, and difficulty concentrating.

Combat veterans who still suffer from post-traumatic stress symptoms from the
Vietnam war had an 8 percent reduction in the volume of their right hippocampus
compared with vets who suffered no such symptoms, according to a report in the
July issue of The American Journal of Psychiatry by a team led by Dr. J. Douglas
Bremner and including Dr. Charney, at the West Haven hospital.

And both combat veterans and and survivors of childhood abuse performed at
levels averaging 40 percent lower on a test of verbal memory than did people of
comparable age and education, Dr. Bremner said in a report to be published later
this year in Psychiatry Research.

The traumatized veterans with reduced hippocampus volume were compared with
other veterans who had similar backgrounds, body size and other characteristics
that might affect brain size, but who had no trauma symptoms.

The left and right hippocampi, twin seahorse-shaped structures deep on each side
of the brain, play a crucial role in memory. The hippocampus is especially vital
to short-term memory, the holding in mind of a piece of information for a few
moments, after which it either resides in more permanent memory or is
immediately forgotten. Learning, the accretion of new data in memory, depends on
short-term memory.

The finding of shrinkage in the hippocampus suggests a loss of cell mass.
Whether the loss is due to the atrophy of dendrites, the long branches that
stretch from one brain cell to another, or from the death of such cells, is not
yet known.

Some researchers caution that it is not yet certain that trauma and stress
shrink the hippocampus. "It might be that people with a smaller hippocampus to
begin with are the ones most susceptible to post-traumatic stress symptoms,"
said Dr. Roger Pitman, a psychiatrist at the Veterans Affairs Medical Center in
Manchester, N.H.

"The rule of thumb is that no matter what kind of trauma -- an earthquake,
combat, rape -- only about 15 percent of victims will get long-lasting, severe
post-trauma symptoms," said Dr. Bremner.

Dr. Bremner's finding of hippocampus effects is the first to be published,
though confirming preliminary results were reported by other research groups in
May at the annual meeting of the American Psychiatric Association in Miami. Dr.
Murray Stein, a psychiatrist at the University of California at San Diego, found
a 7 percent reduction in hippocampus volume in women who had suffered repeated
childhood sexual abuse and who still had post-traumatic symptoms.

Another study of Vietnam veterans found that those who saw more intense combat
and suffered from more severe post-trauma symptoms had an average shrinkage of
26 percent in the left hippocampus and 22 percent in the right hippocampus,
compared with vets who saw combat but had no symptoms. That finding, also
reported at the psychiatry meeting, was by Dr. Tamara Gurvits and Dr. Pitman.

And in new preliminary data, Dr. Bremner also found a loss of hippocampus volume
among adults who were victims of repeated physical or sexual abuse as children.
Two-thirds of the abuse victims were men, and all still had post-traumatic
symptoms as a result of the abuse.

"The abuse was extreme," said Dr. Bremner, "including being raped or otherwise
sexually penetrated regularly, or being routinely hit, burned or otherwise
physically abused over a year or longer."

The memory of those with post-traumatic symptoms is particularly faulty for
words, like grocery lists or phone numbers. Using a test in which people hear a
story and then repeat it back immediately and again 15 minutes later, Dr.
Bremner found a 40 percent deficit in the accuracy of short-term memory in
trauma victims compared with people of similar age and background.

The study found no deficiency in the trauma victims' overall I.Q. scores, nor in
other kinds of memory, like that for things they had seen or for vocabulary.

"The hippocampus is crucial for short-term verbal memory," said Dr. Bremner.

The shrinkage in the hippocampus may be due to the effects of heightened levels
of cortisol, a steroid hormone secreted by the brain in response to emergencies,
some researchers believe. "Cortisol can be toxic to the hippocampus," said Dr.
Bremner.

Studies in rats and primates suggest that glucocorticoids, the equivalent of
cortisol in other species, "may be neurotoxic to the hippocampus at the massive
levels that are released under extreme stress or during trauma," said Dr. Robert
Sapolsky, a neuroscientist at Stanford University. "I'm talking about the levels
you would see in a zebra running from a lion, or a person fleeing a mugger -- a
real physical life-and-death crisis -- if it is repeated again and again as time
goes on."

During such moments of crisis, the body engages in a kind of biological triage,
suppressing less pressing functions like ovulation, immune-system reactions and
growth, shunting its resources to the muscles needed to survive the immediate
danger.

Cortisol is a major means the body uses, with adrenaline, to arouse itself so
quickly; its action, for example, triggers an increase in blood pressure and
mobilizes energy from fat tissue and the liver.

"The dark side of this picture is the neurological effects," said Dr. Sapolsky.
"It's necessary for survival, but it can be disastrous if you secrete cortisol
for months or years on end. We've known it could lead to stress-exacerbated
diseases like hypertension or adult onset diabetes.  But now we're finding the
hippocampus is also damaged by these secretions."

Studies in animals show that when glucocorticoids are secreted at high levels
for several hours or days, there is a detectable effect on memory, though no
neuronal death. But with sustained release from repeated stress, "it eventually
kills neurons in the hippocampus," said Dr. Sapolsky. "This has been shown
solidly in rats, with the cell biology well understood."

A parallel effect has long been known among patients with Cushing's disease, a
hormonal condition in which tumors in the adrenal or pituitary glands or
corticosteroid drugs used for a prolonged time cause the adrenal glands to
secrete high levels of a hormone called ACTHm and of cortisol. Such patients are
prone to a range of diseases "in any organ with stress sensitivity," including
diabetes, hypertension and suppression of the immune system, said Dr. Sapolsky.

Cushing's patients also have pronounced memory problems, especially for facts
like where a car was parked. "The hippocampus is essential for transferring such
facts from short-term to long-term memory," said Dr. Sapolsky.

In 1993, researchers at the University of Michigan reported that magnetic
resonance imaging had shown an atrophy and shrinkage of the hippocampus in
patients with Cushing's disease; the higher their levels of cortisol, the more
shrinkage.

In an apparent paradox, low levels of cortisol in post-trauma victims were found
in a separate research report, also in the July issue of The American Journal of
Psychiatry. Dr. Rachel Yehuda, a psychologist at Mount Sinai Medical School in
New York City, found the lower levels of cortisol in Holocaust survivors who had
been in concentration camps 50 years ago and who still had post-traumatic
symptoms.

"There are mixed findings on cortisol levels in trauma victims, with some
researchers finding very high levels and others finding very low levels," said
Dr. Sapolsky. "Biologically speaking, there may be different kinds of
post-traumatic stress."

In a series of studies, Dr. Yehuda has found that those post-trauma patients who
have low cortisol levels also seem to have "a hypersensitivity in cell receptors
for cortisol," she said. To protect itself, the body seems to reset its cortisol
levels at a lower point.

The low cortisol levels "seem paradoxical, but both too much and too little can
be bad," said Dr. Yehuda.  "There are different kinds of cells in various
regions of the hippocampus that react to cortisol. Some atrophy or die if there
is too little cortisol, some if there is too much."

Dr. Yehuda added, "In a brain scan, there's no way to know exactly which cells
have died."

To be sure that the shrinkage found in the hippocampus of trauma victims is
indeed because of the events they suffered through, researchers are now turning
to prospective studies, where before-and-after brain images can be made of
people who have not yet undergone trauma, but are at high risk, or who have
undergone it so recently that cell death has not had time to occur.

Dr. Charney, for example, is planning to take M.R.I. scans of the brains of
emergency workers like police officers and firefighters and hopes to do the same
with young inner-city children, who are at very high risk of being traumatized
over the course of childhood and adolescence. Dr. Pitman, with Dr. Yehuda, plans
a similar study of trauma victims in Israel as they are being treated in
emergency rooms.

Dr. Yehuda held out some hope for people who have suffered through traumatic
events. "It's not necessarily the case that if you've been traumatized your
hippocampus is smaller," she said. She cited research with rats by Dr. Bruce
McEwen, a neuroscientist at Rockefeller University, showing that atrophied
dendritic extensions to other cells in the hippocampus grew back when the rats
were given drugs that blocked stress hormones.

Dr. Sapolsky cited similar results in patients with Cushing's disease whose
cortisol levels returned to normal after tumors were removed. "If the loss of
hippocampal volume in trauma victims is due to the atrophy of dendrites rather
than to cell death, then it is potentially reversible, or may be so one day," he
said.


LOAD-DATE: August 1, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: In an M.R.I. scan of a patient with combat-related
post-traumatic stress disorder, both the left and and the right hippocampus
regions showed decreased volume compared with the same regions in a similar
veteran who had not suffered any combat trauma. (Dr. J. Douglas Bremner)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              120 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 2, 1995, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

House, Like Senate, Votes To Halt Bosnia Embargo

BYLINE: By ELAINE SCIOLINO

SECTION: Section A;  Page 6;  Column 5;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1203 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 1


In a move that sets the stage for a Presidential veto, the House gave final
passage today to a bill ordering President Clinton to halt American
participation in the United Nations arms embargo against Bosnia.

The bill, passed 298 to 128, was identical to a measure approved by the Senate
last week. And like the Senate's 69-29 vote, the House tally produced more than
the two-thirds margin needed to override President Clinton's threatened veto.

Both votes were a striking challenge to the President's powers to make foreign
policy and a judgment that the warring parties must be allowed to fight on in
the absence of viable peace negotiations.

Even as debate on the House floor got under way, Mr. Clinton was still meeting
with 4 Republicans and 11 Democrats in a lobbying effort to persuade them to
vote against the measure.

"I was encouraged by a few people who told me that they had decided, upon
reflection, it was not the thing to do," Mr. Clinton told reporters at a White
House news conference hours before the vote. Reiterating his commitment to the
allies' plan to strengthen the United Nations peacekeeping mission, he said: "I
think this new strategy will work if we can hammer out a negotiated settlement.
There's a new effort there."

After the House vote, the White House spokesman, Michael D. McCurry, issued a
statement announcing that Mr. Clinton was "disappointed" with today's vote and
repeated his determination to veto it.

On the floor of the House, there was little optimism about the prospects for a
negotiated settlement among the warring parties, which have fought bitterly for
more than three years.

In five hours of emotion-filled statements that captured the depths of their
frustration, lawmakers compared Serbian aggression to the Holocaust; raised the
specter of Vietnam if American troops have to extricate United Nations
peacekeepers; demanded deference to the President's right to make foreign
policy, and proclaimed that the President's time to make Bosnia policy had run
out.

Depending on who was doing the talking, ending the arms embargo was either the
only way to level the playing field or the sure way to increase the fighting on
the battlefield.

Lawmakers who favored the bill argued that what was at stake were the right of a
sovereign country to self-defense under the United Nations Charter and the duty
to end genocide in the heart of Europe.

"Genocide is our problem," said Representative Susan Molinari, Republican of
Staten Island, asserting that the Serbs had forced Bosnian mothers to watch the
beheading of their babies and Bosnian fathers to watch the rape of their
daughters. "This is our date with destiny."

Many of those arguing against the bill admitted that their approach was not a
road map for success, just the path with the least minefields.

"I know my colleagues are frustrated about the tragedy in Bosnia," said
Representative Lee H. Hamilton, Democrat of Indiana and a consistent supporter
of the Administration's position. "I am frustrated. I am not going to argue that
the present policy will lead to a good outcome. It is too late for any good
outcome."

But Mr. Hamilton predicted, his voice cracking with emotion, "What we are
proposing to do today will only make a bad situation worse."

Today's vote passed by a slightly smaller margin than an even more sweeping
measure approved by the House in June. But that measure, approved 318 to 99, was
in the form of an amendment to the foreign aid bill that had no chance of
surviving the President's veto.

Like the Senate vote last week, today's vote underscored the erosion of support
for the President even in his own party. Ninety-three Democrats joined with 204
Republicans and one Independent to approve the measure; 103 Democrats and 25
Republicans opposed it.

Since the House vote in June, the Serbs have overrun two United
Nations-designated "safe areas" and the Croats have begun to push back the Serbs
in a major advance.

Still, a number of members, including Representative Bob Livingston, Republican
of Louisiana and chairman of the Appropriations Committee, and Representative
David R. Obey of Wisconsin, the senior Democrat on the committee, changed their
votes and decided to vote against the measure for the first time.

For them, as for a number of other members who opposed the bill, the principal
risk of lifting the embargo is not the prospect of a wider war or a refugee
crisis, as the Clinton Administration has argued. Rather, it is much more
straightforward: it could mean the deployment of as many as 25,000 American
troops to Bosnia as part of an ambitious NATO operation to withdraw the
peacekeepers first.

"In the last two to three weeks I got to trying to follow what would happen if
we lifted the arms embargo," Mr. Livingston said in an interview in explaining
why he changed his vote. "We do it and the U.N. troops pull out and we have to
put American troops on the ground. At that point, anything can happen."

But Mr. Livingston also said his decision was not based on anything he heard
from Mr. Clinton in his meeting with lawmakers today. "I didn't hear a
definitive plan on where we are going," he said. "There was not any strong
conviction of where we are heading."

In his speech on the floor, Mr. Obey explained that he was voting against
lifting the arms embargo "with great reluctance and with great frustration"
after twice voting for it.

"It seems to me the most important thing at this point is for us to be
together," he said, adding, "We ought to grant the President the time he needs."

But Mr. Obey acknowledged that there was another reason as well: maintaining the
status quo, however imperfect it is, will avoid or at least delay the deployment
of American troops to Bosnia. He called a vote against lifting the embargo "the
best chance to avoid sending American troops into this area."

Some lawmakers, like James L. Oberstar, Democrat of Minnesota, voted in favor of
lifting the arms embargo for the first time.

"I went through a long process of thinking this through," Mr. Oberstar said in
an interview. "I felt the Administration deserved the time to work with the
allies, to work with NATO and the U.N."

But the failure of NATO to launch punitive air strikes and of the international
community to unite to lift the arms embargo convinced him that the United States
had to act on its own. "This is the only option left," he said.

There is nothing automatic about the Senate and House passage of the bill. The
President has 10 days after he formally receives the directive, excluding next
Sunday, to veto it. Both the House and Senate would have to pass it again with
the two-thirds majority to enact it into law.

Even if Congress overrides the veto, the pending legislation states that Mr.
Clinton will not be required to end American participation in the embargo until
the United Nations troops have withdrawn from Bosnia or 12 weeks after the
Bosnian Government requests the withdrawal.

Even then, Mr. Clinton has built-in flexibility: he can ask for unlimited 30-day
waivers if there are still United Nations troops in Bosnia and he can cerify
that the waivers are necessary for their safe withdrawal.

LOAD-DATE: August 2, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              121 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 2, 1995, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

PATTERN EMERGES IN BOMBER'S TRACT

BYLINE: By MARTIN GOTTLIEB

SECTION: Section A;  Page 1;  Column 1;  National Desk

LENGTH: 1529 words


In what was described as an important advance in the hunt for an elusive serial
bomber, the Federal Bureau of Investigation said yesterday that it had traced a
years-long pattern of academic involvement that took the self-described
anarchist from the Chicago area to Salt Lake City to Berkeley, Calif.

By matching his 17-year record of carnage against an analysis of a densely
argued 35,000-word tract he sent to The New York Times in June, Government
officials say they have concluded that the bomber is a student of the history of
science who may have taken classes at or hovered around major university
campuses from the late 1970's to the mid-1980's. [Excerpts from the tract, page
A16.]

These include Northwestern University, the Chicago Circle campus of the
University of Illinois, the University of Utah, Brigham Young University and the
University of California at Berkeley, the officials said.

Federal agents are particularly interested in his activities in the Chicago
area, where they believe his intellectual passion first developed in the late
1970's, and how they relate to his current life of mystery and destruction,
thought to be centered in northern California. The F.B.I. now believes that the
man they call the Unabomber lives somewhere in the Sacramento or San Francisco
Bay areas.

The bomber has killed 3 people and injured 23, many of them seriously, in 16
incidents going back to 1978. His last victim was Gilbert Murray, a
timber-industry lobbyist who was killed when he opened a package bomb sent to
the California Forestry Association in Sacramento.

"By sending out the manuscript, he's given us the greatest insight into his own
personality and education that we've ever had," said Terry D. Turchie, the
senior F.B.I. official overseeing the bureau's wide-ranging investigation.

Mr. Turchie said the bureau, in a break from its normal practice, would make the
single-spaced 62-page document available to scholars and professors in the hope
that further leads would be discerned from its phrasing or its fierce arguments
against a society evermore based on technological advances.

"We would hope the right people out there might see it and might call us and
might be able to bring this entire thing together," he said, adding that agents
were already showing the document to 50 to 60 academics who study the history of
science and technology, psychology and sociology.

The manifesto shows that the writer is familiar with these academic disciplines.
It sneers at scientists, conservatives and particularly liberals, broods about
the meaning of freedom and the causes of anomie, and calls for a revolution
against a complicated, bureaucratic, technological society that its author
maintains robs people of their essence.

"The industrial revolution and its consequences have been a disaster for the
human race," the tract opens. "They have greatly increased the life-expectancy
of those of us who live in 'advanced' countries, but they have destabilized
society, have made life unfulfilling, have subjected human beings to
indignities, have led to widespread psychological suffering (in the Third World
to physical suffering as well) and have inflicted severe damage on the natural
world. The continued development of technology will worsen the situation."

Two hundred numbered paragraphs later, he concludes, "Until the industrial
system has been thoroughly wrecked, the destruction of that system must be the
revolutionaries' ONLY goal."

In late June, the bomber sent to The Times and The Washington Post copies of the
huge manuscript, titled "Industrial Society and its Future," and bearing the
byline "FC," the name of the revolutionary group the bomber claims to be acting
on behalf of. Although the bomber refers to the group, the authorities believe
he is acting alone. In accompanying letters, he wrote that if the full
manuscript was printed by one of the papers within three months and if one of
them agreed to print three annual follow-ups, he would stop trying to kill
people. He left open the possibility that he would still direct bombs at
property.

Neither paper has decided whether to print the full document. Like The Times,
The Post ran excerpts from it in its Wednesday issue..

In a statement yesterday, Arthur Sulzberger Jr., publisher of The Times, said:
"We have yet to make a decision on whether or not to meet the demands of the
Unabomber. Tonight's story and the excerpts we're running represent the judgment
of our editors as to what is newsworthy.

"The tough decision of whether we publish the entire document is still ahead. As
I've said before, the demand that the Unabomber have access to our pages for
three years is especially troubling. There's no easy way to open negotiations
with this person and for the moment we're stymied."

Mr. Turchie said that what fascinated the bureau was the bomber's intellectual
interest in the history of science, a relatively small field when compared with
broader scientific disciplines, and in such precise areas as behavior
modification. In 1985, the bomber mailed a device to a psychology professor at
the University of Michigan who specializes in behavior modification. A secretary
was injured.

By overlaying his interests on the pattern of his bombings, the F.B.I.
developed a sense of where he lived and what circles he may have traveled in at
different times: his first two bombs, in 1978 and 1979, injured two people at
Northwestern University, including one in its Technological Institute. His next
two in 1979 and 1980 were also sent from the Chicago area.

In 1981 and 1982, he sent bombs from Salt Lake City, including one at the
University of Utah in which no one was injured.

From mid-1985, the bombs and a growing collection of letters were sent from
northern California, with the exception of two package bombs postmarked from
Salt Lake City.

Almost all of the universities of interest to the bureau have courses or
programs in the history of science, Mr. Turchie said.

"Our efforts right now are concentrated on trying to tie in the Chicago and
California aspects," he said.  "One of the predominant themes in the manuscript
involves this entire idea of the negative impact of technology on society and he
discusses it in the context of the history of science. He's obviously spent a
lot of time thinking it through. Those are probably the most important elements
of that manuscript. They seem to echo this whole idea of the history of
science."

For the most part, historians who study science look on it as progressive, with
its breakthroughs and intellectual triumphs seen as a social boon. But a small
subset of scholars has long focused on its social ills and unexpected cultural
repercussions, and is sometimes strongly anti-technology.

In the 1970's, this cautionary sentiment was accented by fervor against the
Vietnam war and was formalized by groups that employed confrontational tactics
to disrupt scientific meetings and lobby for more debate on the social
implications of science and scientific warfare.

The members of one such group, Science for the People, once tossed a tomato at a
speaker at a podium at an annual meeting of the American Association for the
Advancement of Science, and one of them was stabbed with a knitting needle in
retaliation for such acts by the irate wife of a scientist.

Science for the People was active the Chicago area in the 1970's, with some of
its members at Northwestern and at the University of Illinois Chicago Circle
Campus. In the main, however, the faculty at Northwestern and the University of
Illinois Chicago Circle Campus tended to be of a more conservative mold.

"None of the people I can think of were in the rabble-rouser category," said
Michael Radnor, who headed a Committee on the Interdisciplinary Study of Science
and Technology at Northwestern during the 1970's. "There were weird people who
showed up at our sack-lunch seminars. But who knows from where."

Current and former faculty members at the two universities said they could
remember no lecturers who espoused a strong anti-science stance or similarly
minded students.

In recent weeks, the F.B.I. has been questioning some leftist and environmental
figures in the Berkeley area, causing criticism from some who are suspicious of
the agency's motives. But Mr. Turchie denied the bureau was using the case as a
pretext for investigating political groups. He said all files gathered in the
inquiry will be kept separate from the agency's general files.

The bomber's manifesto includes 21 footnotes, two pages of spelling and grammar
corrections and references to such diverse thinkers as the sociologist Eric
Hoffer, the social scientist James Q. Wilson and a book on Chinese political
philosophy by Chester C. Tan.

At its heart, it paints a picture of a technological society that is
increasingly ruinous to the ability of people to set goals and achieve them by
themselves or in small groups in the manner of 19th century frontier society.
The result, the bomber maintains, is a listless, dehumanized society that will
only become harder to revolutionize as the march of technology moves on.

LOAD-DATE: August 2, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              122 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 2, 1995, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Thomas E. Morgan Dies at 88; Was Congressman for 32 Years

BYLINE: By DAVID BINDER

SECTION: Section D;  Page 20;  Column 1;  National Desk

LENGTH: 485 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 1


Dr. Thomas E. Morgan, a longtime Democratic member of Congress who had
championed bipartisanship as head of the House Committee on International
Relations for 18 years, died on Monday in Greene County Memorial Hospital in
Waynesburg, Pa. He was 88 and lived in Fredericktown, Pa.

For much of his 32-year tenure, Dr. Morgan was the only practicing physician in
Congress. His medical skills came into play on March 1, 1954, when four Puerto
Rican nationalists, firing from a spectators' gallery, sprayed the House chamber
with bullets, wounding five members. "Doc" Morgan, as he was affectionately
known, applied bandages and in one case a tourniquet to the victims.

An imposing figure, he was 6 feet 4 inches tall and weighed 240 pounds. After
retiring from politics in 1976, he continued to practice medicine until he was
80 in Fredericktown, a community of 1,237 people in southwestern Pennsylvania,
where he maintained a large house "with 67 doors" overlooking the Monongahela
River.

Dr. Morgan became interested in politics when he was a youth. He served on the
Fredericktown City Council in the 1930's but quit when it interfered with his
medical practice. When the Democratic leadership for Pennsylvania's 24th
Congressional District asked him to run for Congress in 1944, he accepted and
won handily; he was re-elected to each succeeding Congress until he retired.

Dr. Morgan was named chairman of what was then called the House Foreign Affairs
Committee in 1958 at a time when that committee was overshadowed by its Senate
counterpart, the Foreign Relations Committee. He had a reputation of supporting
the Administration's foreign policy, whether the President was a Democrat or a
Republican. But in his latter years he opposed President Richard M. Nixon's
policy of involvement in Vietnam and President Gerald R. Ford's intention to
provide assistance to anti-Communist forces in Angola.

Thomas Ellsworth Morgan was born on Oct. 13, 1906, in the small Pennsylvania
mining town of Ellsworth, one of eight children of William and Mary Morgan. His
father, an immigrant from Wales, was a coal miner. As a boy he worked in the
mines, cleaning lamps and picking slate.

The lessons of this heritage were reflected decades later in his Congressional
career, when he promoted legislation to grant Federal assistance for the
retraining of thousands of unemployed miners and to sustain President Harry S.
Truman's stance on maintaining liberal immigration policies.

He received a bachelor of science degree from Waynesburg College in Pennsylvania
in 1930 and a medical degree from Wayne University in Detroit in 1934.

He met his future wife, the former Winifred Strait, while interning at Grace
Hospital in Detroit, where she was a nurse. They married in 1937.

Besides his wife, he is survived by a daughter, Mary Ann Youngwood of Potomac,
Md., two grandchildren and two great-grandchildren.

NAME: Thomas E. Morgan

LOAD-DATE: August 2, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Thomas E. Morgan (Associated Press, 1961)

TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              123 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 3, 1995, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Big Deals, With Journalism Thrown In

BYLINE: By Bill Kovach;   Bill Kovach is curator of the Nieman Foundation for
Journalism at Harvard.

SECTION: Section A;  Page 25;  Column 1;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 987 words

DATELINE: NANTUCKET, Mass.


As the news about the mergers that are reshaping the television news industry
continues to tumble out, public affairs journalism seems to have been swept away
by America's new mania for corporate bigness.

Few of the early accounts of Disney's deal with Capital Cities/ABC and the sale
of CBS to Westinghouse Electric have made more than passing references to the
implications for the future of independent news gathering.

But there are dangers. Among them is the degree to which the emerging corporate
structures will smother what remains of a passion for public affairs coverage in
the corporate news divisions.
 There was a breathtaking glimpse of the future on Monday when Charles Gibson,
co-host of ABC-TV's "Good Morning America," interviewed Thomas S. Murphy, the
chairman of Capital Cities/ABC, and Michael D. Eisner, the Walt Disney chairman
-- his present and future bosses. Mr. Gibson tried to raise the question of the
impact of the merger with the entertainment giant on the high-quality journalism
at ABC-TV.

Mr. Murphy, without missing a beat, asked Mr. Gibson if he wasn't proud to be a
member of the Disney family. Mr. Gibson struggled to keep the conversation on an
objective level that might be of some real value to the viewers. Mr. Murphy
noticed his discomfort with the question and joked about it with Mr. Eisner. Mr.
Gibson may have thought his role was that of an objective journalist. His bosses
made it clear that their interest tended more toward entertainment than
information.

The trend is not new. For the past decade and a half, journalism has been slowly
squeezed into a smaller and smaller corner of the expanding corporations that
make up the communications industry. The values and norms of journalism have
been steadily eroded as corporate managers order news divisions to produce more
"infotainment" programs.

This leads to programs like the recent Diane Sawyer interview on ABC's
"PrimeTime Live" with Michael Jackson that was tied to the release of a new
video with which the network hoped to be associated in the minds of the elusive
youth market. Such programming increasingly draws resources away from the
discovery and pursuit of important material for the evening news broadcast.

Though the trend is not new, with the Disney-ABC merger the threat to a form of
journalism that serves the interests of a self-governing people crosses a new
threshold.

Even with the best of intentions, owners and managers are influenced by the fact
that they now preside over a corporation that, by the simple act of merger, has
drastically reduced the proportionate importance of the news department. An
already diluted pool from which the values of journalism will be drawn has been
reduced to peripheral importance in corporate decisions. ABC's news division
will now have to compete with the enormous energy of Disney's entertainment
productions in a company in which ABC's value as an outlet for entertainment is
paramount.

One important advantage that television news departments have had is the
relatively low cost of production of news compared with entertainment shows. But
the marriage of Disney's entertainment production company with ABC's worldwide
transmission system changes that relative position.

Because of the opportunity to cycle and recycle Disney's cartoons and movies
worldwide, the per unit production costs of these entertainment packages will be
substantially lowered. More important, news neither keeps nor travels
particularly well, but Mickey Mouse goes on forever and is welcome everywhere.

And there is another force at work, best represented by the proposed merger of
CBS and Westinghouse, that should cause worry. This rush to merge mainly
entertainment organizations that have news operations with companies deeply
involved in doing business with the Government raises ominous questions about
the future of watchdog journalism.

Communications companies make up the fastest growing industry in the United
States. They have now almost completely ingested the country's news
organizations. Because these new communications corporations are so dependent on
Government decisions, they are actively involved in lobbying for and buying
Government favors.

According to the Center for Responsive Government, the communications industry
was the sixth largest contributor to the candidates in the 1994 elections. The
industry contributed nearly $10 million directly to political-action committees.

As they seek to buy favorable treatment in law, rules and regulations and to win
Government contracts for their manufacturing divisions, these corporations have
become supplicants of the very institutions whose behavior they must objectively
monitor if their work is to be of any value to the public.

There is a basic fact about the free-market system. The market is governed by
the logic of economic self-interest. Public affairs journalism is by definition
concerned with the broader interests of a civic society. These latest mergers
will drive two more press organizations deeper into a world dependent for its
well-being upon the decisions of governments here and abroad. A passion for good
old-fashioned journalism could hardly find a more discouraging atmosphere within
which to try to survive.
 But in the end, the most important factor that can warm the passion for
journalism is the commitment from the top of the news media corporations. The
owners of The New York Times, Washington Post and Boston Globe risked Federal
prosecution to provide readers with the analysis of the Vietnam War contained in
the Pentagon Papers. And there is the example of a few Southern newspaper owners
who, at great economic cost, encouraged full and objective coverage of the civil
rights movement.
 That is certainly not the sort of message Charles Gibson got when he tried to
interview the men at the top of America's biggest new media conglomerate.

LOAD-DATE: August 3, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              124 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  August 4, 1995, Friday, Late Edition - Final

China Arrests Start a DisputeIn Washington

BYLINE: By STEVEN GREENHOUSE

SECTION: Section A;  Page 1;  Column 1;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 922 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 3


Secretary of State Warren Christopher, worried that his efforts to repair
relations with Beijing could be threatened, has demanded an investigation into
why the Pentagon sent two officers to watch military exercises from the Chinese
coast, senior Administration officials said today.

Mr. Christopher, who is traveling in Asia, complained in telephone calls to
Washington that the operation put in peril a careful effort to reopen a dialogue
with China and win the quick release of Harry Wu, an American citizen held by
China on charges of stealing state secrets, officials said.

"The timing was incredibly bad and someone should explain why," said one senior
official.

The two military attaches, who were detained last week, were expelled from China
today and flown to their base in Hong Kong, where they work in the American
Consulate. China accused them of taking photographs at a restricted military
site in an area where it had launched missiles in military maneuvers apparently
designed to intimidate Taiwan.

The rift between the State Department and the Pentagon, which defended the two
men's activities as routine, seemed to reflect the disarray in the
Administration's China policy. While the State Department has tended to favor a
conciliatory approach, the Pentagon and intelligence agencies generally express
greater alarm about the growing influence of China's military as Beijing
struggles through a political transition.

Several senior Administration officials speculated that the arrest of the two
Americans was itself evidence of the mounting power of Chinese military
hard-liners. Officials said Western military attaches routinely observe Chinese
military sites, and the arrest this time -- just as Mr. Christopher was
preparing to meet with the Chinese Foreign Minister in Brunei -- may have been
designed to undermine the talks.

Several Defense Department officials sought to defend the trip by the Air Force
officers, arguing that the Pentagon had to do as much as possible to monitor
military developments in China.

Mr. Christopher and his entourage have played down the arrest of the two
officers, asserting that it should have little if any effect on the State
Department's strenuous efforts to improve ties with China.

"There is no reason why this incident should have any effect on the forward
momentum in this relationship," Mr. Christopher said today at a news conference
in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, where he stopped on his way to Cambodia and Vietnam.
He said his meeting on Tuesday with China's Foreign Minister, Qian Qichen --
during which neither side mentioned the Air Force officers -- "placed the
relationship back in a forward path."

The Air Force officers were believed to be the first American officials to be
publicly expelled from China since the two countries normalized relations in
1979.

The two officers, Col. Joseph Wei Chan of Fort Wayne, Ind., and Capt. Dwayne
Howard Florenzie of Jersey City, work in the American Consulate in Hong Kong and
left from Xiamen, China, at around 11 A.M.

American officials in Beijing and Hong Kong refused to discuss any aspect of the
incident, especially not what the men were doing in Xiamen, the port in Fujian
Province directly across the straits from Taiwan.

But the location where they were apprehended reinforced reports that the
officers were trying to learn about the recent Chinese military exercises.
Strained relations between Taiwan and mainland China recently revived Chinese
threats of using military force against the island, and attracted interest among
Western military specialists.

Kenneth Bacon, the Pentagon spokesman, acknowledged today that the two men were
monitoring military activities in China.

"In every country there are military attaches who observe military operations
and file reports back," he told reporters. "This happens all the time. That's
what these gentlemen were doing."

The two were riding bicycles, were wearing civilian clothes and had cameras in
their backpacks when they were arrested, Mr. Bacon said. They both had
diplomatic passports and valid visas.

"They were not in a restricted area," he said. "They were on a road with many
civilians."

Some officials speculated that Mr. Christopher, in criticizing the Pentagon, was
seeking to shift the embarrassment he felt at working so publicly to repair
relations with Beijing, even as the Chinese, without his knowing, held the two
officers in detention.

Others suggested Mr. Christopher's complaint was for Chinese consumption: that
he was trying to assure Beijing the mission was not approved at the State
Department or White House and was in no way intended to undermine relations with
Beijing.

"As far as I can tell, no one in Washington was aware of this, no less approved
it," said one senior State Department official in Washington. American diplomats
said the trip was approved by the embassies in Hong Kong and China.

Relations with China have been in a steady decline since May, when President
Clinton brushed aside Beijing's objections and granted a visa to Taiwan's
President, Lee Teng-hui, for a personal visit to the United States in June.
Relations worsened after June 19, when China detained and then arrested Mr. Wu,
a Chinese-American rights activist.

Several Administration officials denied that the arrest of the two officers had
caused serious friction between the State Department and other agencies. "I
really think someone is trying to make a mountain out of molehill," said a
senior Pentagon official.

LOAD-DATE: August 4, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Map of China (pg. A4)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              125 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  August 4, 1995, Friday, Late Edition - Final

In a World of Peril, Let's Keep B-2 Bomber

SECTION: Section A;  Page 26;  Column 5;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 375 words


To the Editor:

Your Aug. 2 editorial alleges that the B-2 Stealth bomber is a "billion-dollar
lemon." This broadside is reminiscent of the 1980's, when critics sought to
undermine the Reagan rearmament program by questioning the idea that a
high-technology military could perform in combat.

Before World War II, bomber advocates thought air defense was futile -- until
radar was invented. Suddenly, bombers could be detected and engaged. The United
States lost 2,200 aircraft over North Vietnam as missiles were added to
anti-aircraft guns and fighters. From this experience came the push for
"stealth" technology that would blind radar.

Only seven B-2 bombers have been delivered to the Air Force. While some flaws
have been discovered in the manufacturing process, they are being corrected and
do not compromise the aircraft's design or mission.

The B-2's radar cannot "distinguish a rain cloud from a mountainside," you
charge. If rain is heavy enough, it will reflect like a solid object. This is
true of all radar. A more powerful radar can "see" better but could also be
detected by an enemy. The rain-rejecting software has been adjusted. There is no
indication this problem will degrade performance.

Tests will continue through spring 1997. The Air Force has confirmed that
detectability and survivability testing has been "successful in confirming
expected B-2 performance."

The 509th Bomb Wing has been putting the B-2's through their paces. It has
participated in the Red Flag combat exercises. It has been able to fly more
training missions than planned because B-2's seldom require more than minor
maintenance.

On June 13 the first test launch from a B-2 of an advanced Global Positioning
System-aided bomb was successfully conducted. Using satellite signals, the bomb
hit within the 20-foot circular error probability.

The B-2, with its stealth capability, long range and capacity to deliver
precision weapons, is unmatched. It is also the only United States strategic
bomber in production.

We need to keep the B-2 line open as a hedge against an uncertain future in what
is still a dangerous world.

(Rep.) DUNCAN HUNTER
Chmn., Natl. Security Subcommittee
on Military Procurement
Washington, Aug. 2, 1995

LOAD-DATE: August 4, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              126 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  August 4, 1995, Friday, Late Edition - Final

China Arrests Start DisputeIn Washington

BYLINE: By STEVEN GREENHOUSE

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 922 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 3


Secretary of State Warren Christopher, worried that his efforts to repair
relations with Beijing could be threatened, has demanded an investigation into
why the Pentagon sent two officers to watch military exercises from the Chinese
coast, senior Administration officials said today.

Mr. Christopher, who is traveling in Asia, complained in telephone calls to
Washington that the operation put in peril a careful effort to reopen a dialogue
with China and win the quick release of Harry Wu, an American citizen held by
China on charges of stealing state secrets, officials said.

"The timing was incredibly bad and someone should explain why," said one senior
official.

The two military attaches, who were detained last week, were expelled from China
today and flown to their base in Hong Kong, where they work in the American
Consulate. China accused them of taking photographs at a restricted military
site in an area where it had launched missiles in military maneuvers apparently
designed to intimidate Taiwan.

The rift between the State Department and the Pentagon, which defended the two
men's activities as routine, seemed to reflect the disarray in the
Administration's China policy. While the State Department has tended to favor a
conciliatory approach, the Pentagon and intelligence agencies generally express
greater alarm about the growing influence of China's military as Beijing
struggles through a political transition.

Several senior Administration officials speculated that the arrest of the two
Americans was itself evidence of the mounting power of Chinese military
hard-liners. Officials said Western military attaches routinely observe Chinese
military sites, and the arrest this time -- just as Mr. Christopher was
preparing to meet with the Chinese Foreign Minister in Brunei -- may have been
designed to undermine the talks.

Several Defense Department officials sought to defend the trip by the Air Force
officers, arguing that the Pentagon had to do as much as possible to monitor
military developments in China.

Mr. Christopher and his entourage have played down the arrest of the two
officers, asserting that it should have little if any effect on the State
Department's strenuous efforts to improve ties with China.

"There is no reason why this incident should have any effect on the forward
momentum in this relationship," Mr. Christopher said today at a news conference
in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, where he stopped on his way to Cambodia and Vietnam.
He said his meeting on Tuesday with China's Foreign Minister, Qian Qichen --
during which neither side mentioned the Air Force officers -- "placed the
relationship back in a forward path."

The Air Force officers were believed to be the first American officials to be
publicly expelled from China since the two countries normalized relations in
1979.

The two officers, Col. Joseph Wei Chan of Fort Wayne, Ind., and Capt. Dwayne
Howard Florenzie of Jersey City, work in the American Consulate in Hong Kong and
left from Xiamen, China, at around 11 A.M.

American officials in Beijing and Hong Kong refused to discuss any aspect of the
incident, especially not what the men were doing in Xiamen, the port in Fujian
Province directly across the straits from Taiwan.

But the location where they were apprehended reinforced reports that the
officers were trying to learn about the recent Chinese military exercises.
Strained relations between Taiwan and mainland China recently revived Chinese
threats of using military force against the island, and attracted interest among
Western military specialists.

Kenneth Bacon, the Pentagon spokesman, acknowledged today that the two men were
monitoring military activities in China.

"In every country there are military attaches who observe military operations
and file reports back," he told reporters. "This happens all the time. That's
what these gentlemen were doing."

The two were riding bicycles, were wearing civilian clothes and had cameras in
their backpacks when they were arrested, Mr. Bacon said. They both had
diplomatic passports and valid visas.

"They were not in a restricted area," he said. "They were on a road with many
civilians."

Some officials speculated that Mr. Christopher, in criticizing the Pentagon, was
seeking to shift the embarrassment he felt at working so publicly to repair
relations with Beijing, even as the Chinese, without his knowing, held the two
officers in detention.

Others suggested Mr. Christopher's complaint was for Chinese consumption: that
he was trying to assure Beijing the mission was not approved at the State
Department or White House and was in no way intended to undermine relations with
Beijing.

"As far as I can tell, no one in Washington was aware of this, no less approved
it," said one senior State Department official in Washington. American diplomats
said the trip was approved by the embassies in Hong Kong and China.

Relations with China have been in a steady decline since May, when President
Clinton brushed aside Beijing's objections and granted a visa to Taiwan's
President, Lee Teng-hui, for a personal visit to the United States in June.
Relations worsened after June 19, when China detained and then arrested Mr. Wu,
a Chinese-American rights activist.

Several Administration officials denied that the arrest of the two officers had
caused serious friction between the State Department and other agencies. "I
really think someone is trying to make a mountain out of molehill," said a
senior Pentagon official.

LOAD-DATE: August 5, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Map of China (pg. A4)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              127 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 5, 1995, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Visiting a New Cambodia

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 1;  Column 3;  Foreign Desk

LOAD-DATE: August 5, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: King Sihanouk presented a Khmer sculpture yesterday to Secretary
of State Warren Christopher, who said Cambodia had "emerged from a cruel
darkness." He went on to Hanoi, where he arrived today. Page 3. (Associated
Press)

TYPE: Caption

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              128 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 5, 1995, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Pain, and Dreams, Greet Christopher in Cambodia

BYLINE: By DAVID E. SANGER

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 3;  Column 1;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1074 words

DATELINE: PHNOM PENH, Cambodia, Aug. 4


The last time a Secretary of State arrived in this poorest corner of Southeast
Asia, 40 years ago, Cambodia still had its tragedies ahead of it: two savage
wars, the secret bombings, the horror of the killing fields.

Today Secretary of State Warren Christopher landed here to declare that Cambodia
had finally "emerged from a cruel darkness," and in small and sometimes unspoken
ways, he spent much of the visit atoning for America's role in Cambodia's many
miseries.

On Saturday, in what is expected to mark the most dramatic moment of his
weeklong tour, Mr. Christopher will land in Vietnam and formally establish
relations with the Communist Government that it battled for 15 years. It is a
visit, he said today, that will "help the United States put behind it the pain
of war."

Mr. Christopher's arrival here was the occasion for a meeting of starkly
different worlds, as his motorcade, sirens blaring, rumbled down dirt roads past
collapsing shanties, flooded rice fields and water buffalo who did their best to
appear unimpressed.

From his car window, he could glimpse the warren of junk-strewn back allies that
contain some of Asia's deepest pockets of poverty in a country that can only
dream of the economic miracles that have so transformed neighbors like Thailand
and Malaysia, only an hour's flight away. Nearly half the Cambodian population
is under 15, meaning that they have no memory of the terror that destroyed the
society.

Throughout the day Mr. Christopher received stunning reminders of how
dramatically the nature of America's power in this part of the world has
changed. For decades his predecessors viewed Cambodia first as a domino in the
cold war, then as a failed state that imploded in genocidal fury, then as a
testing ground for the United Nations.

But this morning the two men who share the prime ministership here -- Prince
Ranariddh, a son of King Sihanouk, and Hun Sen, who first came to power with the
backing of Vietnam after its 1979 invasion of the country -- asked Mr.
Christopher to view Cambodia first and foremost as a trading partner.

They spent much of their time urging the Secretary to help them obtain
most-favored-nation trading status -- he agreed -- and talking about how to
attract foreign capital. Many officials told Mr. Christopher they now fear that
American investors will pour into Vietnam, as Cambodia withers.

"It was a remarkable conversion," one of Mr. Christopher's aides said after the
meeting. "This is a country that a few years ago had no economy, and whose
people scavenged for food," he added, not mentioning that in the countryside
here some still do. "And here they were talking about their hopes for future as
an exporter."

But as Mr. Christopher reminded the two men, the first requirement for
investment is political stability, in short supply here. There was a coup
attempt a year ago; Pol Pot, weakened by defections, still stages attacks from
the Thai border; corruption is rampant, and there are still 8 million to 10
million unexploded anti-personnel mines buried in the countryside. And the new
Government is drifting toward authoritarianism.

In the last few months it has ejected a leading opposition member from the
National Assembly, threatened others, and passed a widely criticized press law
making it a crime to publish anything "injurious to the state," a term the
Government itself will define.

So Mr. Christopher found himself lecturing on human rights, warning the leaders
that "elections are not enough" and cautioning that American aid -- about $40
million -- will probably turn on the country's human rights performance.

"Compared to five years ago, things are definitely improved," said Keith Schulz,
a legal adviser for the Asia Society who is based here. "Compared to a year ago,
they are backsliding."

Everywhere Mr. Christopher went, it seemed, he tripped across the remnants of
Cambodia's mind-numbing suffering.

In the morning he spent an hour learning the art of removing mines, watching
demonstrations of the painstaking work involved in clearing out the jungles
where farmers, children and animals are still regularly blown up. Mr.
Christopher used the time to appeal for foreign aid funds. The "de-mining"
project, a training program, gets $5 million in Federal grants that may well be
reduced to $1 million.

This afternoon he visited the grim prison where Pol Pot's victims were
photographed and sent off for execution. The pictures cover the dingy prison
walls, eyes bulging out in the terror of imminent death, and Mr. Christopher
seemed shaken when he viewed the museum's collection of human skulls.

But bby evening, he was dining in one of the world's most spectacular palaces,
the home of King Sihanouk, who has spent millions over the last few years
restoring the compound, with its French and Khmer influences, to its original
1870 splendor.

It was in the same place in 1955 that John Foster Dulles, the last Secretary of
State to come here, tried to persuade the same King to abandon his neutrality in
the growing war in neighboring Vietnam, a war America had yet to enter. The
failed effort touched off a long downward spiral in America's relations with the
enigmatic King, which reached a low-point when he was overthrown in a coup that
brought Lon Nol to power and saw the Vietnam war spill across the border.

Tonight the aging King, who has been treated extensively in China for cancer and
appeared thin but rested as he sat with Queen Monique in front of his
gold-encrusted throne, was clearly in a mood to set aside lingering resentments.
For his part, Mr. Christopher made it clear he had come partly to atone and
partly to celebrate Cambodia's re-emergence as a nascent democratic state.

"No doubt with the benefit of hindsight the U.S. could have done many things
better in Cambodia," Mr. Christopher said tonight, in words he was clearly
rehearsing for his visit Saturday to Vietnam. "None of us is fully satisfied
with the role of the U.S. in this period. But what we need to emphasize now is
the future."

                             --------------------


HANOI, Vietnam, Saturday, Aug. 5 (Reuters) -- Secretary of State Warren
Christopher arrived in Vietnam today. His plane touched down at Noi Bai Airport,
20 miles north of the capital, at about 9:40 A.M. (9:40 P.M. Friday, Eastern
time), and he was met by Deputy Foreign Minister Le Mai, Hanoi's main spokesman
on American affairs.

LOAD-DATE: August 5, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              129 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 5, 1995, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Bush Is Criticized for Plans to Speak in Vietnam

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHENON

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 1;  Column 3;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 812 words

DATELINE: HANOI, Vietnam, Aug. 4


George Bush, who pleased conservatives throughout his Presidency by refusing to
lift a trade embargo and to establish diplomatic relations with Vietnam, is now
under pressure from some of the same groups over plans for a speaking tour here
that will reportedly earn him a six-figure fee.

Vietnam veterans, some conservative Republican lawmakers and some
Vietnamese-Americans say that a visit by a former President would give Vietnam's
authoritarian Government a propaganda windfall. They also fear it would hinder
American efforts to determine the fate of the 2,198 Americans still listed as
missing in action in Vietnam.

Mr. Bush is scheduled to arrive in Vietnam on Sept. 4 -- less than two months
after his successor as President, Bill Clinton, made the politically risky
decision to establish diplomatic relations.

Mr. Bush's speaking engagements in Hanoi, the capital, and Ho Chi Minh City,
formerly Saigon, are being sponsored by Citibank, one of the first American
banks to seek permission to open branches in Vietnam after the American trade
embargo was lifted last year. His audiences would include business people and
Government officials.

In a statement, Citibank said the visit -- which was organized before President
Clinton's decision to establish diplomatic relations -- would "further enhance
the growing ties of friendship between the two nations."

But that is precisely what opponents of the visit fear.

"This is a slap in the face of veterans," said Bob Currieo, executive director
of the Veterans of Foreign Wars, one of the largest veterans' groups in the
United States.

"It's premature for him to be going over there making these business overtures,"
Mr. Currieo said in a phone interview from Washington. "Here's the person who is
adamant about not lifting the embargo against Vietnam, and now he's jumping at
the first chance to go. You wonder how sincere he was as President."

While the Veterans of Foreign Wars did not oppose President Clinton in his
decision to establish diplomatic relations with Vietnam, it has asked the
Administration to continue pressing the Vietnamese to cooperate fully in
determining the fate of the missing Americans.

Some members of Congress have protested that the trip would lend credibility to
the Vietnamese Government despite the unanswered questions over those still
missing.

"George Bush should stay home," Representative Robert K. Dornan, a Republican of
California, said in a statement in response to a reporter's questions. "George
Bush's place is not with the Vietnamese Communist conquerors. It is with the
mothers, fathers, sons and daughters of our missing heroes."

Another opponent of the trip, Representative Bob Barr, a Georgia Republican, is
sponsoring legislation that could block the money needed to operate an embassy
in Hanoi.

A spokesman for Mr. Bush, Jim McGrath, said that the former President "knows
that there are strong emotions here, and I think he's taken a full accounting
and has decided that it is perfectly appropriate for him to go."

He said that Mr. Bush would use the trip to push Vietnam both to step up its
cooperation in investigating the fate of missing Americans and to improve the
Government's human rights record. "He's made that pledge," Mr. McGrath said.
"He'll be bringing up human rights and democratic reform."

He said that Mr. Bush had made the decision to travel to Vietnam only after
consulting with both Senator John McCain, an Arizona Republican who was a
prisoner of war in Vietnam, and the National League of Families, a group that
represents families of Americans listed as missing in action here.

While Mr. Bush did not lift the trade embargo on Vietnam, he did relax it, a
decision that drew some criticism from opponents of the Hanoi Government.

Senator McCain, who was instrumental in encouraging President Clinton to
establish diplomatic relations, said in a phone interview from Washington that
he had not discouraged Mr. Bush from making the trip.

"I had given him an assessment of the situation and I told him that if he felt
he would like to go, I saw nothing wrong with it," he said. "It's an important
opportunity for President Bush to encourage further cooperation on P.O.W.-M.I.A.
issues."

Ann Mills Griffiths, executive director of the League of Families and a critic
of the decision to grant diplomatic relations to Vietnam, said that "you can
make an argument on both sides" about the trip.

Mrs. Griffiths, who has accused Vietnam of withholding information on missing
Americans, said that Mr. Bush's trip could be useful if he raised the issue.

Neither Citibank nor Mr. McGrath, the former President's spokesman, would reveal
exactly how much Mr. Bush would be paid for speaking. But Mr. McGrath said
reports that the fee would be in the low six-figures were "in the ballpark -- I
know that's not inaccurate."

LOAD-DATE: August 5, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              130 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 5, 1995, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

For Vietnam, a U.S. Visitor Signals End of Isolation

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHENON

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 3;  Column 1;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 647 words

DATELINE: HANOI, Vietnam, Aug. 4


With sun-leathered hands that once clutched an army rifle on the jungle
battlefields of Vietnam, Nguyen Dinh Tuyen now holds a paint bush and a bucket
of off-white paint. His employer today, the United States Government, was his
enemy in that long-ago war.

"The Americans killed 40 of the men in my army unit, and it was wartime, so
certainly we fired back on the Americans," said Mr. Tuyen, 38, a veteran of the
People's Army of North Vietnam who saw not the slightest irony in the fact that
today he was helping spruce up a building that will be converted into a United
States Embassy in Hanoi.

"The war was so long ago," he said, making long brush strokes against a wall
that will be the backdrop for a dedication speech by Secretary of State Warren
Christopher, who arrives in the Vietnamese capital on Saturday for a three-day
visit. "We have forgotten the war. We have moved on."

Mr. Christopher's imminent arrival in Hanoi, less than a month after President
Clinton announced that the United States would establish full diplomatic
relations with Vietnam, has been trumpeted for days with banner headlines in
Vietnamese newspapers.

This nation has not received such a high-ranking American official in more than
two decades. In 1973, Henry Kissinger, then the national security adviser and
later Secretary of State, visited Hanoi after signing the Paris peace accords.

Mr. Christopher will arrive here a celebrity to millions of Vietnamese who have
been told that his visit marks not only the beginning of diplomatic relations
with a former enemy, but also the end of generations of international isolation
for a proud but battered nation.

"We had normalized relations with all the countries of the world except America,
and now there is friendship with America, too," said Bui Thanh Son, a researcher
in American affairs at the Vietnamese Institute of International Relations. "We
are finally recognized again as a full member of the world community."


On Sunday, Mr. Christopher is to dedicate the new embassy and watch as the
American flag is raised above it. Nguyen Thi Tuyet, a 43-year-old merchant whose
tiny jewelry shop is next door to the new embassy, has been planning what she
will wear for the ceremony.

"I will wear my finest silk dress -- it's a pretty shade of blue -- and I will
put on my most beautiful white high heels," she said breathlessly. "This is not
just an important day. This is history for Vietnam, so I must be properly
dressed."

While most Vietnamese admire the United States for its affluence, they also know
of its continuing struggles with violence and racism. The race riots in Los
Angeles were an important news event here given that millions of Vietnamese have
family members among that city's large migrant population.

"The reason we must have good relations with the United States is because it is
such a powerful country -- in technology, in science," said Truong Huu Vy, a
60-year-old tailor who would seem to have more reason than many Vietnamese to be
wary of closer ties to the United States.

His tenement home on Kham Thien Street in Hanoi was destroyed in an American
bombing run over the city late one night in June 1972. Dozens of his neighbors
were killed, their bodies stacked in the street until they could be carted away
in wheelbarrows. "Women and children -- the bombs did not care," he said.

Mr. Vy's wife and children survived only because they had chosen to sleep that
night in a back room of the tailor shop. "We were lucky," he said. "We could not
understand why the Americans would bomb a civilian street."

Still, he said he welcomed the return of Americans to Vietnam, and without any
reservation. "In 1972, a lot of people here would say they hated Americans, but
you would not hear that anymore," he said. "What matters is not the past. All
that matters is the present and the future."

LOAD-DATE: August 5, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Young Vietnamese gathered for cards at a Hanoi cafe below two
portraits of John Lennon. Nguyen Le Hung, center, a business student, said,
"Young people do not care anything about the war." (Lois Raimondo for The New
York Times)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              131 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 5, 1995, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Esoteric Wedge of Academia Is Roiled by Hunt for Bomber

BYLINE: By WILLIAM J. BROAD

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 1;  Column 1;  National Desk

LENGTH: 1470 words


Last October an agent from the Federal Bureau of Investigation showed up in New
Orleans at the annual meeting of The History of Science Society, the main
professional gathering for academics studying the origins of science and how it
has transformed the world.

The agenda featured esoteric items like a discussion of 19th-century social
attitudes toward the germ theory and a detailed analysis of the inks that
Galileo used in one of his manuscripts.

Carrying court papers, the agent subpoenaed the society's membership records and
questioned scholars for clues to the identity of the serial killer, often called
the Unabomber, who in 17 years has killed three people and injured 23 others
with homemade bombs.

That subpoena, and the disclosure that the F.B.I. believes that the bomber is
immersed in the most radical interpretations of the history of science, has
roiled the usually placid waters of the discipline. And across the country,
professors have begun reconsidering old suspicions, acquaintances and tracts to
help solve the crimes.

"They've thrown a bomb into the community," said Stanley Goldberg, a science
historian in Washington. "My impression is that we're all scurrying around in
our minds, thinking of people who might be suspects."

The bureau had detected the bomber's interest in the history of science, as well
as other disciplines including behavioral psychology, by poring over letters he
had sent to newspapers and to intended victims as long ago as a decade. The
35,000-word manifesto that he sent to The New York Times and two other
publications in late June not only corroborated that interest but also gave the
bureau insight into the issues that concerned the bomber, the depth of his
reading and the authors he respected.

More than a few historians of science, who blanched at the possible link between
their usually staid area of study and the object of the most intense manhunt in
F.B.I. history, have taken pains to distance the discipline from a maniacal
murderer who seems to be familiar with their debates and lines of thinking.

But Landon Winner, a political scientist and technology expert at Rensselaer
Polytechnic Institute in Troy, N.Y., said he was disappointed the F.B.I. had not
consulted with him on the bomber. "I feel left out," Dr. Winner said. "It's like
being left off the guest list for a really good party."

Scholars of the history of science investigate the origins of science from the
Babylonians and Greeks onward. They study figures like Ptolemy, Copernicus,
Newton, Galileo, Mendel and the Curies, and examine questions like how calculus
was developed, and how telescopes, atom smashers and computers were invented and
helped change the world.

In some history departments with no emphasis on the subject, professors
sometimes believe that their pursuits are not considered as serious as political
or philosophical history. "It was always regarded as a quixotic thing they let
me play with," said Professor Harold Bauman, who has taught a variety of history
courses for 30 years at the University of Utah in Salt Lake City.

Mr. Bauman has been interviewed three times by the F.B.I. since the bomber left
a booby trap bomb on the Utah campus in October 1981; the device was defused
before anyone was hurt. He said he was scheduled to be interviewed again by the
F.B.I. yesterday and to be shown a copy of the manifesto to review.

Several other professors in the field have also been given copies of the tract,
which condemns technological society and the scientific progress that scholars
in this arcane field usually champion.

"They've got to be desperate," said David C. Lindberg, a physicist at the
University of Wisconsin who specializes in medieval optics and religion and who
is president of The History of Science Society. "These are extremely tenuous
inferences they're making. But if it's the only thing they've got, then it seems
to make sense."

Some academics, while endorsing the bureau's all-out search, take umbrage at the
mention of their field and the bomber in the same breath.

"It's like saying an appreciation of Beethoven has something to do with the
Nazis," said David A. Hollinger, a professor of history at the University of
California at Berkeley.

Dr. Hollinger maintained that the ideas he read in newspaper excerpts of the
bomber's manifesto were less out of the realm of the history of science than
"generally from a more amorphous critical discourse that moves out of
environmental groups and religious groups and some literary discourses."

"I would be looking more toward alternative education courses of the 70's," he
said.

While conservative and scholarly for the most part, and sometimes downright
stuffy, the field of history of science also has undercurrents and factions that
have sometimes mounted intellectual attacks on the science establishment,
blaming the military, industrial and academic worlds for social ills like
unemployment and pollution.

That radical milieu seems to have been the breeding ground for the bomber, whose
treatise says that science and the industrial revolution have undermined human
values and calls for returning to a pre-industrial world better in tune with
nature.

This week Director Louis J. Freeh of the F.B.I. announced that agents were
talking to college professors around the country about the manifesto. The
bureau, Mr. Freed said in a statement, "is taking this investigative step in an
effort to determine whether that community might recognize the writer's work or
be able to shed light on important or telltale aspects of the manuscript's
general topic, the history of science."

In its hunt for the bomber's origins, the F.B.I. is focusing on Northwestern
University and the Chicago campus of the University of Illinois, where the
bureau believes that the killer might have lived in the late 1970's.

In the course of its inquiry, the agency has sown dissension among university
officials quick to disclaim any kind of culpability.

"This is a working-class campus," Jan Rocek, dean of the graduate school of the
University of Illinois at Chicago, said in an interview. "These characters tend
to come out of more affluent families."

Charles Loebbaka, a spokesman for Northwestern, said, "University officials are
cooperating with the F.B.I. and have been for sometime." But Mr. Loebbaka
refused further comment, saying details would have to come from the F.B.I.

Over the decades, historians and writers like Lewis Mumford, Jacques Ellul,
Theodore Roszak and Herbert Muller have worried that science systematically
ignores human values. And even strongly pro-science historians admit that
science tends to sow cultural discord because it is such a powerful agent of
social change.

In the 1970's, the intellectual critique of the science establishment turned
acid and sometimes violent as it joined with and was amplified by protests
against the Vietnam War. Groups like Science for the People, a leftist
organization, used confrontational tactics to disrupt meetings of scientists and
to push for wider debate on the social devastation wrought by science and its
ugly offspring, like napalm and nuclear weapons.

Science for the People was well-organized in the Chicago area, sponsoring
meetings at the various universities and helping finance anti-war pamphlets. Its
membership included all kinds of scientists, not just historians and
philosophers.

After the August 1970 bombing of the Army Math Research Center at the University
of Wisconsin in Madison, in which a researcher was killed, the Chicago
collective of Science for the People helped finance a 119-page "indictment" of
the math project, which was denounced as a "deadly power center" working against
"the peoples of the world fighting for liberation."

The F.B.I., which often infiltrated such anti-war groups in the 1970's, has not
indicated whether it is looking at the membership of the Chicago collective for
clues. But some historians say that it should as a possible aid to tracking down
the killer.

"This is a bright guy, but he doesn't know as much history of science as the
F.B.I. thinks he does," said Dr. Goldberg, the science historian in Washington,
who has read published excerpts of the bomber's manifesto. "He's on the fringes.
It's more of a counterculture thing."

Keith R. Benson, the executive secretary of The History of Science Society,
which is based in Seattle at the University of Washington, agreed. Mr. Benson
said that, based on his talks with F.B.I. agents and his examination of the
evidence, the killer was a knowledgeable outcast rather than a mainstream
scholar.

"My suspicion is that this guy lurked around the halls of academia rather than
being a graduate student," Mr. Benson said. "He's unbelievably sophisticated.
He's covered his tracks."

LOAD-DATE: August 5, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Keith R. Benson, of The History of Science Society, said he
believed that the serial bomber was a knowledgeable outcast rather than a
mainstream scholar. (Loren Callahan/Seattle Post-Intelligencer) (pg. 7)

Map/Diagram: "WHERE IT HAPPENED: Tracking the Serial Bomber"

In its effort to track down the terrorist whose bombs have killed three and
injured 23 others in the past 17 years, the F.B.I. now believes that the bomber
is a student of science history who may have taken classes or spent time at some
university campuses from the late 1970's to the mid-1980's. Of the 16 bombing
incidents, nine were at Universities or the homes of professors. (pg. 7)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              132 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 5, 1995, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section 1; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 829 words



International 2-5

WAR FLARES ANEW IN CROATIA
The Croatian Government launched a long-threatened offensive to retake a swath
of territory that has been under the control of rebel Serbs since 1991. 1



CROATIA URGED TO HALT ATTACK
The U.S. and the major European powers urged Croatia to halt its attacks. But
Washington's criticisms were far more muted than the sharp condemnations issued
by Britain, France and Russia. 4

SERBIAN LEADER SHOWS RESTRAINT
President Slobodan Milosevic of Serbia refrained from giving the Serbs in
Croatia any material or emotional support. How long he will maintain his
restraint is unclear. 4

BUSH TOUR OF VIETNAM CRITICIZED
As President, George Bush won praise from conservatives for opposing calls to
restore diplomatic relations with Hanoi. Now his plans to make a lucrative
speaking tour of Vietnam are under attack. 1

CHRISTOPHER VISITS CAMBODIA
In small and sometimes unspoken ways, Warren Christopher, the first Secretary of
State to visit Cambodia in 40 years, spent much of his trip atoning for the U.S.
role in the country's miseries. 3

Vietnam eagerly awaits Warren Christopher. 3

FISHING TREATY ADVANCES AT U.N.
A U.N. treaty to control fishing on the open seas and to curtail overfishing was
approved by delegates from 100 countries. It must now go before the General
Assembly. 5

Jerusalem Journal: Orthodox Israelis minister to the dead. 2

National 6-9

HOUSE PASSES CABLE BILL
The House approved a communications bill to reduce regulations on everything
from cable television to local and long-distance telephone services. Consumer
advocates contended costs would rise. 1

THE HOUSE TAKES A VACATION
The House wound up the first seven months of this session and departed for a
month's recess, testy, tired and tellingly partisan.  1

SEARCHING ACADEMIA FOR A KILLER
The search for the Unabomber has roiled the usually placid waters of an esoteric
corner of academia, the history of science.  1

IN SEARCH OF A DIFFERENT ELVIS
Scholars gathered in Mississippi in search of Elvis, finding the singer not just
a cultural icon but also a subject for scholarly papers.  6

NEW SIMPSON BLOOD TEST RESULTS
A prosecutor said that new DNA results tentatively linked O. J. Simpson's blood
and that of Ronald L. Goldman to Mr. Simpson's Bronco, but the judge indicated
he might not let the jury hear that.  6

GARMENT INDUSTRY SWEATSHOPS
Almost one-fifth of garment industry workers in Los Angeles, many of them
foreigners, toil in sweatshops, say labor officials, economists and union
organizers.  6

SHUTTLE REPAIR PLAN DEVISED
Engineers developed a plan to repair seals in the space shuttle's booster
nozzles.  7

NO CONSENSUS ON WELFARE
Senator Bob Dole offered a welfare bill that he hoped would bridge differences
within Republican ranks, but conservatives attacked it.  8

CLINTON ACTS ON LOBBYING
President Clinton announced that he would soon tighten the rules governing
contacts between lobbyists and the executive branch.  9

REMOVING A BARRIER
The President signed an order ending the decades-old practice of denying
security clearances on the basis of homosexuality.  9

Religion Journal: A life of virtue earns the papal spotlight.  25

Metro Digest 21

HOW HOT WAS IT. . .AGAIN
As temperatures reached the seventh consecutive day over 90 degrees, New Yorkers
sank into a state of deepest lethargy. 1

M.T.A. WANTS NEW UNION CONTRACT
Seeking sharp reductions in spending, New York transit officials want to
renegotiate the existing contract with subway and bus workers, insisting on work
rule changes or even wage cuts and threatening layoffs if the union balks. 1

Business Digest 31

Arts/Entertainment 11-17

The film "Kids" evokes strong reactions.  11

A spirited black theater festival in North Carolina.  11

Theater: "C'est la Vie." 17

Music: Randy Weston.  15

Mostly Mozart.  17

Dance: Garth Fagan.  17

Sports 26-30

Baseball: Strawberry arrives, gets a hit and Yankees beat Tigers.  27

Polonia, the odd man out.  29

Mets lose to Marlins.  29

Columns: Rhoden on Strawberry.  27

Football: Jets' reality check.  30

Giants' special-teams coach.  30

Track: A leap of faith.  27

Sports People: 26

Obituaries 10

Arno Werner, master bookbinder.

John Coolidge, museum director.

Ida Lupino, actress.

Editorials/Op-Ed 18-19

Editorials

Stiffing straphangers.

Mr. Dole and deregulation.

Keep the base-closing machinery.

A sort-of train to the plane.

Letters

Frank Rich: The Disney trap.

Russell Baker: What a line!

Stephen E. Ambrose: The Bomb -- it was death or more death.

Jim Holt: Morality, reduced to arithmetic.

Chronicle 20

Bridge 14

Crossword 16

LOAD-DATE: August 5, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              133 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  August 6, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

ON LANGUAGE;
Or What?

BYLINE: By WILLIAM SAFIRE

SECTION: Section 6;  Page 20;  Column 1;  Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 1073 words


"PORK RINDS AND PERRIER," muses a redneck in a TV commercial for 7-Eleven
stores, "is this heaven or what?"

On the ABC sitcom "Family Matters," a teen-age girl tentatively challenges a
boy: "Do you want to go to the dance with me or what?" Viewers recall a daughter
on "The Cosby Show" a decade ago defying her parents with "Is this America or
what?"

In a New York Times Book Review assessment of the 1991 novel "A Hollywood Life,"
by David Freeman, Chris Chase writes: "They make love. She in the skirt. Every
time. Is that dumb or what?"

"We have entered the world of or what," notes George Feldman of New York. Adds
Sheldon Rosen of Brooklyn: "This is a very overused and misused expression. I
don't really believe I know the meaning."

Am I here to provide the meaning and the etymology or what?

The phrase is known to lexicographers as a tag question, like the won't you?
after "sit down" or the isn't it? after "today's a scorcher." It is akin to the
German nicht wahr after "Kissinger one-upped the world by escorting the Queen to
Ascot," meaning "isn't that so?"

The function of a tag question is to follow a statement with a question
eliciting confirmation, approval or assent. When the tag is part of a sentence
that is itself a question -- like Is this fun or what? -- the tag is used to add
emphasis. Readers who follow these columns with scholarly intensity will
remember Prof. James McCawley's recent exposition of the exclamative -- a
question with more of the force of an exclamation than an interrogation.

"The or suggests an option," says Frank Nuessel, professor of modern languages
and linguistics at the University of Louisville, "and the what functions as a
type of pronoun, standing for a deleted clause -- as in 'Is this fun or is
something else fun?' -- with an ironic tone implied.

"Or what looks for an obvious answer," says Nuessel, "suggesting a rhetorical
question most of the time." Sometimes, however, it can request an answer: for
example, told about a new book, a person might ask, "Is it a biography, or
what?"

A year ago, Prof. John Algeo (am I pulling out all the academic stops on this or
what?) planted a query about the or what? epidemic in his column Among the New
Words in the quarterly American Speech, where he defines it as "a tag
emphasizing the preceding question or implying that its answer is obvious." In
the forthcoming second volume of Jonathan Lighter's marvelous Historical
Dictionary of American Slang, the catch phrase's earliest citation is an
inscription on a 1965 napalm canister in Vietnam: "Hot Foot. Do You Need This or
What?"

When Algeo hit the button on his CD-ROM edition of the Oxford English
Dictionary, early etymology leaped out. As the last member of a series, the
phrase implied an open choice among a series of options. In an entry in his 1766
diary, John Adams asked himself about the quality of a Massachusetts lawyer,
Robert Auchmuty Jr.: "In what is this Man conspicuous? in Reasoning? in
Imagination? in Painting? in the Pathetic? or what?"

In the same seriatim way, George Bernard Shaw, in a 1902 letter to a
hypochondriac, wondered about the work of a Dr. Buzzi: "Is it starvation cure,
or overfeeding cure, or water cure, or grape cure, or faith healing, or what?"

However, by 1922, James Joyce was using the phrase more as an emphasizer than as
a pronoun for another option. The slang phrase get the horn meant "get horny,
become sexually excited"; in "Ulysses," a character asks, "Got the horn or
what?"

Algeo concludes: "It seems likely that the emphatic use of or what? to highlight
a preceding rhetorical question grew out of the statement of an alternative when
in fact no alternative was conceived by the speaker. So Is that dumb or what?
begins with the sense 'Is that dumb or what else can explain it?' but as a
rhetorical question, no real alternative explanation is imagined. Thus or what?
becomes purely a signal of emphasis, a sort of lexical exclamation mark." An
exclamative tag.

The final sentence of this item, ending in a reprise of the phrase under study,
writes itself.

Paramount

"The approaching death of Deng Xiaoping, the paramount leader. . . . " That's
how Patrick E. Tyler, Beijing correspondent of The New York Times, like just
about everybody else writing about the nonagenarian Communist, identifies the
man who abandoned his title but not his power.

Fox Butterfield of The Times, writing in 1980 from what was then transliterated
as Peking, may have been the first to chose paramount over foremost or
pre-eminent in identifying Deng; the adjective stuck, becoming a bogus title in
itself.

It's an old French word -- "le chef seigneur paramont" is first cited in 1339 --
picked up in English as the Lord Paramount, or King, to whom other lords were
vassals.

Abraham Lincoln used the word in its adjectival function in 1862 when replying
to the New York Tribune editor Horace Greeley's long editorial demanding
emancipation of the slaves.

"My paramount object in this struggle," wrote Lincoln, "is to save the Union,
and is not either to save or to destroy slavery," notwithstanding his
"oft-expressed personal wish that all men every where could be free." (Italics
signify Lincoln's underlining.)

The one-volume biography of Lincoln for this generation will be David Herbert
Donald's, coming this fall from Simon & Schuster. (Long-awaited is the cliche
beloved by blurbers; in the case of Donald's "Lincoln," it's true.) Those of us
who have written about emancipation in detail have long puzzled over Lincoln's
widely publicized letter answering Greeley's "Prayer of Twenty Millions":
because Lincoln seemed to argue that freeing the slaves was not his purpose --
at a time he had a draft of the Emancipation Proclamation in his pocket,
awaiting a Union military victory -- the President's answer to Greeley seems
deliberately deceptive.

Professor Donald interprets this seeming misdirection as a step taken to prepare
Northern public opinion for the drastic move. "Like most Republicans," he
writes, "he had long held the belief that if slavery could be contained it would
inevitably die. . . . For this reason, saving the Union was his 'paramount
object.' "

The historian suggests evidence for that is in the word paramount: "But readers
aware that Lincoln always chose his words carefully should have recognized that
paramount meant 'foremost' or 'principal' -- not 'sole.' "

LOAD-DATE: August 6, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              134 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  August 6, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

FILM: TAKING THE CHILDREN;
And This Little Piggy Stayed Off the Platter

BYLINE: By LINDA LEE

SECTION: Section 2;  Page 24;  Column 1;  Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 234 words



Operation Dumbo Drop
Danny Glover, Ray Liotta, Denis Leary, Doug E. Doug and Dinh Thien Le
Directed by Simon Wincer
PG 108 minutes

It's Vietnam, circa 1968, and this is a comedy. The North Vietnamese Army
assassinates a Montagnard village's treasured elephant. In a "winning hearts and
minds" mission, three American soldiers -- led by an old-timer who has embraced
Vietnamese ways (Mr. Glover) and a by-the-book newcomer (Mr. Liotta) -- are
ordered to replace the elephant. The title refers to the novel solution to the
question: How do you get an elephant up a mountain in a hurry?

VIOLENCE Considering the frequent encounters between American soldiers and the
N.V.A., it is amazing there is no actual bloodshed, although a boat is blown up
and guns are fired at close range. We are indeed in the land of Disney.
SEX None. Not even between elephants.
PROFANITY Gol-leee, these are the cleanest G.I.'s ever.

For Which Children?

AGES 3-5 Only the elephant poop jokes are on their level. And the drama of a
pachyderm being heaved out of an airplane at 15,000 feet, and free-falling until
the parachute opens -- if it opens -- may be too much.
AGES 6 and up They are old enough to know that in the land of Disney, all
elephants dropped from airplanes will survive. (And they will easily spot the
animatronic stunt-ephants used in the action sequences.)   LINDA LEE

LOAD-DATE: August 6, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              135 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  August 6, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

SPENDING IT: OFF THE SHELF;
Renewal and the Cyber Nation

BYLINE: By BARBARA PRESLEY NOBLE

SECTION: Section 3;  Page 9;  Column 1;  Money and Business/Financial Desk

LENGTH: 872 words


THE business best-seller list provides yet more evidence, if it is needed, that
all's right with these United States. Newt Gingrich and "To Renew America"
opened at the top of the chart, showing every likelihood of renewing either his
bank account or the conservative foundations to which he may donate the
proceeds. The good news is that "The Seven Spritual Laws of Success" is now
eating Newt's dust in second place.

With an exception or three, the top 15 on the list are about equally divided
between "let's make America great again" books and "computer digital revolution
information superhighway" books. Mr. Gingrich could have bridged the two niches
if he had included more of his thinking on technology in "To Renew America,"
which is no more than a text of the pronouncements that became familiar after
last fall's elections.

Far more interesting is an interview with Mr. Gingrich by Esther Dyson, the
technosavvy information entrepreneur, in the current issue of Wired magazine.
Mr. Gingrich reveals, or Ms. Dyson teases out, the brain behind the bloviations.
Peculiarly for a man born within spitting distance of the baby boom, Mr.
Gingrich seems to be utterly a man of the establishment 50's, formed
intellectually before the idea of civilization became an imperialist fantasy and
while World War II, not Vietnam, was still the defining experience of the young,
whether they actually fought in it or not.

His major influences, he tells Ms. Dyson, were big-picture schemers like Arnold
Toynbee and Isaac Asimov. Hari Seldon, the visonary psychohistorian of the
"Foundation" trilogy, may well be the model for Mr. Gingrich's own career,
although, of course, he may also be the Mule, the charismatically destructive
individual whom the Seldon plan could not anticipate. That other classic of the
period, "The Man in the Gray Flannel Suit," seems to have no role in the
Gingrich personal history script.

One consequence of this background is that Mr. Gingrich leans toward a belief in
the "good technology" of the 50's, which would bring prosperity and solve social
problems, not the "bad technology" of the 60's, which could be used, especially
by Government, to destroy and enslave. This opposition survives in the current
split between "doubters" and "touters" of technology: the Luddites who reject
the apparent inevitability of the spread of digital technology and those who see
infinite possibilities, which upon examination have little utility. As Ms.
Dyson's interview reveals, Mr. Gingrich is more touter than doubter.

The digital future is a swamp: vast, ecologically rich in its own way, but, over
all, a tough wade. It is probably no surprise then that most writing about it is
sprawling, for better or worse. "Road Warriors: Dreams and Nightmares Along the
Information Highway," by Daniel Burstein and David Kline (Dutton, $24.95),
ranges from the ill-fated proposed combination of Time Warner,
Tele-Communications Inc. and Microsoft to CD-ROM's entertainment potential to
the skills of "knowledgeworkers," sending the reader back again and again to the
introduction to find a thesis sentence.

Normally, narrative chaos is irritating and grounds for derision, but it hardly
seems fair to set a standard that could be attained only by someone with an
old-fashioned nondigital crystal ball, which is to say, someone who knows how
all the recent digital-media-entertainment events -- like the Disney-Capital
Cities deal -- will ultimately play out. Perhaps "Road Warriors" is mainly
civics, for it finally settles on an eight-point plan, including the creation of
an industrial policy to encourage on-shore manufacturing; a "cyberfund," so that
people who do not belong to Newsweek's overclass will have access to digital
technology, and a cyberspace moral code that would keep Government regulation of
the cyberwaves at bay. If nothing else, the book kills off any desire to ever to
use "cyber-" as a prefix again.

Just as wide-ranging, but with more personnel involved, is "Resisting the
Virtual Life: The Culture and Politics of Information," edited by James Brook
and Iain A. Boal (City Lights, $14.95). The title is slightly misleading, as
most of the collection's writers appear to be experienced cyberphiles -- there's
that prefix again! -- living in a world where the conversation has progressed
far beyond the touting and doubting stage. Newcomers may have trouble with some
of the academic jargon, but by and large the collection is accessible. A couple
of debunkings stand out: Laura Miller's demystification of -- she argues -- the
vastly overhyped danger to women who venture onto the on-line world and Doug
Henwood's analysis of the future of the information job market.

Finally, Danny Goodman's "Living at Light Speed" (Random House, $21), which came
out last year, remains the sanest introduction to the information superhighway
and the likely impact on the lives of those average Americans, Mr. and Mr. Joe
Gigabyte. "Living at Light Speed," despite its title, has the clarifying,
cleansing effect of a good dry martini.

It will make you want to sit back and reflect on what would have happened if
Newt Gingrich's major influences had been Herbert Marcuse and "Cat's Cradle."

LOAD-DATE: August 6, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              136 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  August 6, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

University Ponders Unabom Link

BYLINE: By DON TERRY

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 14;  Column 1;  National Desk

LENGTH: 896 words

DATELINE: EVANSTON, Ill., Aug. 5


The search for a deadly serial bomber has crisscrossed the country for 16 years
but it always seems to return to the sedate campus of Northwestern University
here, the place where the manhunt began with questions about Dungeons and
Dragons.

The F.B.I. started poking around Northwestern, just outside of Chicago, in 1979.
A simple bomb, rigged in a cigar box, exploded inside the school's technological
institute on May 9 and a graduate student was slightly injured.

Few seemed to take the incident too seriously. The Chicago Tribune wrote a
six-paragraph story about the bomb and buried the article on page 11 of section
two, even though another small but more sophisticated device had exploded the
year before, injuring a university security guard.

In the coming years, however, the explosions would be considered by the
authorities as the first acts of the elusive terrorist in the investigation
known as the Unabomb case, who says, in a 35,000-word manifesto, that he is bent
on the overthrow of the "industrial-technological system."

But when the agents first arrived in 1979 on the campus , spread out across 240
acres along the gleaming Lake Michigan shore, they found a hotbed of political
inactivity.

They had a hard time finding clues about the bomber's identity in the campus's
political organizations. The passions and protests of the 1960's rarely gripped
Northwestern as tightly as they did other campuses in the Midwest and by the
last days of the 70's many people figured the cigar box bomb had probably been
more personal than political.

"Northwestern has never been Berkeley," said Professor Henry C. Binford, who has
taught history at the university since 1973. "My reaction to the '79 bomb was
that it might have been some overly ambitious chemistry student, not that it was
the beginning of a campaign of terror."

The F.B.I. seemed to agree. As one professor remembers it, the agents did not
ask a lot of questions about Marx or Lenin or neo-Nazi's. They wanted to know
about any students who were obsessed with the fantasy game Dungeons and Dragons,
assuming perhaps, that the bomber was playing a game instead of making a
statement.

No one knows if the bomber ever attended Northwestern or worked there. But the
university cannot seem to shake itself free of the case that has frustrated
dozens of F.B.I. agents, injured 23 people and killed 3 others from California
to New Jersey.

Several weeks ago, Thomas R. Tyler, a professor of social psychology at the
University of California at Berkeley, received a package in the mail. It
contained a manuscript similar to the 35,000-word manifesto sent to The New York
Times.

From 1978 to 1990, Mr. Tyler taught at Northwestern.

In the last few weeks, Federal agents have been back on campus. This time they
have been showing professors at Northwestern, and several other universities,
copies of the bomber's manifesto, hoping that his writing style will jog a
former professor's memory, especially those teaching the history of science.

What Patrick M. Quinn, the university's archivist since 1974, remembers about
the days the bomber was thought to have been at the university is how quiet they
were politically.

"It was almost like the return of the 1950's to Northwestern," Mr. Quinn said.
"Fraternities were coming back strong and R.O.T.C. was restored to legitimacy."

In 1978, the year the bomber apparently started down his path of postal
terrorism, an article in The Daily Northwestern declared, "Individuality is
dead."

"After a short-lived life in the 60's of ad hoc clothes, life styles and
heroes," the article said, "conformity is back."

In a "viewpoints" column, a senior wrote that he was glad to see that most of
the "More-Radical-Than-Thou" students of earlier years had been replaced by a
freshmen class "seen as somewhat right wing."

What political activism existed in the late 70's on campus was of a smaller
scale and quieter than in years past. Students still came out to protest and
picket but not nearly as many as in the early days of the decade when Vietnam
was still eating away a generation.

Although the passions had cooled considerably, among the issues that still
comprised political activity were the fight over the Equal Rights Amendment, the
knocking down of closet doors by gays and lesbians and the beginning of a demand
that the university divest itself from South Africa.

Professor Binford, who specializes in urban history but has also taught the
history of technology, said that when he read lengthy excerpts of the bomber's
manifesto he could "see issues that were alive in the late 70's, alive in his
mind."

"Here at Northwestern and across the country, there was a lot of questioning of
the unthinking use of technology," the professor said. "It was not uncommon for
people to debate the consequences of unrestrained economic growth. There was a
lot of talk about trying to make industrial manufacturing more humane."

But Bernard Beck, a professor of sociology at Northwestern since 1965, said the
late 70's were the beginning of the birth of the conservative movement on
campus, a rightward turn inward.

"Students were warming up to what would become the Reagan Revolution," Mr. Beck
said. "The idea and politics of life-style choices had taken hold at that time.
Those were the notorious days of malaise."

Then a bomb went off.

LOAD-DATE: August 6, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              137 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  August 6, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section 1; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 755 words



International 3-13

SERBIAN OUTPOST FALLS TO CROATS
Croatian Government forces captured Knin, the capital of the Serbian rebel
region of Krajina, and linked up with troops of the Bosnian Muslim enclave of
Bihac. 1



President Clinton said the Croatian offensive could prove helpful.  9

Bosnian Serb leader took command of military. 8

Sarajevo residents enjoyed a relative lull in the shelling. 8

HIROSHIMA, 50 YEARS LATER
The dropping of the atomic bomb over Hiroshima in 1945 remains one of the great
moral and historical tangles of modern history. 1

ENOLA GAY CREW LOOKS BACK
The pilot and navigator of the Enola Gay, the B-29 that dropped the atomic bomb
over Hiroshima, say their action saved lives by hastening the war's end.  10

PERSPECTIVE FROM HIROSHIMA
The director of the Hiroshima Memorial Peace Museum argues that the bombing had
"special features" that made it inhumane.  10

Japanese officials called for a nuclear test and weapons ban.  12

CHRISTOPHER IN HANOI
Secretary of State Warren Christopher arrived in Hanoi to initiate formal
diplomatic relations with the Communist leaders of Vietnam.  3

NEWSPAPER TO PAY IN SINGAPORE
The International Herald Tribune will not fight a Singapore court ruling
assessing it $678,000 in damages for an opinion article held to be libelous of
Government officials.  3

White House blocked effort to limit U.S. role in women's meeting.  6

Laos has undergone many changes, but its capital endures.13

National 14-32

SENATE DEBATES ABORTION MONEY
The Senate voted to bar the use of Government money to pay for most abortions
for Federal workers but rejected a stricter measure from a House bill.  1

SUSTENANCE FOR THE MALE SOUL
In stadiums across the country, men are finding strength and faith in religious
gatherings that are part revival, part pep talk and part support group.  1

NORTHWESTERN'S NOTORIETY
The Unabom investigation keeps coming back to the campus of Northwestern
University in Evanston, Ill.  14

BIG-NAME BATTLE IN VIRGINIA
Two women with well-known relatives are the contenders in a pivotal Virginia
legislative election.  14

WHITEWATER'S PERSISTENT WAKE
Newly released files raise questions about Bill and Hillary Clintons' taxes as
they relate to the Whitewater Development Company.  20

A NEW POWER IN ACCREDITATION
A group of tradition-minded scholars determined to turn universities away from
faddish courses have won the authority to judge and accredit liberal-arts
colleges.  21

BLACK CONGRESSMEN ON THE SPOT
The affirmative action issue is putting the two black Republicans in the House
of Representatives in the spotlight.  22

The office that enforces affirmative action is anonymous no more.  22

SHAPING THE WELFARE BILL
The Clinton Administration listed its objections to the Senate Republicans'
welfare bill and proposed changes to make it more palatable to the President.
24

DANCING BEHIND BARS
A dance program is transforming a the maximum-security women's prison in
Washington State.  26

BOMBING INDICTMENTS NEAR
With an indictment deadline nearing, prosecutors are viewing the Oklahoma City
bombing as the work of a few disgruntled former soldiers rather than as a
widespread conspiracy.  28

Metro 33-38

MANY THRILLS, LITTLE TRAINING
The people responsible for making sure amusement rides are safe in New York City
are elevator inspectors with no specialized training in how the thrill rides
work.  1

PORTRAIT OF BOMBINB SUSPECT
In the two and a half years since the bombing of the World Trade Center, Eyad
Ismail had led a seemingly mundane existence in Jordan. Federal law enforcement
officials paint a more sinister portrait.  33

THE SUBTERRANEAN CHILL
While millions of people in the New York region sought familiar forms of relief
from the heat, a few dozen seeking something different drove to Ice Caves
Mountain in Ellenville, N.Y., and spent hours clambering around in a labyrinth
of cool.  33

FAITHFUL RIDERS
The bus to the land of broken dreams rolls along New York City streets to the
broad highways, along the country roads to the Attica Correctional Facility,
carrying visitors, overwhelmingly women, to see the convicts they continue to
love.  33

Fresh Air Fund 37

Obituaries 39

Agha Hasan Abedi, Pakistani businessman who founded B.C.C.I.

Gloria Wills Landes, a former Broadway showgirl.

LOAD-DATE: August 6, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              138 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  August 6, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

2 Black G.O.P. Lawmakers in House Differ Slightly on Affirmative Action

BYLINE: By STEVEN A. HOLMES

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 22;  Column 1;  National Desk

LENGTH: 1378 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 3


They have been cited by their fellow Republicans as proof that blacks are
welcome in their party. They have been vilified by some of their fellow blacks
as turncoats. They have been dismissed by some political analysts as irrelevant
curiosities.

But as the Republicans struggle for consensus on dealing with the complex issue
of affirmative action, everyone is watching Gary A. Franks of Connecticut and J.
C. Watts of Oklahoma, the party's two black members of the House of
Representatives.

Though they generally agree on the desire to abolish some of the more widely
criticized facets of affirmative action, like set-asides, they have very
different responses to the scrutiny they are receiving.

"There is nothing wrong with it," said Mr. Franks, comparing his situation with
that of Vietnam veterans in Congress when the issue is Vietnam or American
servicemen still listed as missing in action there.  "It's just like McCain and
Kerry are looked upon to deal with the P.O.W.-M.I.A situation in Vietnam," a
reference to Senators John McCain, Republican of Arizona, and John Kerry,
Democrat of Massachusetts, both Vietnam veterans.

But people who ask Mr. Watts if his race and party make him a natural leader in
the debate over affirmative action get a more testy response.

"I don't feel any burden to necessarily be the black Republican in this debate,"
the 37-year-old freshman Congressman said in an interview in his office earlier
this week, as he ate a hurried lunch between House votes and committee hearings.

That these lawmakers should react differently, even on an issue on which they
essentially agree, is nothing new. Though they are often viewed as two peas in a
pod, these two black conservatives have differences, great and small, in
background, party loyalty and temperament.

Mr. Franks, 42, who was elected in 1990 as the first black Republican in the
House in 56 years, is the son of a millworker but grew up in an affluent white
section of Waterbury, Conn., received a bachelor's degree from Yale University,
where he was captain of the basketball team, in 1975 and became wealthy as a
real estate investor.

Mr. Watts had a dirt-poor childhood in rural Oklahoma; he went to the University
of Oklahoma on a football scholarship and became a star quarterback, leading his
team to two victories in the Orange Bowl.

Mr. Watts, who came to Congress in the 1994 Republican landslide, was a Democrat
until 1989, when he switched parties just months before his first statewide race
in Oklahoma. Despite the switch, analysts and lawmakers consider him a
consummate team player.

Mr. Franks is a lifelong Republican who has an unpredictable voting record and
has shown a willingness to criticize black Democratic lawmakers and his own
party's chieftains with equal fervor. His record on environmental issues has
earned him a 23 percent approval rating from the League of Conservation Voters
in 1992, a 64 percent rating in 1994 and a zero this year. He voted for the
Republican welfare plan after accusing Republicans earlier this year of "waging
a war on the poor."

Representative Donald M. Payne, a New Jersey Democrat who is chairman of the
Congressional Black Caucus, called Mr. Franks's voting record "inconsistent" and
"bizarre," adding: "He seems to have different votes for different days. The
things he does are patternless."

Of Mr. Watts, Mr. Payne said: "J. C. seems to be more self-assured. He knows
really what he feels and stands for, and has an approach to try to see that it
comes to fruition. That probably comes from his background in athletics, where
you study a plan, train for it and execute it."

Mr. Franks and Mr. Watts are also backing different candidates in the Republican
Presidential sweepstakes. Mr. Watts is a national co-chairman for the campaign
of Senator Bob Dole of Kansas, the majority leader and front-runner in the
Republican race. Mr. Franks is a national co-chairman in the campaign of Senator
Phil Gramm of Texas, one of Mr. Dole's principal challengers.

And there are subtle differences in the two Congressmen's positions on
affirmative action. Both men want to do away with the policy of setting aside
contracts for women and minorities, and place other strict limits on policies
granting benefits based on race or sex.

"Affirmative action as we know it today is on its last legs," Mr. Watts said. "I
say that because I know there are enough votes on the Democratic and Republican
sides that affirmative action, as we know it today, will not survive the 104th
Congress."

Mr. Franks believes in requiring Federal contractors to try to meet "goals and
timetables" in hiring and promoting women and minorities, while Mr. Watts says
he is more disposed to scrapping this requirement, too.

For two junior members of the House to wield as much influence as Mr. Franks and
Mr. Watts on the issue illustrates how much affirmative action is viewed as a
matter that involves minorities, rather than women. It also highlights the fact
that, despite Republican gains among black voters, Mr. Franks and Mr. Watts are
still anomalies.

"These fellows have been given a platform by the new Republican majority," said
Eddie Williams, president of the Joint Center for Political and Economic
Studies, a research organization that studies black issues. "They get attention
because they are the equivalent of 'man bites dog.' But they represent a narrow
band of black thought, and as soon as the platform leaves, they disappear."

While both men express support for each other's efforts, there are, at times,
hints of rivalry. Mr. Franks, for example, says that while he opposes set-asides
and quotas, he supports anti-discrimination laws and is one of only four
Republicans to vote for increasing money for the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission. At a breakfast interview, Mr. Franks criticized, though not by name,
Republicans who voted against increasing spending on the commission and those
who did not vote at all on the measure.

"There is no excuse for not voting on something as important to
African-Americans as the enforcement of civil rights laws," he said.

Left unsaid is the fact that Mr. Watts missed the vote on financing the
commission.

"Sometimes I think Gary is behaving like a rejected suitor," said Mr. Payne, who
has had his share of clashes with Mr. Franks. "His rage is that he is no longer
-- and I'm not sure he ever was -- the superstar, the only African-American
Republican in Congress."

The latest exhibition of Mr. Franks's maverick tendencies came last week, when
he said the House Republican leadership had reneged on a promise to support his
amendment barring the Government from setting aside a portion of contracts for
minorities and women.

Faced with the threat of delaying tactics by Democratic lawmakers on a Defense
Department spending bill, to which Mr. Franks's' amendment was to have been
attached, Speaker Newt Gingrich, who has urged a go-slow, deliberative approach
to dismantling racial and sex preferences, withdrew his support for Mr. Franks's
measure.

In a reaction that stunned lawmakers and Congressional staff members, Mr. Franks
called Mr. Gingrich a liar who "did not have the stomach" to take on the issue
of affirmative action, unusually harsh words by a backbencher for the leader of
his party in the House. This week Mr. Franks gave no sign that he regretted his
sharp remarks.

"I don't mind confrontation," he said in the interview. "I think that's what
we're here to do. We're here to shake things up. We're here to make a
difference. You don't make a difference by procrastinating. You make a
difference by saying to people, 'This is what I believe and I'm willing to fight
for it.' "

True to form, Mr. Watts said he agreed with the thrust of Mr. Franks's measure
to outlaw set-asides. But the Oklahoma lawmaker also said that attaching such a
measures to a spending bill was not the way to accomplish that goal.

"He wanted to to put it on some appropriations legislation before we had any
hearings or before we had any chance to talk things through," Mr. Watts said. "I
didn't think we were prepared to deliver this product, if you will. I thought we
were shooting from the hip as a party. I felt we were not organized or
prepared."

LOAD-DATE: August 6, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Representative J. C. Watts, Republican of Oklahoma, at his desk
on Capitol Hill earlier this month. Mr. Watts, who was elected in the Republican
landslide last November, is considered a consummate team player. (Marcia Allert
for The New York Times); Representative Gary A. Franks of Connecticut, in his
office in Washington this month, is a lifelong Republican who has an
unpredictable voting record and has shown a willingness to criticize his party's
leadership. (David Scull/The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              139 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  August 6, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

U.S.-Vietnam Ties: War Is Yesterday, Hope Is Today

BYLINE: By DAVID E. SANGER

SECTION: Section 1;   Page 3;   Column 1;   Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1075 words

DATELINE: HANOI, Vietnam, Aug. 5


Declaring an end to "a decade of war and two decades of estrangement," Secretary
of State Warren Christopher arrived here today to open formal diplomatic
relations with the Communist leaders of Vietnam, and immediately plunged into
talks about turning a former enemy into an emerging trading partner.

In a day constantly haunted by images of a war from which neither side has fully
recovered, Mr. Christopher began his visit by witnessing the return of
fragmentary remains of four American servicemen who were among the 58,000 who
died here. More than a million Vietnamese also died.

"A generation ago, the trauma of war bound together the history of our nations
for all time," he said, standing against the austere backdrop of "Thud Ridge,"
the mountain range where scores of American pilots were shot down as they flew
bombing runs on Hanoi. "Let us now lay our past of conflict to rest, and
dedicate ourselves to a future of productive cooperation."

Those were the words the Vietnamese have waited years to hear, and by midday --
over a luncheon at which his hosts conspicuously served California wine -- there
was already talk of trade and tax treaties and investment incentives. The
Vietnamese were so eager for quick accords that Mr. Christopher had to send his
top economic deputy, Joan Spero, to explain that such agreements can take months
or years to draft, and will require major changes in Vietnam's economy.

"They took copious notes," Ms. Spero said later. "They are beginning to
understand this will be a detailed process," one that many in Congress will
oppose and that many others will insist include specific requirements for vast
improvements of Vietnam's dismal record on human rights.

Today there were already signs that the country's leaders would stiffen at any
such conditions: Vietnam's urbane Foreign Minister, Nguyen Manh Cam, said at a
signing ceremony with Mr. Christopher, at an ornate colonial-era guest house,
that a key to the new relationship would be "non-interference in each other's
internal affairs."

As Mr. Christopher moved through the center of this increasingly chaotic
capital, which is gradually being restored to its old French graciousness, there
still seemed to be two Vietnams living side by side: the ideological state that
continues to decorate its parks with statues of Lenin, and the bustling,
motorbike-choked streets that have brought a vibrancy to this city that was
markedly absent just four years ago.

The conflicting images are everywhere. Mr. Christopher met tonight with
Vietnam's President, Le Duc Anh, just blocks from the simple wooden house in
which Ho Chi Minh and his successors prosecuted the war and wrought political
havoc half a world away in America.

The house has been carefully preserved, and both Vietnamese and foreigners visit
it daily to see the simple long table where Ho met his generals. A single
ancient-looking telephone sits at the end, near his seat, to dispatch commands.

But if the Vietnamese are preserving Ho's home, they are racing to tear apart
the other remnants of the war, betting that the documents signed today will
clear a wider path for investors. While Mr. Christopher was signing the formal
documents establishing diplomatic relations, workers a few blocks away were in
the last stages of knocking down one of the city's most notable landmarks, the
Hanoi Hilton, where American fliers and other prisoners of war were held for
years.

"John McCain's cell was over there, but it was knocked down already," Pham Tu,
an official of the cultural affairs ministry, said today, referring to the
Arizona Republican Senator whose support of diplomatic recognition helped give
President Clinton the political cover he needed to make the move.

Where the prison once stood, a group of local and foreign investors is building
two office towers, one 23 stories high and the other 13, making them among the
tallest in the city. The block that became a symbol of the terrors of Vietnam is
to contain a hotel, a supermarket, a parking lot and offices. A few cells are
being preserved in the front as a museum.

To Mr. Christopher, this was a day heavy with history: no American Secretary of
State has ever visited Hanoi (though Henry A. Kissinger came here as national
security adviser in 1973), and none have set foot anywhere on Vietnamese soil in
the quarter of a century since William Rogers traveled to Saigon, the capital of
South Vietnam, now named Ho Chi Minh City.

Acutely aware that many veterans and relatives of the missing consider Mr.
Clinton's diplomatic recognition of Hanoi a betrayal, the Administration
carefully orchestrated Mr. Christopher's first day here to focus on the efforts
to account for the 1,615 Americans still listed as missing in Vietnam.

"Every one of them is a cherished human being with a name and a family and a
nation that cares and this endeavor is a reflection of that deep caring we have
for every one who goes into battle," he said at a news conference.

The Vietnamese leaders, while promising continued cooperation on the prisoner
issues, made it clear that their focus is intently on the markets and on making
up for time lost when America's trade embargo sharply limited the country's
ability to grow. They see trade and tax treaties with the United States as the
surest way to reassure international investors, and thus the path to building
the kind of foundation that turned Thailand and Malaysia into economic
powerhouses.

But they want to do so on the Singapore model: letting free markets bloom, but
with minimal challenges to central political authority. By some accounts they
were perturbed by President Clinton's observation last month that trade benefits
often "require certification regarding human rights and labor rights before they
can succeed."

It was a subject that Mr. Christopher was not anxious to discuss at length
today, perhaps for fear of putting a damper on the celebration. "Today's
normalization gives us an added basis for having a human rights dialogue," he
said, adding that his Chinese counterpart was "ready to proceed down that road."

"The main thing is that the trend be in the right direction," he said. "I don't
want to give a letter grade" to Vietnam on human rights, he said, presumably a
reference to the country's sharp controls on press freedom and political
opposition.

"This is a great day in Vietnam. We shouldn't miss the significance of this
day."

LOAD-DATE: August 6, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Secretary of State Warren Christopher, in Hanoi opening formal
diplomatic relations with Vietnam, attended a ceremony yesterday at the airport
there for the return of four sets of human remains believed to be those of
American servicemen who were among those killed in the war. (Reuters)

Map of Vietnam showing location of Hanoi.

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              140 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  August 6, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

U.S. and Vietnam Open Ties in Hanoi

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1; Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 203 words


Declaring an end to "a decade of war and two decades of estrangement," Secretary
of State Warren Christopher arrived in Hanoi to open formal diplomatic relations
with the Communist leaders of Vietnam, and immediately plunged into talks about
turning a former enemy into an emerging trading partner.

The Vietnamese were so eager for quick accords that Mr. Christopher had to send
his top economic deputy, Joan Spero, to a separate meeting to explain that such
agreements can take months or years to draft, and will require major changes in
Vietnam's economy.

Article, page 3.




U.S. and Vietnam

Open Ties in Hanoi

Declaring an end to "a decade of war and two decades of estrangement," Secretary
of State Warren Christopher arrived in Hanoi to open formal diplomatic relations
with the Communist leaders of Vietnam, and immediately plunged into talks about
turning a former enemy into an emerging trading partner.

The Vietnamese were so eager for quick accords that Mr. Christopher had to send
his top economic deputy, Joan Spero, to a separate meeting to explain that such
agreements can take months or years to draft, and will require major changes in
Vietnam's economy.

Article, page 3.


LOAD-DATE: August 6, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              141 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  August 6, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Political Legacies Trail a Campaign

BYLINE: By MICHAEL JANOFSKY

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 14;  Column 4;  National Desk

LENGTH: 1171 words

DATELINE: MOUNT VERNON, Va. Aug. 2


In some ways, they are much alike, each well-known because of a famous relative,
each a survivor of emotional pain that helped shape her political activities.

Yet their differences have brought Linda (Toddy) Puller and Sandy Liddy Bourne
together as candidates for a seat in the Virginia Legislature in potentially
historic state elections this fall. After years of steady gains, Republicans in
Virginia are optimistic they can win control of both chambers of the Legislature
for the first time.

Mrs. Puller, the Democratic incumbent in the 44th District of the House of
Delegates, the lower chamber, is the widow of Lewis B. Puller Jr., a Marine
officer whose autobiography, "Fortunate Son: The Healing of a Vietnam Vet," won
the Pulitzer Prize for biography in 1992. Mrs. Bourne, her Republican
challengeris the daughter of G. Gordon Liddy, the convicted Watergate burglar
who is now a conservative radio talk-show host. Mrs. Bourne, a former nurse,
works for a company that helps welfare recipients become small-business owners.

They are vying to represent the 67,000 people in the district along the Potomac
River, just above the Mount Vernon home of George Washington.

All 140 seats in Virginia's House and Senate are up this year. In the last
elections, Republicans cut the Democrats' advantage in both chambers to their
narrowest margins ever -- to 52-47 with one independent in the House in 1993,
which turns over every other year, and to 22-18 in the Senate in 1991, which
holds elections every four years.

With Gov. George F. Allen a hero in many areas of the state, and even in some
national circles, for policies more conservative than those contemplated by a
Republican-controlled Congress in Washington, party leaders in Virginia are
optimistic over the possibilities for November.

At the same time, some political analysts say a failure by the Republicans to
win control of the state houses could not only neutralize Mr. Allen's agenda for
his final two years in a state where a governor cannot succeed himself. It could
also tarnish whatever appeal he might have had as a Vice-Presidential candidate.

"For his first two years, George Allen clearly set the tone for Virginia
politics, emphasizing the differences in the two parties," said Robert
Holsworth, a professor of political science at Virginia Commonwealth University
in Richmond. "But we've never had this situation before, with Republicans so
close to winning majorities. His governorship is at stake. If the Republicans
win, it will be seen as a show of support for his policies. But if the Democrats
win, he will be viewed as a half-term governor."

With control at stake, no seat is more important than the next. But while few
other races offer voters a choice of two candidates with such storied relatives,
each said her political growth developed independently.

Mrs. Puller, a 50-year-old mother of two grown children and a former teacher,
married Lewis Puller just before he shipped off to Vietnam as a lieutenant in
1967, eager to make his father proud. Gen. Lewis B. (Chesty) Puller was the most
decorated marine in the history of the corps.

But several months later, Mr. Puller was back in the United States, barely alive
after stepping on a land mine during a patrol. He lost both legs and parts of
his hands. After rehabilitation, he earned a law degree from the College of
William and Mary and after running unsuccessfully for Congress in 1978, worked
as a Defense Department lawyer and later as a writer in residence at George
Mason University in Fairfax, Va.

His autobiography, dedicated to his wife, is a chilling account of his
experiences in Vietnam and battles with physical pain, alcohol and depression
afterward. Those same struggles led him to commit suicide last year.

It was shortly after Mr. Puller lost his Congressional bid that his wife
expanded her own political activities, joining local and statewide efforts to
help other Democrats win election. Then in 1989, with her husband's blessing,
she ran for a seat in the house and lost by a narrow margin. Two years later she
tried again and won, and then held her seat in 1993 when Mr. Allen was elected.

"Lewis was not much of a factor," she said of her husband's influence on her
political career. "I talked to him about a lot of issues, and he always
supported me. But as a Government employee, he was not allowed to do anything
partisan. He was frustrated he could not do more."

As a legislator, she has fought against Governor Allen's efforts to cut spending
for education and has campaigned hard for gun control measures, a losing cause
in Virginia. The state this year passed a law that makes it easier to carry a
concealed handgun.

"A lot of people are very concerned," Mrs. Puller said of the possibility Mr.
Allen would have a Republican Legislature to work with. "As a result, people are
volunteering with greater intensity to work with me, and some of my
contributions have been more than I usually get. People tell me they don't want
extreme-type people to take over the Legislature."

While it might be easy to assume that Mrs. Bourne, a 36-year-old mother of three
young children, fits the conservative mold of her father, she contends that
would be a mistake.

"I'm very different," she said. "I support a woman's right to choose, that's one
difference. And I'm more of a fiscal conservative." She also said she would not
suggest how to shoot Federal agents in self-defense, as Mr. Liddy did on a
recent show.

"To me," she said in reference to her political bearing, "my father's not a
factor."

Mrs. Bourne, whose husband, Bryan, plays trombone in the White House Marine
Corps band, was drawn into statewide politics after a close friend of her
husband's, a fellow trombonist, was shot in the back of the head and killed two
years ago by four teen-agers in a carjacking. They were caught and tried as
juveniles and the 18-year-old who pulled the trigger, received a life sentence.
The others were given lesser terms.

"That was a wake-up call for me," Mrs. Bourne said. She has made a major
campaign theme of trying to change laws laws to try as adults those juveniles 14
and older involved in serious crimes like robbery, rape and murder.

With three months remaining before the election, Mrs. Puller and Mrs. Bourne
have tangled only once, indirectly, through comments by Mr. Liddy on his July 5
show that his daughter was running for the Virginia House and it would be nice
if listeners sent her donations. Mrs. Puller asked for equal time, and the
Washington-area station agreed to broadcast 10 and a half minutes of her
campaign advertising.

Otherwise, neither Mr. Liddy nor the memory of Mr. Puller have played much of a
role in the race, give or take Mrs. Bourne's occasional encounter with a
Democrat while knocking on doors around the district.

"Once in a while, somebody says, 'You're related to him? Get off my property,' "
she said. "But I just try to tell people, I'm not like my Dad. I'm a different
person."

LOAD-DATE: August 6, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Sandy Liddy Bourne is the Republican challenger for a seat in
the Virginia House of Delegates.; Democrat Linda Puller is fighting to stay in
the Virginia Legislature. (Photographs by Karin Anderson for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              142 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  August 6, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Cal Anderson, 47, Gay State Legislator

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 39;  Column 4;  National Desk

LENGTH: 210 words

DATELINE: SEATTLE, Aug.5


Cal Anderson, the first openly gay member of the Washington Legislature and an
advocate of a state gay rights bill, died of AIDS on Friday at his home here. He
was 47.

Mr. Anderson, a Democratic State Senator, was absent for most of this year's
legislative session, battling non-Hodgkins lymphoma, an AIDS-related cancer. In
June, he missed being grand marshal of Seattle's gay pride parade because of
blood clots in his legs and lungs.

Mr. Anderson served in Vietnam and was awarded two Bronze Stars and two Army
Commendation Medals. He was appointed to the State House of Representatives in
1987 to fill out an unexpired term.

He won House elections in 1988, 1990 and 1992 in the heavily Democratic 43d
District, and won an open Senate seat in 1994 with 81 percent of the vote.

For years, Mr. Anderson waged an unsuccessful battle to have the Legislature
adopt a gay rights bill. In a 1994 interview on the day the bill died for the
17th consecutive year, Mr. Anderson said his tenure in the Legislature put a
human face on homosexuality and would pave the way for passage of the
legislation.

"Egotistically, my being in the House has helped, because they see that gay men
care about the same issues they do, that we are not monsters," he said.

LOAD-DATE: August 6, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              143 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  August 6, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

CHOICE TABLES;
Quebec's Cuisine: With a Lighter Ladle

BYLINE: By FLORENCE FABRICANT;    FLORENCE FABRICANT writes the Food Notes and
Off the Menu columns for The New York Times.

SECTION: Section 5;  Page 6;  Column 1;  Travel Desk

LENGTH: 2641 words


OLD QUEBEC, with its clusters of lovingly restored buildings from the 17th and
18th centuries, horse-drawn carriages and streets lined with antique shops, is a
city rooted in the past. But increasingly its restaurants are thoroughly up to
date, turning from traditional fare to accommodate contemporary tastes. Often
this has meant that popular places with tourist menus now feature lasagna and
pizza along with bistro boilerplate like onion soup and coq au vin.

But there is cooking done with a lighter hand, too, with an emphasis on
market-fresh ingredients, and sometimes even a stylish whiff of Asia on the
plate.

Some of the culinary excitement a visitor finds in other Canadian cities,
notably Vancouver, Toronto and Montreal, is seeping in. While the best food in
Quebec may be French, it is no longer exclusively so.

Quebec's food has never been on the cutting edge. Provincial Quebecois, or
habitant cooking, as it is called, is heavy going, bolstered by thick soup, meat
loaf wrapped in pastry and desserts like maple sugar pie.

Aux Anciens Canadiens in the upper old city and L'Atre on the Ile d'Orleans
about 30 miles downriver in the St. Lawrence are two such places, long on
quaintness, that have built their reputations on this hearty fare.

The last time my husband, Richard, and I were in Quebec it was midwinter, so
deep in snow that we went cross-country skiing on the Plains of Abraham, the
battlefield park in the center of the city.

And dinner at Aux Anciens Canadiens was welcome and fortifying. But recently,
having arrived during a summer heat wave, that steaming bowl of pea soup was out
of the question.

Instead, along with some fine modern French cooking we tried one of several
restaurants that specialize in Southeast Asian food. And we were even tempted by
a startling new German place in a cool vaulted atrium.

Regardless of the cuisine, the Canadian dollar, which has sunk like a neglected
souffle, has made dining in Quebec extremely easy on the pocketbooks of visitors
from the United States.

At Quebec's most elegant restaurants, dinner for two will rarely go above $120
with wine.

Portions in restaurants in Canada tend to be modest (or more reasonably sized
than in the United States, to my way of thinking). We also found that, in Quebec
at least, the array of wines has expanded and become more affordable, in
contrast to the somewhat limited and overpriced selection generally available
about a decade ago.

Most menus are printed in French and English. Virtually all waiters speak
English and are reasonably adept at translations.

Laurie Raphael

Open about four years, Laurie Raphael shares a 17th-century building in the
lower old city with Le Priori, a small hotel decorated with cool, Philippe
Starck-style austerity. The 60-seat restaurant has a cozier feel, its one wall
of quarried stone warmed by others painted pale gold as well as several
handsomely lighted floral displays on the high blond wood bar. Leading from the
restaurant is an inviting garden courtyard that seats another 60 or so, shaded
with trees and canvas umbrellas, a lovely spot on a soft summer night.

The menu is alluringly inventive, and the food, prepared by the sure
professional hand of Daniel Vezina, lives up to expectations. Mr. Vezina was
formerly with A la Table de Serge Bruyere, often considered the best in the
city, but his cooking at Laurie Raphael has clearly outclassed that at his
previous stint.

A tidbit, tiny spring rolls filled with vegetables and mango, was offered with
cocktails, a good indication of the way Mr. Vezina flirts with Southeast Asia.

An appetizer of crunchy fried baby calamari with a spicy-sweet Thai-style chili
sauce came on a bed of silky grilled Japanese eggplant.

Scallops, squid and lobster lightly marinated in a citrus dressing and
surrounded by a scattering of whitefish roe was another fine starter, as were
warm pencil-slim fresh asparagus sharing the plate with a small, perfectly
seasoned salad of diced potato and bacon.

But pairing foie gras and smoked salmon was a singular misstep. Though both were
perfectly seared and benefited from an inventive grapefruit sauce, the two
luxury ingredients were not on speaking terms.

A choice of an attractive green salad tossed with hazelnut oil or a velvety
cream of broccoli soup is included for those who order appetizers and main
dishes.

Meaty chunks of lobster cooked in a sheer tempura batter were enriched with a
coconut milk sauce studded with baby corn kernels and fueled by a subtle touch
of acid and spice. A nest of rice vermicelli provided a gentle counterpoint.

A black olive glaze seasoned a slab of fresh salmon served with a brochette of
grilled vegetables; baby guinea hen was given complex treatment with a foie gras
stuffing for the leg, a port wine sauce for the breast, and fresh, herb-flecked
linguine alongside.

Yellow beets, snow peas and a gratin of purple potatoes accompanied bay
scallops, but the seafood got a bit lost in this colorful crowd.

As an alternative to dessert, or as a separate course, Laurie Raphael offers a
cheese plate, which one evening included orange-crusted St. Basile, a
satin-textured variety with a delectably mellow pungency from the province of
Quebec, easily one of the best cheeses made in North America.

But desserts are not the skippable sort; they are visually splashy with jaunty
disks of spun caramel and a scattering of berries and sauce. White chocolate and
praline mousses were layered on a crunchy dacquoise base for one confection. An
array of chocolate fantasies included a grown-up Oreo of homemade cookies
enclosing swirls of whipped cream alongside an intense chocolate pot de creme. A
cup of creamy maple creme brulee was paired with a stemmed glass of vanilla ice
cream.

Perhaps it was just our waiter who was exceptionally sophisticated when it came
to wine. He steered us away from a Canadian wine, describing it as an
"interesting curiosity." We were not disappointed by the smooth 1991 Oak Knoll
pinot noir from Oregon, and, though it is a red wine, he suggested icing it
briefly.  And he was right. The wine, $48 Canadian, came to about $37 at a rate
of exchange of $1.30 Canadian to an American dollar.

Marie Clarisse

It is puzzling that Quebec, within striking distance of the fishing communities
of the Maritime Provinces, has few seafood restaurants.

Though salmon appears on many menus, and bowls of steamed mussels are as
ubiquitous as maple syrup, a restaurant like Marie Clarisse, with a menu that
changes daily depending on the fish available in the market, is a rarity.

It is the only serious seafood restaurant in the old city.

Done in crisp marine blue and white, Marie Clarisse has a pair of small dining
areas with stone walls and rustic beams, plus a small umbrella-shaded deck
outside where a more limited menu is served.

It is at the foot of the steep staircase that connects the lower, more recently
restored 17th-century Place Royale with the upper old city dominated by the
stately Chateau Frontenac hotel. Though this location puts it on every tourist's
itinerary, Marie Clarisse has not compromised to appeal to the souvenir T-shirt
crowd.

High-quality seafood of impeccable freshness was prepared with great delicacy.
Tender mussels steamed to order in white wine came showered with ribbons of
basil. Sheer sauces, like the horseradish-tinged beurre blanc that subtly
pointed up my portion of perfectly cooked monkfish or the rather reserved curry
sauce on my husband's salmon trout, complemented but did not muffle the rich
flavors of these fish. A feathery fresh pear charlotte was a better choice for
dessert than the soggy tarte Tatin. The well-chosen and fairly priced white
wines include a Muscadet for $21, Chateau Bonnet from Bordeaux for $24 and a
premier cru Chablis for $44.

Le Graffiti

In any number of cities Le Graffiti could be one of the better restaurants.
Situated on a block of restaurants and shops just off the Grande Allee, the
boulevard bordering the Plains of Abraham park that runs west from the old city,
Le Graffiti is in a modern brick shopping complex and food court.

Vaguely Art Deco in style, with glass, mirrors, brick and burnished wood, it has
none of the charm of places in the old city.

The menu might be called contemporary Continental because, while clearly rooted
in France, it also offers a number of pasta dishes like angel hair with pesto
and fettuccine with mushrooms.

The kitchen's expertise was evident in the meaty rabbit rillettes served with
bittersweet tendrils of orange peel in syrup and a feuillette of smoked salmon
on melted leeks in a mellow red pepper sauce -- two fine starters. Pork
tenderloin came glazed with a vinegar-sharpened sauce, and a country mustard
dominated the sauce for filet mignon with mashed potatoes.

The restaurant also owns a bakery, so desserts are mostly fancy cakes, like a
very good dark chocolate layer cake or a delicate cheesecake. It also boasts a
wine cellar with more than 4,000 bottles, many of them extremely expensive
big-name labels.

Despite the size of the list there was less to choose from here in the $25 to
$30 price range than in other restaurants we tried. But one good buy was the
Cote de Nuits Villages Villamont 1990 for $30.

While service is professional, it can also be a touch perfunctory and
unaccommodating.

Falstaff

For decades the popularity of German food has been slipping on this side of the
Atlantic, so we were intrigued to discover Falstaff, open since January in the
upper old city with a menu of German dishes and an impressive list of beers.

But wait. Falstaff? Though German-sounding, the name is English, of course. For
the Barres, however, who bought the complex of restaurants and cafes in the
historic Maison Livernois building two years ago, from Serge Bruyere, who
created them, the name had a German ring.

This inviting restaurant has a soaring skylighted atrium with an open kitchen, a
handsome wood-trimmed bar room and, off to the side, a number of stone-vaulted
rooms with names like Wagner and Gutenberg. Although the menu is German, with
its choucroute garni, baeckeoffe casserole and onion tart, it could as easily be
Alsatian.

And while German beers dominate the list of nearly three dozen priced from about
$3 to $12, there are Canadian labels as well.

A first course of delightfully peppery rabbit terrine with prunes, custardy
onion tart or snails in flaky pastry with a beer-based cream sauce might be
followed by choucroute royal, made with a combination of steamed and grilled
sausages on finely shredded sauerkraut seasoned with bacon, juniper berries and
bay leaf.

A properly moist salmon fillet tops a portion of lentils in a creamy,
bacon-studded sauce. As tempting as the crusty country bread might be it pays to
remember the splendid linzer, apple and pear-almond tarts that wait in the
wings. The straw berries from the Ile d'Orleans nearby were astonishingly good.

We opted for Brasal Speciale, a well-made Canadian amber beer ($3), and Tucher
Hefe-Weizen, a light, tangy summer wheat beer from Nuremberg ($5). Falstaff
offers just a handful of wines.

L'Apsara

An attractive restaurant owned by a Cambodian family, L'Apsara roams Southeast
Asia and offers specialties from Thailand, Vietnam in addition to Cambodian
dishes.

Among the highlights were a Cambodian salad of shrimp mingled with bean sprouts
in a sharp lemon grass dressing, greaseless Cambodian spring rolls with peanut
sauce, and pork oudong -- a memorable Cambodian dish of pork strips in a
pepper-tinged ginger sauce. Plar van, a Thai fish dish consisting of a succulent
fillet moistened with tamarind and served with refreshing cucumber pickle, and
crisply glazed Thai rice noodles with pork -- a kind of understated mee krob --
were also very satisfying. Less successful were a bland Vietnamese lobster
salad, Cambodian sauteed shrimp in a watery sauce and Vietnamese chicken curry
that could have used more spice.

Sweet Southeast Asian pastries, fried banana, pineapple and apple slices are
available for dessert, along with canned fruit salad, the puzzlingly banal
offering in many Asian restaurants. Happily, the server recommended the good
fresh litchis instead of the fruit salad.

L'Apsara has a fairly lengthy wine list at generally moderate prices, as well as
a limited selection of beers.

The restaurant, which seats 125, occupies two rooms; the one in front is
essentially a pleasant Victorian parlor with Asian artifacts and woven straw
lamps. The large dining room in the rear is decorated with floor-to-ceiling
posters of landmarks like Angkor Wat. Servers in traditional silk outfits add to
the allure.


For croissants and coffee

There is a choice of room service, hotel dining rooms and any number of
plasticized cafes that serve breakfast.

But it is unlikely that any will have better coffee and croissants than Le
Temporel, an honest, well-worn, two-story place down a side street of the upper
old city, in what was once the city's artists' quarter and is now frequented by
local people as well as some tourists. French cafe au lait is served by the cup,
the double cup or the bowl, as is homemade hot chocolate, with or without
guimauves (marshmallows). The espresso and cappuccino are strong and first-rate.

Flaky croissants, well-glazed palmiers, raisin pastries and toasted baguettes
are served, as is oatmeal, granola, muffins and eggs. Quiches, croque monsieur
sandwiches and salads round out the all-day menu in this funky little place that
is also good for a light lunch. If you sit upstairs note the unusual
stained-glass windows.

On the negative side, the orange juice in copious servings is not freshly
squeezed and the croissants deserved higher-quality preserves. Ask for honey.

Le Temporel is at 1190 St. Jeane Street, (418) 692-5445. Open daily 7:30 A.M. to
11 P.M. (midnight Friday and Saturday). A la carte menu for breakfast and light
food.

Continental breakfast for two about $10. No credit cards.


The bill of fare

Except where noted, prices in United States dollars for the following are for
dinner for two, with a low- to moderately priced bottle of wine, and include tax
but not tip. The costs are calculated at $1.30 Canadian to the American dollar.
Dinner reservations are recommended.  Credit cards are accepted except where
noted.

Laurie Raphael, 17 Sault-au-Matelot, (418) 692-4555. Open for breakfast, lunch
and dinner Monday to Friday, breakfast and dinner on Saturday and brunch and
dinner on Sunday. A la carte dinner menu has main dishes $15 to $20; tasting
menu $42. Fixed-price lunch is $7.50 to $12. About $100.

Marie Clarisse, 12 Rue du Petit Champlain, (418) 692-0857. Open for lunch and
dinner Monday to Friday, dinner only Saturday and Sunday, except in summer when
lunch is served on the terrace. Deck menu available every day. A la carte dinner
menu has main dishes $10 to $15; fixed-price lunch $8 to $10. About $70.

Le Graffiti, 1191 Avenue Cartier, (418) 529-4949. Open for lunch and dinner
Monday to Friday, dinner on Saturday and brunch and dinner on Sunday. A la carte
main dishes at dinner $10 to $18; fixed-price lunch $8 to $10, fixed-price
dinner $10 to $15. A la carte dinner $90.

Falstaff, 45 Rue Couillard, (418) 694-0618. Open for lunch and dinner every day.
A la carte menu for lunch and dinner has main dishes $7 to $12; fixed-price
lunch $6 to $9, fixed-price dinner $9 to $16. About $35 with beer and tax.

L'Apsara, 71 Rue d'Auteuil, (418) 694-0232. Open Monday to Friday for lunch and
dinner, Saturday and Sunday for dinner. A la carte menu at lunch and dinner has
main dishes $8 to $10. Fixed-price lunch $8, fixed-price dinners $15 to $23. A
la carte dinner about $35 with beer.

LOAD-DATE: August 6, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: September 10, 1995, Sunday

CORRECTION:

A short article accompanying a Choice Tables column on Aug. 6 about Quebec
misstated the address and telephone number of Chez Temporel. It is at 25 Rue
Couillard, and the number is unlisted. The address and number published were for
a restaurant not mentioned in the article.


GRAPHIC: Photos: Le Graffiti offers contemporary Continental dishes.; Falstaff,
serving German food, opened last January.; Diners at Marie Clarisse, a seafood
restaurant. (pg. 6); Diners in the courtyard dining area at Laurie Raphael. (pg.
23) (Photographs by George S. Zimbel for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              144 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  August 6, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

IN SHORT: FICTION

BYLINE: By DAVID HAWARD BAIN

SECTION: Section 7;  Page 20;  Column 1;  Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 258 words



HIGHWAYS TO A WAR
By Christopher J. Koch.
Viking, $23.95.

Christopher J. Koch, an Australian writer best known for "The Year of Living
Dangerously," has set his rich and evocative new novel in Southeast Asia, from
just before the American buildup in Vietnam to just after the murderous Khmer
Rouge takeover of Cambodia. His mysterious hero is Michael Langford, a
celebrated Australian war photographer who crosses the border into Cambodia in
April 1976, a year after it was sealed by the Khmer Rouge. When Langford fails
to return, his boyhood friend, a lawyer named Raymond Barton, feels compelled to
investigate his disappearance. As Barton retraces Langford's adventurous career,
his journey takes him across Southeast Asia to Bangkok and finally to a squalid
Cambodian refugee settlement, the last place Langford was seen before crossing
the border. Engagingly, Mr. Koch presents his narrative from a variety of
first-person perspectives: Barton relates his past and present witnessing of
Langford's life; the photographer's buddies in the press corps spin vivid
adventures as they admiringly talk of his luck in evading death; and Langford
himself contributes pieces to his own puzzle through his legacy of notebooks and
tape-recorded diaries. As Barton's research mounts up, no one can quite believe
that the magnetic Langford won't someday saunter into a hotel bar, order a round
and tell his latest tale -- an undercurrent that adds even more tension to a
remarkably resonant and haunting story.   DAVID HAWARD BAIN

LOAD-DATE: August 6, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              145 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  August 6, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

The Great Pragmatist

BYLINE: By Richard Wightman Fox;   Richard Wightman Fox, a professor of history
at Boston University, is the editor, with James Kloppenberg, of "A Companion to
American Thought."

SECTION: Section 7;  Page 21;  Column 1;  Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1156 words



JOHN DEWEY
And the High Tide
of American Liberalism.
By Alan Ryan.
414 pp. New York:
W. W. Norton & Company. $30.

THE intellectuals with whom John Dewey came of age in the late 19th century were
troubled above all else by the excesses of American individualism. They saw
selfishness and disarray everywhere: among the workers, largely immigrants, as
much as the grasping industrialists. The Northern Protestant middle class from
which nearly all these intellectuals came was shocked by the great railroad
strike of 1877, terrified by the 1886 Haymarket bombing in Chicago, and hence
deeply comforted by the vision in Edward Bellamy's "Looking Backward" (1888) of
a future Boston from which conflict and competition (along with class and
swarthy kinds of race and ethnicity) had peacefully vanished. Bellamy boosted
many intellectuals' hope that "social control," scientifically administered by
expert reformers serving the public interest, could vanquish self-aggrandizing
workers and capitalists alike.

One of the remarkable things about Dewey (and the same can be said about his
friend Jane Addams) was his resistance to this top-down vision of
state-sponsored expertise, a vision that came to dominate 20th-century
liberalism. He refused the choice between individualism and social solidarity by
rejecting the terms of the debate. As Alan Ryan shows in "John Dewey: And the
High Tide of American Liberalism," a lively study of Dewey's thought, he held
that authentic individual growth always meant a deepening of social engagement.
Individual freedom was to be seen not as the negative state of being left alone
but as the positive cultivation of a calling, an activity that set a person into
the web of community. Selfhood was social from start to finish. Society would
get the equilibrium it needed when individuals embarked on paths of true
self-realization, and those paths had to be made available to everyone through a
democratic reordering of work and education.

Dewey attacked one classic dualism after another, beginning with this presumed
split between the individual and the social. Mind versus body, nature versus
culture, fact versus value, objective versus subjective, science versus
religion, means versus ends: all these oppositions dissolved before the
harmonizing logic of the pragmatism (he came to prefer "experimentalism") that
evolved from his early Hegelianism and his even earlier liberal Protestantism.
There was always a unity in human experience, Dewey insisted, however hidden it
might be by apparent antinomies. The ends a person pursues, for example, can
only be achieved by means commensurate with those ends, means that are in fact,
on closer examination, already ends -- a conviction made famous by Martin Luther
King Jr. only a few years after Dewey's death in 1952. Mr. Ryan, a professor of
politics at Princeton University, skillfully lays out the social, political and
philosophical dimensions of Dewey's faith in the ultimate wholeness of human
experience, and he dispels several mistaken labels that still cling to Dewey's
60-year career.

As an educational theorist Dewey was not the child-centered romantic that
conservative critics have made him out to be. Far from embracing the idea that
children possessed an inborn wisdom that needed liberating, Dewey had a
teacher-centered viewpoint: talented instructors knew how to bring children to
new levels of understanding by enlisting their innate interest in solving real
problems, not only practical problems but intellectual and artistic ones. Mr.
Ryan also shows that Dewey's pragmatism did not reduce the truth, in Bertrand
Russell's words, to "whatever works" -- an alleged reduction that in the view of
critics like Russell supplied America with the muddled philosophy proper to a
civilization stunted by business. Dewey's experimentalism was centered not on
so-called practical issues of problem solving, but on the pursuit of what Dewey
called "consummatory" (the highest) experience in religion, art and everyday
life.

The key terms for Dewey, in Mr. Ryan's account, were "experience" and
"democracy." Here Mr. Ryan shares the view of Robert Westbrook in "John Dewey
and American Democracy" (1991). Given his interest in Dewey's politics, Mr. Ryan
necessarily goes over much the same ground as Mr. Westbrook, and he expresses
concern in his preface about whether another book on the same subject is
justified. He need not have worried. Mr. Ryan has the same "intellectual high
spirits" that he celebrates in Bertrand Russell, about whom he wrote an earlier
volume. He needs no justification other than the excitement and grace of his
writing, and the often uncanny ease with which he explicates difficult
philosophical issues.

He underscores the gaps he detects between his own and Mr. Westbrook's
viewpoints, but in doing so he sometimes distorts the latter's perspective. Mr.
Westbrook's "political purpose," according to Mr. Ryan, is to "rescue Dewey for
the New Left"; it makes no sense, he adds, to associate Dewey with "the ecstatic
politics of the 1968 student uprisings." But this gets Mr. Westbrook backwards:
his commitment is to Dewey, not to the New Left. He likes the New Left -- not of
1968 but of the 1962 Port Huron statement -- only to the (in the end minimal)
extent that it shared Dewey's commitment to participatory democracy. Mr. Ryan,
who repeatedly emphasizes the centrality of democratic participation for Dewey's
politics as well as his broader philosophy, gives a reading of Dewey that is
much closer to Mr. Westbrook's than he lets on. It is a reading that highlights
Dewey's "faith in the common man's capacity for uncommon experience." Whatever
Mr. Ryan's political differences with Mr. Westbrook, his book confirms Mr.
Westbrook's judgment that participatory democracy is the key to understanding
Dewey.

ALAN RYAN'S book is one more sign of the Dewey boom sparked over the last decade
by Richard Rorty, Richard J. Bernstein, Cornel West and others. For liberals,
nearly comatose politically, intellectual inquiry provides a much-needed respite
and a return to first principles. Senator Bill Bradley saw the light a Dewey
scholar could shed on the liberal plight when he hired Mr. Westbrook for six
months last year as a consultant. Dewey is indispensable because he gives
philosophical grounding to the liberal quest for open-ended growth in knowledge
and experience, and because he pins the liberal hope for social justice not on
the beneficence of the state -- discredited even in liberal eyes since Vietnam
and Watergate -- but on the capacity of citizens to form communities of
deliberation. Even those liberals who find Dewey's craving for harmony
Pollyanna-ish are apt, like Mr. Ryan, to find him inspiring as a model of the
engaged thinker committed to what Mr. Ryan calls, in a nicely Deweyan joining of
apparent opposites, an "unflinching middle-of-the-road radicalism."

LOAD-DATE: August 6, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              146 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  August 6, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

The Code War

BYLINE: By Ronald H. Spector;   Ronald H. Spector, a professor of history and
international relations at George Washington University, is the author of "After
Tet: The Bloodiest Year in Vietnam" and "Eagle Against the Sun: The American War
With Japan."

SECTION: Section 7;  Page 27;  Column 1;  Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1139 words



COMBINED FLEET DECODED
The Secret History of American Intelligence
and the Japanese Navy in World War II.
By John Prados.
Illustrated. 832 pp. New York:
Random House.
$37.50.

IN the mid-1970's, the revelation that the British and Americans had been able
to intercept and read many of the most secret German and Japanese coded messages
produced great curiosity and excitement among people interested in World War II.
The fact that the Americans were reading Japanese codes had long been known, but
little documentation had been available except for that relating to pre-Pearl
Harbor Japanese diplomatic messages. The ability of the Allies to read German
messages came as a greater surprise.

As documents and memoirs pertaining to both of these code-breaking efforts
became available there were frequent statements by journalists, historians and
others that the entire history of the war would now have to be rewritten. This
conclusion was reinforced by some of the early books about the new intelligence
material, which tended to credit almost every Allied military success to
superior intelligence information.

As historians attempted to move beyond these generalizations to ask how
communications intelligence influenced specific campaigns and battles, the
picture became more cloudy. In some battles, good intelligence had been
available to the Allies but they lost anyway. Sometimes admirals and generals
failed to use or understand the information. Sometimes they received it too
late. It also became apparent that the Germans and Japanese were themselves far
from total failures at communications intelligence and deception. The Germans,
for example, were reading the British merchant shipping code for a considerable
time, an obvious advantage in their submarine campaign.

Most of these more detailed and comprehensive studies have focused on the war in
Europe, although a few -- like the excellent books by Richard B. Frank on the
Guadalcanal campaigns and Edward J. Drea on MacArthur's campaigns in New Guinea
and the Philippines -- have looked at the Pacific theater. John Prados's
"Combined Fleet Decoded" is a far more ambitious work. Mr. Prados's aim is
nothing less than a comprehensive history of intelligence in the Pacific war --
or at least its naval aspects -- in order to "reassess the outcomes of battles
and campaigns in terms not just of troops or ships but of how the secret war
played out." Where previous books usually devoted most of their attention to
Pearl Harbor and Midway, Mr. Prados provides a view of the entire war. He is
well qualified to undertake such a task, having written five previous books
about intelligence and covert action, including "The Soviet Estimate: U.S.
Intelligence and Soviet Strategic Forces."

He rightly sees the role of intelligence in the Pacific war not simply as a
story of code-breaking successes. Rather, he writes, "the true achievements of
intelligence in the Pacific war lie in the day-to-day accumulation of a fund of
knowledge. . . . Cryptography, traffic analysis, aerial photography, prisoner
interrogation, document capture and translation, and technical intelligence . .
. became pillars of an overall effort greater than the sum of its parts." He
explains and describes this winning synergy of intelligence elements as well as,
or better than, any previous author. He shows, for example, how Japanese neglect
of such a prosaic aspect of intelligence as ship recognition led to constant,
sometimes critical mistakes, in scouting, after-action reports and photo
interpretation. The Americans, in contrast, put generous resources into photo
reconnaissance and made courses in recognition a regular part of pilot training.

Mr. Prados has new things to say about the intelligence aspects of almost every
naval campaign in the Pacific and lays to rest some venerable myths in the
process. The reader should be warned, however, that these new insights and
discoveries are often buried in a mass of irrelevant anecdotes, biographical
detail and digressions, which may be of interest to dedicated World War II buffs
but which many others will find tedious.

Like the historians of intelligence in the European theater, Mr. Prados finds
that superior intelligence did not always insure victory. He says, for example,
about the 1942 fighting in the Netherlands Indies, that "all through the
campaign intelligence had served the Allies well." Nevertheless, all of
Southeast Asia was soon lost to the Japanese. Similarly, the Japanese had ample
warning, based on radio traffic analysis, of American plans to attack Okinawa,
but they could not change the outcome. There were also spectacular intelligence
failures. Despite their superiority in radio intelligence, photo interpretation,
linguistics and interrogation techniques, the Americans never got the size and
armament of Japan's superbattleships right until near the end of the war.

Despite its considerable merits, this book will probably not be accepted as the
last word on the subject. For one thing, the documentation is thin. Only direct
quotes are footnoted, and many of the new facts and anecdotes presented are not
backed by references.

A more serious flaw is that this is a book about Japanese intelligence and the
Japanese Navy based entirely on sources in English! Mr. Prados explains that he
originally "hoped to rely entirely upon Japanese-language sources for the
Imperial Navy portions." However, he says, "It turns out that media outlets and
corporations have put such a premium on Japanese-language translation as to bid
me right out of the market. I posted requests for translation help at three
major Eastern universities in the United States; for what I could afford to pay
there was not a single expression of interest."

MR. PRADOS gives assurance that English translations of captured Japanese
materials in the National Archives and other repositories, plus decrypted
Japanese messages, "included exactly the kind of materials I had hoped to get
from Japanese-language sources." He has made good use of those materials, but it
is asking a lot to have us believe that this is just as good as using the
Japanese materials not translated, along with the considerable body of Japanese
memoirs, diaries, letters and oral histories made available over the last 50
years.

To give just one example, the portrait of Adm. Isoroku Yamamoto's ideas and
influence given in the Prados account, based on wartime records, is considerably
at variance with the oral histories conducted with former senior naval officers
by the distinguished historian Ikuhiko Hata in 1980-81. Perhaps Mr. Prados could
show that his wartime interrogations and captured documents are more reliable
than Mr. Hata's informants. But then we will never know, since Mr. Hata's work
is mostly in Japanese.

LOAD-DATE: August 6, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              147 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  August 7, 1995, Monday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 787 words



INTERNATIONAL   A2-7

SERBIAN REFUGEES FLEE CROATIA
Terrified of reprisals at the hands of Croatian Army troops, tens of thousands
of Serbs became refugees, streaming out of Croatia for Bosnia and Yugoslavia.
A1
CROATIA DECLARES VICTORY
Three days after it launched an offensive, the Croatian Army declared victory
over rebel Serbs in the region they call Krajina.  A6
CUBA ABANDONS HOPE FOR A THAW
After months of diplomacy that raised Cuban hopes for a thaw in its relations
with Washington, Havana appears to have abandoned hopes for an improvement
before the U.S. presidential election.  A1
COLOMBIAN DRUG SUSPECT HELD
A top leader of the Cali drug cartel was arrested by the Colombian police in
what U.S. and Colombian officials describe as a final blow to the world's
largest drug-trafficking organization.  A3
THE LUCKIEST CITY IN JAPAN
Half a century ago, an American bomber was sent to drop the world's first
plutonium bomb on the Japanese city of Kokura. But cloud cover prevented the
attack, and the aircraft turned toward Nagasaki.  A7
CHRISTOPHER IN VIETNAM
In a speech in Hanoi, Secretary of State Warren Christopher declared that
Vietnam's best hope of achieving prosperity lies in independent courts, a free
press and an end to authoritarianism.  A7

Art lovers still pay the price of the Uffizi gallery bombing.  A2
A veteran of civil rights marches leads Israeli protests.  A5
Ste. Anne de Beaupre Journal: Keeping hawkers from shrine.  A4

NATIONAL   A8-10, B6-8

BUILDING A BUDGET COALITION
The White House is starting to look at a budget strategy that would rely on
rallying a coalition of Democrats and moderate Republicans around an alternative
to the Republican balanced budget plan.  A1
DOLE'S WELFARE PLAN CRITICIZED
Senator Bob Dole's plan to overhaul the nation's welfare was called too weak by
two of his principal rivals for the Republican Presidential nomination: Senator
Phil Gramm and Gov. Pete Wilson.  A1
BEHIND THE G.O.P. GAINS
Congressional Sketchbook: Representative Charles Canady's panel on the
Constitution has gone little noticed but has shaped some of the heavier
legislation of the House's Newtonian revolution.  B6
CHANGE FOR PLANNED PARENTHOOD
For Planned Parenthood, general-practice patients may be the only way the
organization can survive in a health marketplace undergoing radical change.  A1
MEDIA DIVERGENCE
Globalization of the entertainment business is seen as a threat by both media
executives and independent TV stations.  A1
ADVENTURE IN A CORN FIELD
A corn farmer near Shippensburg, Pa., has constructed the world's largest maze.
A8
UNION CANDIDATES GET SPECIFIC
News analysis: Nearly two months into their election campaign, the candidates to
lead the A.F.L.-C.I.O. are turning initially vague platforms into ever more
specific promises and even some action.  A8
DEAL IN BOMB CASE
The lawyer for Timothy McVeigh, the prime suspect in the Oklahoma City bombing,
said he expected his client's Army buddy to be indicted on lesser charges in
exchange for testifying for the prosecution.  A9
REPUBLICANS AND CHARITIES
Conservative Republicans are trying to quiet the voice of charities and other
nonprofits in the shaping of Government policy.  A10

A lobster season in Biscayne Bay, Fla., gives divers a chance.  B8
Talk continued on regional telephone worker contracts.  A8


METRO DIGEST   B1

BURDEN OF PROOF
Immigrants' rights groups contend that residency rules in some suburban school
districts are so burdensome that some districts have locked out poor immigrant
families, undocumented or not.  A1
Business Digest D1
Arts/Entertainment C9-14
British furor over arts grants from national lottery proceeds.  C9
Music: The Santa Fe Opera's "Modern Painters." C9
Tafelmusik.  C10
Primus at Roseland.  C11
Works by Libby Larsen.  C11
Ray Davies and the Kinks.  C11
Dance: Solos from Japan.  C9
Books: "Dark Sun: The Making of the Hydrogen Bomb." C14
Sports C1-7
Autos: Earnhardt's magic.  C2
Baseball: Yanks lose in 12th.  C1
A visit by Ripken.  C1
Mets finally recover.  C5
Columns: Vecsey on women's soccer.  C2
On Pro Football.  C3
Football: Giants win exhibition opener.  C3
Obituaries B10
Agha Hasan Abedi, Pakistani businessman who founded B.C.C.I.
Jerzy Toeplitz, film historian.
Editorials/Op-Ed A12-13
Editorials
House of environmental horrors.
China: Kind words, little effect.
Star Wars, the sequel.
Letters Anthony Lewis: The new priorities.
Bob Herbert: A lesson in blood.
Orlando Patterson: Affirmative action, on the merit system.
Bridge C12
Chronicle B2
Crossword C12

LOAD-DATE: August 7, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              148 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  August 7, 1995, Monday, Late Edition - Final

U.S. Message to Vietnamese: Freedom Pays

BYLINE: By DAVID E. SANGER

SECTION: Section A;  Page 7;  Column 1;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 726 words

DATELINE: HANOI, Vietnam, Aug. 6


The sons and daughters of those who prevailed in the Vietnam War met Secretary
of State Warren Christopher today, and he told them in surprisingly stark terms
that independent courts, a free press and an end to authoritarianism were their
best hope for achieving prosperity.

In a 45-minute speech today at the Vietnamese Government's top foreign-policy
school, the Institute for International Relations, Mr. Christopher described at
length the democratic changes that have swept through parts of Southeast Asia
over the last two decades and made it clear that Vietnam was far behind.

Before a clearly attentive audience of several hundred -- mostly students who
listened to his English delivery directly even though they had access to a
simultaneous translation over earphones -- Mr. Christopher explicitly linked
progress in human rights to Vietnam's hopes of joining the booming market
economies of Asia.

"Sustained economic development is more likely where courts provide due process,
where newspapers are free to expose corruption, and where business people can
make decisions with free access to accurate information," he said, describing
conditions that are in drastically short supply in this authoritarian -- but
increasingly nonideological -- Communist nation.

"Indeed, the reality of Japan, Hong Kong, South Korea and Thailand tells us that
the rule of law and accountable government are the bedrock of stability and
prosperity," he said. "The reality of Burma and North Korea tells us that
repression entrenches bureaucracy."

In a more ordinary setting, such comments would hardly have seemed surprising.
But Mr. Christopher gave the address shortly after meeting the general secretary
of the Communist Party here, Do Muoi, and it was clearly intended as a signal
that Washington will raise human rights issues as Vietnam seeks a far broader
economic relationship with the United States.

Mr. Christopher might well have included Vietnam on his short list of repressive
nations. Political dissent is still a serious crime here, and even the
publication of essays urging political or constitutional reform has resulted in
detention and imprisonment; religious activity is also controlled in this
country of more than 72 million people.

He did not mention the cases of any political prisoners today, and he carefully
avoided direct criticism of the leaders with whom he signed an agreement
normalizing diplomatic relations on Saturday.

Nonetheless, Mr. Christopher was speaking in the heart of Hanoi, where today he
formally raised an American flag over a new United States Embassy. And in the
course of his talk, Mr. Christopher, 69, essentially urged the students to bring
about fundamental change in a system that owns every outlet for information,
controls the country's property and generates more than its share of corruption.

It is not the kind of classroom instruction that students are accustomed to
receiving in this country, where most of the population is under the age of 25.

"When you hear American talk about freedom and human rights, this is what we
mean," he said. "Each of you ought to have the right to help shape your
country's destiny, as well as your own."

Throughout his weeklong trip through Asia, Mr. Christopher and his aides have
argued that economic and cultural engagement with Vietnam is the quickest way to
bring about changes in its human rights record. The same argument has been made
in the case of China, although so far the evidence of success is slim. Clearly,
the Vietnamese Government is betting the opposite: that it can follow a Chinese
model, liberalizing its economic system without giving up too much social or
political control.

The students appeared to have been chosen largely from the institute, although
the United States Embassy here encouraged local employees to bring their
friends. The audience looked unsurprised by the Secretary's message, and there
were no provocative questions, except for one asking what Mr. Christopher
planned to do about Bosnia.

The students seemed less interested in his comments about human freedom than in
his discussion of economic issues.

"If Vietnam wants to grow, it has to change its thinking about the economy," one
student, Tran Van Thuy, said afterward. "The more foreign investment comes to
Vietnam, the more jobs that are created."

LOAD-DATE: August 7, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Secretary of State Warren Christopher greeted Vietnamese near
the United States Embassy in Hanoi after its opening ceremony yesterday.
(Associated Press)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              149 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 8, 1995, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Harry Jenkins, 68, Navy Pilot Imprisoned for 7 Years in Hanoi

BYLINE: By WOLFGANG SAXON

SECTION: Section D;  Page 21;  Column 5;  National Desk

LENGTH: 475 words


Harry Tarleton Jenkins Jr., a retired Navy captain who spent more than seven
years imprisoned in North Vietnam, much of it in solitary confinement, died last
Wednesday in the crash of his light plane in Arizona. He was 68 and lived in
Coronado, Calif.

Captain Jenkins was piloting a Long Eze, a two-seater light plane that he built
about five years ago from a kit. The plane suddenly lost power while taking off
from Prescott Municipal Airport, said his son-in-law, Comdr. David M. Kennedy,
senior test pilot for the Naval Weapons Test Squadron at Point Mugu, Calif.

Also on board was Captain Jenkins's elder son, Chris, 44, of Los Angeles, who
was seriously injured, Commander Kennedy said.

Captain Jenkins was shot down while piloting an A-4E Skyhawk jet on his 155th
mission over North Vietnam on Nov. 13, 1965. For years his fate remained
unknown.

He was put in prison in Hanoi in a cell next to that of his former wing
commander, Capt. James B. Stockdale, who had been shot down about two months
earlier. Captain Stockdale later became a vice admiral and was Ross Perot's
running mate in the 1992 Presidential campaign.

Captain Jenkins and Captain Stockdale were among 12 American servicemen to be
placed in solitary confinement for refusing to cooperate with their Communist
jailers.

Of Captain Jenkins's 87 months as a prisoner of war, 46 were spent in solitary
with little food and none of life's amenities. He said later that he kept his
sanity by deriving calculus equations in his head and by mentally reviewing
college courses and books.

His family was left in doubt about his fate for more than five years; in
December 1971, the North Vietnamese indicated in a six-line message that he was
alive. After the United States signed a four-party peace pact in January 1973,
Captain Jenkins was released along with some 590 American prisoners as part of
the pact. He returned to his family in February 1973 bearing a dirty, cracked
porcelain cup -- the only dish he used during his long ordeal.

He was born in Washington, and joined the Navy in 1945 when he was 18 under a
wartime program at the University of South Carolina. He entered flight school
and became a carrier-based naval aviator, piloting various types of attack
planes.

After the Vietnam War, Captain Jenkins was active in the campaign to get a full
accounting from Hanoi of American servicemen held prisoner and or missing in
action.

He retired from the Navy in 1978 and joined the Cubic Corporation, which designs
electronic equipment. At his death, he was the San Diego company's government
property manager.

Besides his son Chris, Captain Jenkins is survived by his wife of 46 years,
Marjorie Fowler Jenkins; another son, Kirk, of Phoenix; a daughter, Karen
Kennedy of Thousand Oaks, Calif.; a brother, Robert, of Philadelphia, and eight
grandchildren.


NAME: Harry Tarleton Jenkins Jr.

LOAD-DATE: August 8, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Harry Tarleton Jenkins Jr. (1965)

TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              150 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 8, 1995, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1011 words



International A2-8

CROATS SEAL THEIR VICTORY
In the captured Serbian rebel capital of Knin, Croatian soldiers consolidated
and celebrated a triumph that has altered the Balkan balance of power. A1

CHANCE FOR PEACE, OR MORE WAR?
News analysis: Now that Croatia's offensive has redrawn the strategic map in the
Balkans, many Western diplomats are asking if this is an opportunity for peace
or the prelude to an even wider war. A1

BALKAN REFUGEE CRISIS
As 120,000 fleeing Croatian Serbs sought help in Serb-held Bosnia, relief
officials said they faced the biggest refugee crisis of the war. A6

THE JAPANESE A-BOMB PROJECT
As Japan honors those who were killed at Hiroshima and Nagasaki, one aspect of
the dawn of the nuclear age is nearly forgotten: Japan's own attempt to build an
atomic bomb during World War II.  A2

RUSSIA'S POOR PENSIONERS
Many of Siberia's elderly, watching the value of their pensions dwindle with
inflation, feel nostalgia for life under Communism.  A3

FRANCE LEADS IN ARMS SALES
France surpassed the United States as the world's leading arms dealer last year,
while American sales fell to their lowest levels in eight years. A3

MEXICAN CORRUPTION CLAIM
The fugitive former chairman of Mexico's largest airline said that he paid $8
million in illegal campaign donations to the governing party during his
country's presidential elections last year.  A8

A blast that killed 22 people in Sri Lanka was tied to Tamil rebels. A2

Cam Ranh Journal: Is Vietnam ready for U.S. soldiers' return? A4

National A10-19,B6

HOUSE TAKES UP WHITEWATER
The House Banking Committee began a week of hearings into the financial and
political underpinnings of President Clinton's investment in the Whitewater
deal.  A1

AN EXTRA-PARTISAN DEBATE
Congressional Sketchbook: Lawmakers are displaying an unusual degree of
partisanship as they look into the Whitewater case. A18

NBC EXECUTES OLYMPIC SWEEP
NBC agreed to pay $1.27 billion for the television rights to the 2000 Summer
Olympics in Sydney, Australia, and the 2002 Winter Olympics in Salt Lake City.
A1

WILSON'S CHANGING STANCE
Gov. Pete Wilson of California, now the point man in the fight to eliminate
affirmative-action programs, was a passionate supporter of them as recently as
last year.  A10

STAY FOR JAILED JOURNALIST
Mumia Abu-Jamal, a black journalist active in politics who was to be put to
death for the murder of a police officer, was granted an indefinite stay.  A10

VICTORY FOR SIMPSON'S TEAM
A North Carolina woman to whom a detective repeatedly uttered a racial epithet
may be forced to testify in the O. J. Simpson case.  A14

LAWMAKER'S ACCUSER TESTIFIES
A former volunteer for Representative Mel Reynolds testified that she and the
lawmaker began having sex when she was 16.  A14

UNNERVED BY UNABOM INQUIRY
Authorities investigating the Unabom case have focused their attention on
leftists and environmental radicals in the San Francisco area, particularly
Berkeley.  A19

LEG FOUND AT BOMBING SITE
A medical examiner revealed that a mysterious, unidentified leg had been found
in the rubble of the Oklahoma City Federal Building.  A19

WELFARE DEBATE BEGINS
The Senate began debating legislation to strip the Federal Government of control
over the nation's main cash welfare program and give it to the states.  B6

REGULATION FIGHT CONTINUES
Senator Bob Dole rejected a Democratic attempt to break the impasse on
legislation to limit Federal health, safety and environmental regulation.  B6

GINGRICH RUNS INTO OPPOSITION
Speaker Newt Gingrich fled from an Atlanta meeting organized for him to discuss
changes in Medicare as trade unionists accused him of seeking to cut the program
to finance tax cuts for the rich.  B6

The President backed plans to deter smoking among minors.  B6

Metro Digest B1

RUSSIAN MOB INDICTMENTS
Authorities unsealed an indictment charging 25 reputed members of the Russian
mob in a scheme that cheated the Government out of more than $140 million in
fuel taxes. A1

HOME FOR RETARDED IN QUESTION
A Federal court convened to consider the fate of Connecticut's sole large home
for the retarded, with the Clinton Justice Department pushing for a goal
previous administrations have rejected: placing residents in the community. A1

Business Digest D1

Arts/Entertainment C13-17

In the Hamptons art whirl, more is definitely more.  C13
Marian Seldes and the role she may have been born to play.  C13
"Harbinger" returns, and Eliot Feld remembers.  C13
Theater: "Deviant Craft." C14
Music: Foetus.  C14
Mostly Mozart.  C15
Ali Farkas Toure.  C15
Books: "War of the Worlds," a warning about cyberspace. C16
Television: Three addicts.  C16

Fashion B8

 They called for talent. They got it.

Science C1-11

Restored wetlands called an effective buffer for flooding.  C1
To every perception, the brain may attach a value judgment.  C1
Quasars all seem to be equally ancient, new data say.  C1
There may be a window of opportunity to fight spinal damage.  C3
The prediction of earthquakes remains an uncertain science.  C5
Q&A C5

Sports B9-14

Baseball: Yanks' McDowell shuts out Baltimore.  B9
Mets' Mlicki wins.  B11
Columns: Berkow on Ripken.  B9
On Baseball on Strawberry.  B11
Football: Jets' new center.  B13
Giants shallow at corners.  B13
Golf: Spotlight on Pavin.  B9
Track: A hot time but a cold shoulder for Torrence.  B9

Obituaries D20-21

Gay Wilson Allen, biographer

Editorials/Op-Ed A20-21

Editorials

The Croatian offensive.
New York's surliest.
A modest step to save the fish.

Letters

Russell Baker: Ready for the last war.
A. M. Rosenthal: A return to Hiroshima.
Bernard W. Nussbaum: What I did and why I did it.
Nathan Glazer: The next chancellor's big chance.

Chronicle B2

Chess C11

Crossword C16

LOAD-DATE: August 8, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              151 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 9, 1995, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

BUSINESS DIGEST

SECTION: Section D; Page 1; Column 1; Business/Financial Desk

LENGTH: 582 words



Poor Treasury Auction Weakens Bonds and Dollar
The Treasury's auction for three-year notes was poorly bid, dashing hopes that a
recent easing of Japanese investment regulations would spur greater interest in
U.S.  Government securities and strengthen the dollar.

The credit market showed its disappointment by selling off much of its earlier
gains, ending little changed. Most market participants had expected the
three-year auction to go well and set the tone for the remainder of the
Treasury's $42.5 billion three-part quarterly refunding. [Page D16.]

The dollar had risen to a high of 91.90 yen during the day, but after the
auction it began to fall, closing at 91.49 yen. [D13.]

May and Penney to Buy 2 Chains
May Department Stores and J. C. Penney won the Woodward & Lothrop and John
Wanamaker chains, bidding $590 million. [D2.]

Worker Productivity Rises
Worker productivity grew at an annual rate of 3 percent in the second quarter as
more goods were produced with fewer workers. Labor costs moderated, helping hold
down inflation. And the average number of hours worked fell by the largest
number in 15 years, as businesses shed jobs. [D4.]

Netscape I.P.O. Price Soars
As demand for an initial public offering of Netscape Communications intensified,
the underwriters raised the price to $28, more than double the original offering
price. [D2.]

MCI and Murdoch Going On-Line
MCI Communications and Rupert Murdoch's News Corporation are expected to create
a new Internet-based on-line information service today. It will replace Mr.
Murdoch's Delphi Internet Services and enter a tough competitive field dominated
by America Online, CompuServe and Prodigy. AT&T and Microsoft are also entering
the fray. [D5.]

Goldman Drops Board Seat
Daniel M. Neidich, a partner at Goldman, Sachs, has resigned from the board of
Rockefeller Center Properties. Goldman and its Whitehall Real Estate Fund
resigned the board seat during sale talks. [D6.]

Talks Over Turner Stake
Turner Broadcasting said it was continuing to hold discussions with
Tele-Communications and Time Warner about Time Warner's 18 percent stake in
Turner. Turner also said that earnings rose 70 percent in the second quarter, to
$22 million, or 8 cents a share. [D5.]

S.E.C. Settles Fraud Case
Relatives of Gary A. Singer, the former co-chairman of the Cooper Companies,
have agreed to pay $2.5 million to settle a civil lawsuit filed in 1992 by the
S.E.C. . Mr. Singer is scheduled to be sentenced for fraudulent trading
practices today. [D4.]

U.S. Urging Changes in Vietnam
Washington is trying to persuade the Vietnamese to privatize their inefficient
state-run industries. News Analysis. [A3.]

Navigation Help From Hertz
Hertz is equipping some cars in several cities with a high-tech navigation
system. With the system, a driver gets driving directions from a four-inch video
screen mounted under the dashboard that is accompanied by automated voice
instructions. At the heart of the system is a Global Positioning Satellite
receiver that determines the car's location by using satellite signals. Business
Travel. [D4.]

The High Cost of Ego
A new study indicates that the premium paid by acquiring companies for takeovers
relates more to what the study's authors call the acquiring chief executive's
hubris than to business rationales like synergy and eliminating inefficiencies.
Market Place. [D6.]

LOAD-DATE: August 9, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Table: "YESTERDAY"
Dow industrials                4,693.32      Unchanged
30-yr. Treasury yield             6.88%          -0.01
The dollar                    91.49 yen          +0.19

Chart: "TODAY"

Columbia/HCA

Second-quarter earnings due during the day.

Expected: 70 cents a share.

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              152 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 9, 1995, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

A Little-Known Candidate With a Big Issue

BYLINE: By ELIZABETH KOLBERT

SECTION: Section A;  Page 16;  Column 3;  National Desk

LENGTH: 1502 words

DATELINE: CLAREMONT, N.H.


Members of the New Hampshire Christian Coalition had been listening to Alan L.
Keyes for almost 40 minutes when they began to nod and murmur, "Amen."

"In a society where you have a Christian community, you shouldn't need a welfare
system," Mr. Keyes said.

"That's right," called a voice from the back of the room.

"There is a God, and we are not Him," Mr. Keyes continued. "That simple insight
is, I think, the insight that is most fundamentally lost in our society."

"Yes!" another voice said.

"Let's look at this issue of abortion," Mr. Keyes went on. "Their pro-choice
position is based on the notion that a woman has a choice. If she wants the
baby, then it's human and she has to respect its life. And if she doesn't want
it, it's not human and she doesn't have to respect it. We are placing that human
choice in the place of God's authority. That means, my friends, that we are
exercising authority in such a way as to cut the ground out from under our claim
to be free."

"Amen!" someone responded.

Mr. Keyes, a former Reagan Administration official who is now the host of a
radio talk show, is seeking the Republican nomination for President -- according
to the party's research, the first black in the nation's history to do so. In a
group of nine candidates -- several of them, like Representative Robert K.
Dornan of California and Senator Richard G. Lugar of Indiana considered
long-shots -- Mr. Keyes is usually ranked ninth.

But his relentless focus on abortion and what he calls moral issues has granted
him an influence that far exceeds his expected vote tally.

"I think that Alan's presence in the race insures not only that there will be an
abortion question in every debate, but that the other candidates won't be able
to duck that question," said Bill Kristol, a Republican strategist and a friend
of Mr. Keyes's from graduate school at Harvard University. "He makes life
uncomfortable for the nominally pro-life candidates who aren't comfortable
discussing the issue."

Many Republicans, who remember the damage done by the 1992 convention's focus on
these social issues, believe that this kind of influence is exactly the sort
that the party does not need. A few months ago, Mr. Keyes gave a luncheon speech
to contributors to Gopac, the political action committee founded by Speaker Newt
Gingrich, that led to a series of testy exchanges afterward. Several audience
members suggested that his message could tear the party apart and cost it the
White House in 1996.

Mr. Keyes, however, pronounces himself unfazed by such criticism and responds to
it in a tone laden with contempt. "Elections are not about what we need or what
the party thinks it needs," he said in an interview conducted in an aide's car
during a furious New England thunderstorm. "Elections are about what this
country needs. So I frankly don't care who thinks it's a problem. I'm going to
talk about what I think is important to this country."

At the heart of Mr. Keyes's campaign is the proposition that problems that may
seem diverse -- poverty, crime, out-of-wedlock births -- can all be traced to
the same root cause: the breakdown of what he calls "the marriage-based,
two-parent family." Often at public appearances, Mr. Keyes, 45 on Aug. 7, shows
off his own "marriage-based" family: his wife, Jocelyn, and their three young
children.

"It turns out we don't have many problems in America," he told the Christian
Coalition gathering here in late July. "We have one problem that has many very
expensive, very tragic consequences. Our family structure is eroding and some
cases in a state of total collapse, and the result is a disaster for this entire
society."

In response to these grave problems, Mr. Keyes advocates a variety of unorthodox
measures. He recommends, for example, restricting subsidized mortgages to
couples who have been married for several years. He favors a form of what he
calls indentured servitude for men who father and then abandon children. And,
for the most recalcitrant bachelor fathers, he proposes public paddling.

"I don't see any problems in having them have a little interview with some folks
who have gone to Singapore to learn the delicate techniques for getting their
attention," he said.

On the stump, Mr. Keyes liberally cites both the Bible and the Declaration of
Independence, weaving theology and American history into one unified, if often
idiosyncratic, political philosophy. He opposes abortion, for example, not only
on religious grounds, but also because, he argues, it violates the principles
set forth by the Founding Fathers.

"Literally, the whole abortion culture is really the culture of a concept of
freedom based on selfishness," he said. "Our society's all about freedom. If we
define that freedom wrongly then we have at the heart of this nation's existence
corrupted the source of what we are. And downstream the river's going to be
polluted if the source is poisoned."

Black and Catholic, Mr. Keyes is an unlikely candidate of the Christian right, a
movement that is virtually all white and largely evangelical Protestant. Indeed,
at this point, members of the Christian right appear to be divided over whom to
support in 1996. Yet of the nine declared Republican candidates, Mr. Keyes has a
platform that most closely mirrors theirs. Unlike Patrick J. Buchanan, whose
agenda is crowded with a variety of issues, including free trade and
immigration, Mr. Keyes's campaign is almost exclusively centered on the issues
that the Christian right has championed: introducing school choice, giving
communities more control over education, changing the tax code and outlawing
abortion.

Probably the biggest boost Mr. Keyes's campaign has received came from James
Dobson, host of the syndicated Christian radio show "Focus on the Family." Twice
the show broadcast segments of a speech Mr. Keyes had delivered in February in
New Hampshire. Mr. Dobson told listeners that he was so moved when he first
heard the speech that he wept.

Mr. Keyes's eloquence is much talked about even among Republicans who are not
planning to vote for him. "Alan Keyes has probably the best delivery of any
speaker you will hear," said Richard Kennedy, a New Hampshire State
Representative who is committed to Mr. Buchanan. "He makes Jesse Jackson sounds
like he stutters."

An Army brat who grew up on bases around the United States and in Italy, Mr.
Keyes has been championing conservative causes since adolescence. At 16, he
became the first black elected president of the American Legion Boys Nation,
delivering ringing pro-Vietnam War speeches.

As a freshman at Cornell University, Mr. Keyes studied with Allan Bloom, author
of "The Closing of the American Mind." After black militants seized the student
center in 1969, Mr. Keyes left Cornell, went to Paris for a year and then spent
the better part of the next decade at Harvard, where he earned a doctorate in
government.

Mr. Keyes was a functionary in the United States Embassy in India when he was
discovered in the late 1970's by Jeane J. Kirkpatrick, who when she later became
chief delegate to the United Nations brought him to New York as the Ambassador
to the United Nations Economic and Social Council. In 1985, President Ronald
Reagan appointed him Assistant Secretary of State for International Organization
Affairs, a position he used to become a leading spokesman for the
Administration's opposition to economic sanctions on South Africa.

After quitting that post in 1987, Mr. Keyes ran for both of Maryland's United
States Senate seats, and both times he was badly defeated. In his 1992 campaign
against Senator Barbara A. Mikulski, Mr. Keyes paid himself a salary of more
than $8,000 a month from his campaign fund, a move that although legal was
widely criticized. A few days before the election, Mr. Keyes accused Republican
leaders of shortchanging his campaign because of his race, suggesting that the
national party should bear some responsibility for his showing. He ended up with
just 29 percent of the vote.

This time Mr. Keyes, who is an opponent of affirmative action programs, is
avoiding most racial issues, saying his campaign transcends race.

Republican Party officials in Maryland, speaking on the condition of anonymity,
recalled Mr. Keyes with a distinct lack of affection, and have for the most part
stayed far away from his Presidential campaign.

Some Republican Party officials, indeed even some of Mr. Keyes's allies, suggest
that he is running for President mainly to boost his name recognition and to
promote his syndicated radio show, "America's Wake-Up Call."

Mr. Keyes, however, said he is running precisely to talk about the topics on
which the Republican Party would prefer his silence.

"I think some elements -- big elements, I'm afraid -- of the party leadership
were convinced by the post-1992 propaganda that somehow or another the
Republican Party stance on the moral, social issues hurt us," he said. "Well, I
think that's a lot of bunk."

NAME: Alan L. Keyes

LOAD-DATE: August 9, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Alan L. Keyes, who the party says is the first black Republican
to run for President, often cites the Bible in his speeches. At an appearance in
July in New Hampshire, Gerry Gallick got him to annotate a Bible passage. (Ben
Garver for The New York Times)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              153 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 9, 1995, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Vietnam's Budding Market: What Role for U.S.?

BYLINE: By DAVID E. SANGER

SECTION: Section A;  Page 3;  Column 1;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1208 words

DATELINE: HANOI, Vietnam, Aug. 7


The American flag finally flies in Hanoi now, over a new embassy that symbolizes
the end of the argument in Washington over whether and when to recognize
Vietnam. Hanoi, stultifying and lifeless just five years ago, is suddenly the
new magnet for entrepreneurs seeking one of the few frontier cities left in
Asia.

Gracious but decrepit French town houses are suddenly fetching prices in the
millions, and already ads for Carrier air conditioners and Caterpillar tractors
are popping up in villages that American pilots once bombed.

But as the visiting American delegation, led by Secretary of State Warren
Christopher, discovered over the last few days, it is hardly a foregone
conclusion that the logic of economic self-interest will now bind together
once-bitter enemies.

A generation after the war ended, Washington is once again out to win the hearts
and minds of the Vietnamese -- this time to persuade them to privatize their
desperately inefficient state-run industries, allow free emigration, adopt labor
policies assuring minimum rights of workers and create an independent legal
system that will give foreign investors recourse to the courts. Without those
steps, Mr. Christopher and his aides told Vietnam's leaders, Hanoi will get few
of the economic benefits that it hoped would flow quickly from diplomatic
recognition by the United States.

Clearly such requirements are already viewed as a threat to many in the
Government here, whose leaders harbor dreams of transforming their country into
a far larger version of Singapore: a booming free market, combined with strict
political control.

Vietnam's Foreign Minister, Nguyen Manh Cam, said on Saturday that the key to
the new relationship between Washington and Hanoi would be "noninterference in
each other's internal affairs." If they had not known before, Mr. Cam and his
colleagues discovered in the last few weeks that American foreign policy has
changed a lot since the days of the Vietnam War. With the cold war ended,
Washington these days is far less concerned with domino theory than with
deregulation and open markets, and that often means involving itself in a
trading partner's economic and social policy.

So on Sunday, a day after signing the accord formally establishing diplomatic
ties, Mr. Christopher was already beginning to lecture his hosts that nothing
short of radical change in their domestic economy is needed to prosper in trade
with the United States. "I would ask you to look at economic reform as a passage
over a ravine," he said. "You cannot do it by taking several little steps; only
one giant leap will get you across."

A senior Administration official involved in Asian policy said here the other
day: "The hard part of the relationship is just beginning. I think the
Vietnamese had a lot of expectations that after the political relationship was
established, the floodgates would open. The reality is that it's going to be
slow going, and we're concerned that their very high expectations could turn
into a very negative reaction."

Vietnamese officials are already chafing that after an initial burst of
enthusiasm, American companies, which have been permitted to invest here since
February 1994, have only trickled in. To step up the pressure, they have begun
conspicuously awarding contracts to non-American bidders, and the Vietnamese
Communist Party chief, Do Muoi, just returned from a tour of Australia and New
Zealand, which are actively seeking a slice of the market here.

The old Hanoi, a dour place that once seemed to lack the energy that marked Ho
Chi Minh City, has been vanquished. A visitor here five years ago had a hard
time finding anything open past the dinner hour. But this weekend, the streets
were still jammed at 11 P.M. Small stores were selling compact disks and audio
tapes -- almost all of them pirated copies, some being copied in clear view on
hundreds of whirring tape decks -- along with Samsung microwave ovens and Sony
televisions.

Five years ago, bicycles ruled the roads of Hanoi, making the Vietnamese capital
one of the handful of Southeast Asian cities spared, chiefly by poverty, the
choking pollution and unrelenting development that has overtaken places like
Bangkok and Kuala Lumpur. The streets are now noisily alive with the roar of the
Honda "Dream," a motor scooter that has become so popular on the streets here
that it is almost a cliche.

"It's quite a snappy model," observed Mr. Christopher, not a man ordinarily
known to enthuse about such things, after a tour of the city.

But Vietnamese officials understand that what they need is foreign investment,
not imports. So while Mr. Christopher was raising flags and talking to college
students over the weekend, the State Department's top economic official, Joan
Spero, was holed up with Vietnam's powerful Chairman of State Planning, Do Quoc
Sam, offering a quick rundown of how a country like Vietnam gets a credit rating
and what it must do to meet Congressional requirements for preferential trade
status.

"At one point he looked up from his pad and asked me, 'What about human rights?'
" Ms. Spero recalled of her meeting with Mr. Sam. "He took a lot of notes -- no
reaction, just copious notes."

Vietnamese officials are clearly eager to please on the regulatory requirements:
Tax and investment laws are already being issued here so fast that no one seems
quite certain what they say. Privatization of state industries is a far more
complicated issue, because much of the political control over the country is
based on the state ownership of factories, land and agricultural products. So
instead of "privatization," Government officials here are using another term,
"equitization." It suggests that they will sell some equity in the state
industries, but retain majority control.

What Vietnam lacks today is the presence of anyone in the higher reaches of its
Government with a working knowledge of international commerce. "We have been
isolated for so long," a senior official of the Foreign Ministry said, "that we
don't even have economists."

Vietnam's other problem is likely to be the Republican-controlled Congress in
Washington. Getting a trade treaty passed -- the first step before any other
significant agreements can be negotiated -- and securing most-favored-nation
status for Vietnam will require Congressional approval.

Already, human rights advocates and others who say the Clinton Administration
has played down Hanoi's continued repression of dissidents have begun pressing
for inserting human rights requirements on any accord with Vietnam. Some in the
House, in early votes on the Federal budget, have sought to deny funds to
operate the United States Embassy in Hanoi, and Administration officials fear
that it could take months to win confirmation of an American Ambassador to
Vietnam.

Over the weekend, Mr. Christopher announced that he would appoint a longtime
Asia hand in the State Department, Desaix Anderson, to act as charge d'affaires.
Mr. Anderson, one of the department's leading Japan experts, speaks Vietnamese
and was stationed in South Vietnam as an adviser at the height of the war. He
later became the director of Vietnam, Laos and Cambodian affairs in Washington.

LOAD-DATE: August 9, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: News Analysis

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              154 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 9, 1995, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Hugh Borton, 92, Expert on Japan and Ex-College President, Dies

BYLINE: By ERIC PACE

SECTION: Section D;  Page 19;  Column 3;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 537 words


Hugh Borton, an authority on Japan who became president of Haverford College
after heading Columbia University's East Asian Institute, died on Sunday at his
home in Conway, Mass. He was 92.

Dr. Borton was in the State Department from 1942 to 1948 and was chief of its
Japanese affairs division and special assistant to the director of Far Eastern
Affairs in charge of preparations for the peace treaty with Japan.

He was a senior research associate at Columbia's East Asian Institute from 1967
until 1991, after heading Haverford -- in Haverford, Pa. -- from 1957 to 1967,
when he retired from that post.

His writings during those last years at Columbia included a second, 1970 edition
of his 1955 history of Japan's transformation into a modern, industrialized
world power, "Japan's Modern Century."

Also in 1970, Dr. Borton addressed a gathering of 300 Asia scholars in
Washington and contended that the United States intervention in Vietnam
resembled Japan's disastrous attempt to achieve a political solution by military
means on the Asian mainland before World War II.

He began his immersion in Japanese history at a seminar in Tokyo in the winter
of 1928-29. Years later he wrote, "Having decided to enter a new field of study
and set for myself a high standard of intellectual and personal integrity, I was
fortunate to have done so when my special knowledge was useful both for the
academic world and for our Government in determining its postwar policies toward
Japan."

After studying at the Imperial University in Tokyo from 1931 to 1937, he
received a doctorate in Japanese history from the University of Leiden in the
Netherlands in 1937. He was on the Columbia faculty from 1937 to 1957, with time
out for his State Department duty.

In the 1950's, he edited a book of essays, "Japan" (1951), which was praised in
The New York Times Book Review as "outstanding" and containing "gems of
writing." He was a co-author of "The Far East, 1942-46" (1955) and "Japan
Between East and West" (1957). In addition, he rose to be a full professor of
Japanese and, from 1954 to 1957, the East Asian Institute's director.

As Haverford's president, he oversaw the raising of tuition, in 1958, to $1,000
from $850. Also, in a 1958 speech to a conference in New York on secondary
schools, he warned against overspecialization in science and mathematics there.

In addition, he spoke out against an antisubversion provision of the National
Defense Education Act of 1958. The provision required students seeking loans to
dislaim, by affadavit, belief in or support of groups advocating the overthrow
of the Government by force. And in 1967 he warned Haverford students that they
faced suspension if found illegally using drugs.

Dr. Borton was born in Moorestown, N.J., graduated from Haverford in 1926 and
received an M.A. in history from Columbia in 1932. He was awarded several
honorary degrees and was decorated by the postwar Japanese Government.

He is survived by his wife of 68 years, Elizabeth Wilbur Borton; a son, Anthony,
and a daughter, Anne Carter-Borton, both of Conway; a brother, John Carter
Borton and a sister, Faith Weston, both of Kennett Square, Pa.; two
grandchildren and a great-grandson.

NAME: Hugh Borton

LOAD-DATE: August 9, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              155 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 9, 1995, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Journey to Hanoi

SECTION: Section A;  Page 18;  Column 1;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 466 words


Twenty years after the fall of Saigon and one month after President Clinton
established diplomatic relations with Hanoi, Secretary of State Warren
Christopher's visit to Vietnam last weekend was an important step in the painful
process of reconciliation. Mr. Christopher set just the right tone on a journey
he said he had long hoped to make.

There would normally be nothing unusual about a Secretary of State visiting the
capital of an East Asian country of 70 million people that eagerly courted
American investment and was a leading military power in a region made nervous by
recent Chinese belligerence. In this case, no United States Secretary of State
had ever gone to Hanoi before.

The President's decision to open an American Embassy in Hanoi, which was the
formal occasion for Mr. Christopher's trip, serves national interests and was
long overdue. But it remains opposed by some Republicans in Congress, who now
stubbornly threaten to withhold funds for operating the new embassy.

Veterans' groups worry that Washington may slacken its efforts to learn more
about Americans missing in action since the Vietnam War. Human rights groups are
nervous that the Administration is getting too cozy with one of the world's few
remaining Communist police states.

Mr. Christopher used his principal public speech in Vietnam to address these
legitimate concerns. He reminded his audience of young Vietnamese foreign
service trainees that determining the fate of missing Americans remains
Washington's primary concern with Hanoi and that continued progress on this
issue will be the key to a closer relationship.

On human rights, he insisted on a formal government-to-government dialogue, and
appealed positively to Vietnamese self-interest, pointing out that economic
growth is usually smoothest when accompanied by the rule of law and creative
freedom. Directly addressing the young Vietnamese before him, he defined
America's ideal of freedom and human rights with simple eloquence. "Each of
you," he said, "ought to have the right to help shape your country's destiny, as
well as your own."

In separate meetings with government officials, his aides pointedly noted that
many of the special economic benefits Vietnam seeks from the United States,
including preferential trade status and subsidized loans, depend by law on human
rights performance.

Hanoi's culture of political repression is deeply entrenched. Foreign companies
have found their activities plagued by bureaucracy, copyright piracy and an
unreliable legal system. For these and other reasons, diplomatic and economic
relations between America and Vietnam are unlikely to progress as rapidly or
smoothly as Vietnamese authorities hope. But Mr. Christopher has gotten them off
to a sound and principled start.

LOAD-DATE: August 9, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              156 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 9, 1995, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

AT WORK WITH: The Art Guys;
In Performance: Life Imitates Art Imitating Life

BYLINE: By SAM HOWE VERHOVEK

SECTION: Section C;  Page 1;  Column 1;  Living Desk

LENGTH: 1381 words

DATELINE: HOUSTON


MEET the Art Guys. Here in Houston, it's impossible not to.

There they were one recent day, working as clerks for 24 hours straight at the
Stop N Go convenience store in Houston's museum district. They sold lottery
tickets. They asked for patience when a customer couldn't get the gas pump to
work and neither could they. "Hey, we're new at this," said Michael Galbreth, an
Art Guy. They mopped the floor.

And they called it art.

The Art Guys are part Dada, part David Letterman, pushing the concept of
performance art to the outer limits. Or maybe they're a cross between John Cage
and the Smothers Brothers. Whatever. "That's the beginning and the end of the
argument 'Is it art?' " said Jack A. Massing, the other Art Guy. "Well, yeah, it
is -- because I'm an artist and I made it. So it is."

Groups from the National Endowment for the Arts to the Shell Oil Company
Foundation seem to agree: last spring they supported "The Art Guys: Think
Twice," a retrospective exhibition of the Guys' 13-year collaboration, at the
Contemporary Arts Museum in Houston.

In the exhibition's catalogue, Lynn M. Herbert, the museum's associate curator,
placed the Art Guys "within a continuum larger than just art history": the
history of jesters or fools.

"Historically, fools were employed by a royal court or a household," Ms. Herbert
wrote. "Their role was to provide their masters with humorous entertainment,
which more often than not commented upon the politics and social mores of the
day. The tradition lives on today; fools have simply been modernized to adapt to
changing times."

The Art Guys' 24-hour shtick is not new. They once commemorated the winter
solstice by spending the entire day in a booth at a Denny's restaurant just off
Interstate 10 here, sipping coffee and eating scrambled eggs.

"This is definitely dining, and that was our intent," Mr. Galbreth deadpanned
before a news camera crew, one of several news organizations that, as often
happens with the Art Guys, showed up to cover their event.

"This isn't performance," Mr. Massing said. "This is behavior."

Back in the studio, the news anchor said during a news broadcast that the whole
thing reminded him of an Off Broadway play he saw, one that basically involved
watching a typical family just carry out their lives on the stage.

"That was it," the anchor said to a colleague. "They were just there, living,
and you went and watched them. It was the only play I could get tickets to."

Mr. Massing, 36, said the anchor's comment was actually "quite brilliant" -- Mr.
Galbreth, 39, called it "sophisticated" -- because it went to the heart of what
the Art Guys are about. Anybody can get tickets to the Art Guys. Whether they
want them or not.

In a recent performance piece called "Art Guys Blow Through Town," the pair
moved through Houston with leaf blowers. To some, the work may have only
conjured up the essential absurdity of leaf blowers, which often seem to be used
to blow debris from one yard to another and back again.

Looked at another way, though, the act was a literal sweep through Houston's
ethnic mosaic: from the Hispanic East End to Chinatown and Little Vietnam, to
the largely black, largely poor Fourth Ward to very white, very wealthy white
River Oaks. And maybe the blower represented an artistic appeal for a little
more intermingling of much more than leaves.

The Art Guys held a book signing at the Brazos Bookstore, but because they have
never written a book, they signed other authors' books instead. In a piece
called "Driving Two Cars to Galveston," Mr. Massing did drive two cars 61 miles
to Galveston, driving one several hundred feet, then getting out, running back
to the other and driving that one several hundred feet, then returning to the
first car, and so on. It took a day and a half, and he sprained his foot.

The Art Guys do produce art that can be viewed in a museum -- elaborate
sculptures made from things like pennies and nonprescription drug capsules and
carrots and Pringles potato chips. Some of their work clearly borders on the
obsessive, like "1,000 Coats of Paint," a seven-month project in which they
painted a baseball, a toothbrush, a teddy bear, a computer keyboard and several
other objects 1,000 times each.

They are also pyromaniacs. For the opening of last spring's show at the
Contemporary Arts Museum, they assembled designs made up of thousands of wooden
matches glued to a gallery wall like dominoes arranged on a floor. Ann W.
Richards, the former Governor, lighted the first match while hundreds of
onlookers watched, many wondering aloud if the whole place was about to burn
down.

"Listen, children, don't do this," Ms. Richards warned the younger members of
her audience. "Don't do this. This is crazy. They are crazy." One by one, the
matches flared and then burned out, leaving singed designs on the wall. The
building survived. The Art Guys had done it before.

Still, they are best known for their performance art -- or, in many instances,
endurance art. Some of it is best explained verbatim from the catalogue
accompanying videos of their acts: "The Art Guys field sports questions from the
audience, then lie down on suspended boards wearing drum major hats. As their
heads collide, they crack a suspended egg that falls into a frying pan. A
television plays the Home Shopping Network as a soundtrack repeats the name Kiki
Vandeweghe" (a former professional basketball player).

It is possible, of course, that the Art Guys are more con artists than artists.
Texas Monthly magazine rather huffily dismissed them several years ago as
"shameless promoters of themselves and their creations, which makes them the
Home Shopping Network of the Texas art world." They even have a popular bumper
sticker: "Visualize the Art Gize."

But the Art Guys defend their work: It's accessible. It's democratic. "There's
been some sort of breakdown between the artist and society," said Mr. Galbreth,
a tall, lanky man with a shock of dark hair. He met Mr. Massing in 1982 while
they were studying with the sculptor James Surls at the University of Houston.

"It's easy to overintellectualize things" and to be obscure, Mr. Galbreth said,
"saying: 'Well, you don't understand me. You don't understand my work.' Whose
fault is that? I think it's possible to engage the intelligentsia but at the
same time not lose everybody else."

The Art Guys insist that the things they do, however absurd at first glance,
have a point. The day at Denny's, for instance, represented an attempt to
contrast a celebration of the solstice with the elaborate ceremonies of ancient
civilizations whose lives revolved around the harvest and intense knowledge of
the rhythms of nature. Or so said Mr. Galbreth.

"This is how we get our harvest today," Mr. Galbreth explained. "It comes right
to your table. It comes right to your table 24 hours a day, if you want it. It's
totally artificial."

Mr. Massing added: "Then the question becomes, why are we doing this? Why are we
building these restaurants, and why are we keeping them open 24 hours a day?
What's the deal?"

At the Stop N Go here, customers filed in and out all day. Some were impressed.
"Drawing, sketching -- that's not the only thing artists can do," said Larry
Green, an unemployed man who was scavenging for aluminum cans in the trash bins
as Mr. Galbreth came out to pump gas. "Maybe these guys are a new type of
artist."

Others were not impressed. "I just wanted to get some beer," said Oscar Gomez, a
carpenter, who bought a 12-pack of Miller Lite and a large bag of Lay's potato
chips from Mr. Massing. "That's not art."

In the catalogue, Ms. Herbert described the milieu of the Art Guys as "a fool's
paradise -- the nebulous and convoluted world of contemporary art."

"Amidst the hue and cry of 'My kid could do that!' and 'You call that art?,' who
better to jump into the fray than the Art Guys?" she added.

The Art Guys say their mission is not to send messages or make statements, but
to ask questions. "Our work is not didactic," Mr. Galbreth said. "We're in the
world with everybody else and we put ourselves in absurd situations, and they
open up intellectual doors. And once you really start investigating the issue of
absurdity, that gets very complex."


NAME: Michael Galbreth; Jack Massing

LOAD-DATE: August 9, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: The Art Guys, Michael Galbreth, left, and Jack A. Massing, as
viewed from the inside of a soft-drink dispenser at a Stop N Go store in
Houston. (F. Carter Smith for The New York Times) (pg. C1); Into facial hair:
Michael Galbreth, on the left, and Jack Massing in "Smashing Our Faces Together
to Make One Mustache From Two Half-Mustaches," part of the "Mustaches for
Seattle Project," a 1986 Art Guys opus.Art Guys Worldwide Photos) (pg. C7)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              157 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 9, 1995, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 976 words



International A3-9

SERBIAN REFUGEES TRAPPED

Thousands of Serbian refugees were trapped as they fled Croatia, caught in
fighting between a conquering Croatian army and fleeing Serbian rebel forces. A1


WELCOME LULL IN BIHAC

Since the outbreak of the war in Bosnia three years ago, Bihac has been
blockaded by Serbian forces. Now some relief has come. A1

U.S. OVERTURES ON BALKANS

President Clinton is dispatching emissaries to Europe to discuss new ideas for
diplomatic initiatives in the Balkans. A7

Some fear Croatia may now turn against Bosnia. A7

FORGING TIES WITH VIETNAM

News Analysis: As U.S. delegates discovered recently in Hanoi, it is hardly a
foregone conclusion that economic self-interest will now bind together
once-bitter enemies.  A3

NAGASAKI IN MEMORY

For centuries, storytellers have spun folk tales for younger generations, but
the ancient legends cannot match one man's tales of the atomic bombing of
Nagasaki.  A8

RUMBLINGS IN RWANDA

As the United Nations withdraws its peacekeepers from Rwanda, the country's
military is massing against what many fear may be a reprise of last year's civil
war.  A8

Protests of expanded Palestinian self-rule across Israel. A3

Extradition hearing for a Hamas leader wanted in Israel.  A5

Moscow Journal: To business risks in Russia, add poison. A4

National A12-16, A20

DELAY FOR WELFARE BILL

In a setback for Bob Dole, Senate Republican leaders said they could not finish
work on a bill making vast changes in welfare programs, and they decided to lay
aside the bill until after a summer recess.  A1

CLINTON ISSUES POLLUTION ORDER

The President issued an order to assure that companies doing business with the
Government will continue to comply with Federal disclosure requirements on
pollution -- rules Congress opposes.  A1

LOS ANGELES'S HEALTH CUTS

To save money, Los Angeles County's supervisors adopted a budget that envisioned
the closing of all 6 comprehensive health centers and all but 10 of the county's
39 community clinics.  A12

EX-REVOLUTIONARY ARRAIGNED

Jamil Abdullah Al-Amin, who was once known as the fiery revolutionary H. Rap
Brown, was arraigned on weapons possession and assault charges stemming from a
shooting in Atlanta.  A12

GAIN FOR BOMBING PROSECUTION

Timothy J. McVeigh's closest army buddy apparently will testify for the
prosecution about his knowledge of the preparations for the Oklahoma City
bombing.  A12

ACCOUNT OF WHITEWATER

An investigator told a House panel that officials in the Justice and Treasury
Departments, as well as in the Resolution Trust Corporation, sought to block her
as she pursued the Whitewater case.  A14

WHITEWATER FRUSTRATIONS

Capitol Sketchbook: Susan Thomases' unrelenting politeness and passivity drew
frustration from Whitewater questioners.  A14

CALL FOR PACKWOOD HEARINGS

Senator Barbara Boxer renewed her call for public hearings into accusations
against Senator Bob Packwood after new details about his association with a
17-year-old.  A14

A CANDIDATE'S INFLUENCE

Alan Keyes, who is seeking the Republican nomination for President, is usually
ranked last among his challengers. But his relentless focus on abortion and
moral issues has granted him an influence that exceeds his expected vote tally.
A16

SIMPSON WITNESS POSTPONED

Testimony in the O. J. Simpson trial stumbled as the long-anticipated face-off
between a Nobel Prize winning-chemist and a prosecutor was postponed.  A20

A second regional phone company settled with employees.  A16

Education A17

A Yale summer program pays students to serve in New Haven, Conn.

Metro Digest B1

DOCTOR CONVICTED OF MURDER

A Queens obstetrician was convicted of killing a woman who went to him for an
abortion, making him the first doctor in the state found guilty of murder
stemming from the medical mistreatment of a patient. A1

WELFARE CUTS AND THE RURAL POOR

During the vigorous push in Albany to tighten welfare rules, the debate focused
on reducing costs in big cities, but the Legislature may have created hurdles
far higher for rural people than for the urban poor. A1

Business Digest D1

Arts/Entertainment C9-14

CULTURAL HEAVY HITTERS

In any given year, New York art museums draw larger crowds than all New York
professional sports teams combined. The big museums have become a blend of
playground, cafe and fair.  A1

The 1995-96 New Wave Festival.  C9

Theater: "Present Laughter." C9

Film: "The Brothers McMullen." C9

Music: The Ramones.  C12

Books: Two police novels.  C14

Book Notes C14

Television: Critic's Notebook C14

The Living Section C1-7

At work with the Art Guys.  C1

Health Page C8

Personal Health: More and more help for erectile dysfunction.

Two new treatments for impotence in testing stage.

Sports B6-11

Baseball: Yankees batter Orioles.  B7

Mets beat Phillies.  B9

Basketball: N.B.A. and union announce agreement.  B7

Columns: Rhoden on the N.B.A. union B7

Football: Giants worried about Brown's sore elbow.  B7

Track: Ethiopian takes 10,000meter title.  B11

Obituaries D19-20

Hugh Borton, former president of Haverford College.  D19

Brigid Brophy, novelist, critic and essayist.  D20

David Begelman, quixotic former head of Columbia Pictures.  D20

Editorials/Op-Ed A18-19

Editorials

Don't tax the school kids.

Senator Dole's welfare defeat.

Journey to Hanoi.

Letters

Frank Rich: Who lost the arts?

Charles G. Boyd: America prolongs the war in Bosnia.

Geraldine Brooks: The condos are eating our history.

Chronicle B2

Crossword C14

LOAD-DATE: August 9, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              158 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 10, 1995, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 915 words



International A3-13

EVIDENCE OF SERB ATROCITY
The Clinton Administration said spy photographs showed an apparent mass grave
near Srebrenica, where thousands of Muslims are missing since Bosnian Serbs took
over the enclave last month.  A1

SERBS FLEE CROATIA
Thousands of defeated and visibly frightened Serbs streamed out of Croatia,
jeered by crowds of bitter Croats who lined the roads to witness the latest
chapter in the Balkans' ethnic division. A8

FORCED LABOR IN BRAZIL
Reports of forced labor have grown so numerous in Brazil that President Fernando
Henrique Cardoso has opened an investigation. A1

CORRUPTION IN CHINA
China's anti-corruption campaign is netting bigger fish than ever before, but
officials and Western businessmen say it indicates corruption's pervasiveness
rather than determination to stop graft. A3

SLOW DEATH IN LAOS
The bombs that the United States dropped over the vast, mountainous stretches of
Laos's border with Vietnam continue to kill and maim more than two decades
later.  A12

MEXICAN DONATIONS DEFENDED
Mexico's governing party acknowledged yesterday that the chairman of the
country's largest airline supported the party financially last year, but
insisted that the donations were all legal.  A9

A struggle for the soul of English rugby.  A6

Madrid Journal: Bird-watching at the city dump.  A4

National A14-17, B6-7

CLINTON TO MOVE ON TOBACCO
The President has decided to let the Food and Drug Administration declare
cigarettes a drug, thus making way for the most significant tobacco regulations
in the industry's history.  A1

A TURNING AWAY OF FRIENDS
Federal prosecutors building their case against Timothy J. McVeigh have turned
most of his friends into witnesses against him, possibly providing a much more
detailed account of what the Government portrays as a conspiracy.  A1

ONE HOT PROPERTY
Netscape Communications, an Internet software company, made a stunning debut,
jumping $30.25 a share to close at $58.25. The trading showed how the rush to
commercialize the Internet has created an investor frenzy. A1

A RISE IN THE NUMBER OF INMATES
In a comprehensive report on the scope of law-enforcement network, the
Government said the number of Americans under the control of the criminal
justice system reached five million last year.  A14

AIRPORT SECURITY TIGHTENED
Airports began stepping up security as the Government took steps to counter the
increased threat of terrorist attacks after the arrests in New York City of
Palestinians accused of terrorism.  A14

A SETBACK FOR SIMPSON TEAM
The judge in the O. J. Simpson case ruled that Mr. Simpson's lawyers had failed
to prove that a leak to news organizations was material to the case, and could
not either obtain a police report on the leak or ask two reporters about it.
A16

DIABETES GENE IS DISCOVERED
Scientists have discovered the first human gene associated with adult onset
diabetes, a disorder related to obesity.  A16

GAINS FOR TIMBER INTERESTS
The chairman of a Senate panel considering a measure to require logging in an
Alaska forest has stock in a timber business.  B6

MOVEMENT ON WELFARE BILL
Senator Bob Dole said he was picking up additional Republican support for his
bill to overhaul the nation's welfare system.  B6

MORE MONEY FOR THE ARTS
The Senate voted to raise the House allocation for the national endowments for
the arts and for the humanities by $11 million each.  B6

NUSSBAUM DEFENDS ACTIONS
Bernard W. Nussbaum, the former White House counsel, told the Senate Whitewater
committee that he had been duty-bound to prevent investigators from going
through Vincent W. Foster Jr.'s files.  B7

St. Michaels Journal: A town finally finds an official bell ringer.  A14

The Citadel asked the Supreme Court to bar a female cadet.  A17

Metro Digest B1

Business Digest D1

Obituaries B7-8

JERRY GARCIA IS DEAD
Jerry Garcia, the singer and guitarist who embodied the psychedelic benevolence
of the Grateful Dead for three decades, died in his sleep at a residental drug
treatment center in California. He was 53.  A1

Across the nation, Grateful Dead fans mourn.  B7

Frank Maya, comedian.  B8

Arts/Entertainment C11-18

U.N. exhibition in Geneva brings art and politics together.  C11
Changes at Santa Fe Opera.  C11
Hong Kong film festival.  C11
Theater: "Hunger and Lightning," by Kestutis Nakas. C12
Music: The Pop Life.  C14
Sabalon Glitz in concert.  C18
Books: Sue Hubbell goes beyond the bugs.  C16
The Home Section C1-10
Crumbling 'parkitecture.' C1
Toward a people's park. C6
Eudora Welty, still telling stories.  C1
Jerry Brown communing.  C1

Sports B9-14

Baseball: Oriole left-hander stymies Yankees.  B9
Mantle takes turn for worse.  B9
Mets shut out Phillies.  B11
Columns: Araton on Mantle B9
Football: A slow start for Wheatley at Giants camp.  B9
Jets' Barber fights for job.  B14
Track: Michael Johnson wins 400-meter race.  B9

Editorials/Op-Ed A18-19

Editorials

The casualties of Chechnya.
Mr. Gingrich's broken promise.
Leaving children with abusers.

Letters

Maureen Dowd: The two Mrs. Clintons.
Lisa Schiffren: Penalize the unwed dad? Fat chance.
Joel Millman: The city subsidy we don't need.

Chronicle D20

Bridge C16

Crossword C16

LOAD-DATE: August 10, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              159 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 10, 1995, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Decades-Old U.S. Bombs Still Killing Laotians

BYLINE: By HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Section A;  Page 12;  Column 1;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 905 words

DATELINE: MUANG PHONSAVAN, Laos


The bombs that the United States Air Force dropped in profusion over the vast,
mountainous stretches of this country that adjoin Vietnam are continuing to kill
and maim Laotians more than two decades later.

Scattered all over eastern Laos are unexploded cluster bombs. Smaller than
tennis balls, they are tempting as playthings to children who find them on or
just below the surface -- in schoolyards, vegetable patches or paddy fields, or
on the dirt tracks of this underdeveloped country. They are taking a belated
toll of those not even born when they were dropped.

Most of the Ho Chi Minh Trail, over which North Vietnam ferried men and arms to
make war in the South, ran through the jungled mountains on the long border
between Laos and Vietnam.

In an effort to "interdict" the trail and to protect the towns of Laos from
Vietnamese and Laotian Communist troops, the United States, without owning up to
making war in a nominally neutral country, dropped more than two million tons of
bombs of various types on Laos from 1964 to 1973.

The problem is greater here than in Vietnam and Cambodia because the United
States bombed Laos with undiminished intensity from 1964 until 1973 and used
cluster bombs in greater numbers.

The two other countries were bombed for shorter periods, but leftover ordnance
continues to take a toll there as well. Vietnam does its own clearance; an
international effort in Cambodia concentrates on the removal of mines.

At the end of the American bombing, not a building remained standing in
Xianghoang Province, said Gov. Phoumi Thiphavone, who lived through it. Most of
the population took refuge in areas under Government control, and those who
sided with the Communists lived in caves, tilling their fields after dark.

Besides the great quantities of cluster bombs that failed to explode, artillery
and mortar duds of the North Vietnamese, Laotian and Thai forces, which fought
an ever-shifting, small-scale ground war in Laos, still clutter this country's
soil.

The cluster bombs are the principal killers, and the first detailed study of the
unceasing wave of accidents found that 42 percent of the victims were children.

So familiar has this menace become over the years that Laotians habitually refer
to the small bombs, which on explosion spread a deadly shower of more than 100
steel ball bearings, by the jocular diminutive of "bombi," making them sound
almost like toys.

A swarm of children watched excitedly recently as Steven Wilson, a lanky former
British ordnance sergeant, supervised the demolition of the last of seven small
bombs that he and Graham Pritchard, another British veteran, had found scattered
over a small sandlot in the center of this ramshackle provincial capital of
30,000 people, rebuilt from scratch after the war.

Using a mine detector, the two Britons and the Laotian team they are training
found the cluster bombs dispersed no more than two inches below the surface in
an open field surrounding a one-story wooden grade school.

"The children play here before and after school," Mr. Wilson said. At the side
of the lot stands Phonsavan's only movie theater.

After shooing the children to safety, Mr. Wilson handed his Laotian assistant
the keys to the device that would transmit the spark to set off the dynamite
that he had placed on top of the bomb. The bang and the rising column of smoke
set the children laughing gleefully.

The two ordnance specialists work for the Mines Advisory Group, a British
organization. With the American Mennonite Central Committee, the group has been
conducting a survey since last year of casualties from unexploded bombs and
shells in one of the seven districts of Xianghoang. The province, whose center
is the Plain of Jars, a constant battlefield of the ground war in Laos, was one
of the most heavily bombed regions.

From the air it is apparent that even lush tropical growth needs more than 22
years to cover over the multitude of bomb craters, and nothing can put back
together the smashed ancient stone jars, which give the plateau its name.

In the single district of Muang Pek, the investigators gathered reports of 598
accidents since the end of the bombing, among a population of 36,500. Of those,
337 were fatal.

In addition, the Mines Advisory Group recorded 30 victims of ordnance accidents
in this province from January to March of this year.

But communications in this thinly populated country are among the most primitive
in the world. Many deaths or injuries never come to the attention of a medical
system that rarely reaches beyond the limits of a handful of towns and are never
reported to any authority.

The United Nations and the Laotian Government estimate that about half the
national territory may contain unexploded ordnance, a serious deterrent to
farming in a country short of food.

After decades of relative international inattention, a United Nations initiative
led last May to a Laotian-United Nations proposal to create a Trust Fund for the
Clearance of Unexploded Ordnance, which is appealing for contributions. Much
attention is focused on whether the United States will accept special
responsibility for helping to solve a problem for which it is largely
responsible.

An American diplomat said Washington had offered last year to send a Defense
Department survey team as a preliminary to deciding on an American contribution
but had found Laos unresponsive.

LOAD-DATE: August 10, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Map shows the location of Muang Phonsavan, Laos.

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              160 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 12, 1995, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Clinton's Balkan Envoy Finds Himself Shut Out

BYLINE: By TIM WEINER

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 5;  Column 1;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 832 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 11


As top Clinton Administration officials travel through Europe this week trying
to fashion a peace plan for the Balkans, Richard Holbrooke, the State
Department's point man for Bosnia, is strolling in the Rockies.

The voice of Mr. Holbrooke, the Assistant Secretary of State for Europe, has
been muted lately in the high councils of state. That is in part because he has
at once spoken for the Administration's policies in Bosnia and against them: he
has publicly supported some of the positions he has privately savaged.

Mr. Holbrooke has said repeatedly that he considers Bosnia "the greatest
collective failure of the West since the 1930's." Now he says he is trying "to
fashion a policy out of the debris that surrounds us." But he has not done so.
His bosses have judged him, as one of them put it, "a brilliant mind, but very,
very high maintenance."

The diplomat voiced his frustration in a recent interview.

He says he is flailing against "a gigantic stalemate machine" that produces
"watered-down policy," a decision-making apparatus run by people incapable of
making decisions, where "bureaucrats of every stripe have their say."

One result, he complains, is a bleating cacophony instead of one voice, creating
policies that contain many points of view but no point.

Because of such negative critiques of American policy, Mr. Holbrooke's role has
diminished. While the national security adviser, Anthony Lake, and the
Undersecretary of State, Peter Tarnoff, toured Europe this week to seek peace in
the Balkans, Mr. Holbrooke was vacationing in Telluride, Colo. Should Mr. Lake
and Mr. Tarnoff succeed, Mr. Holbrooke may be called on to sell the policy to
the warring parties.

In May he was in Budapest, preparing for his wedding in the United States
Ambassador's residence to the writer Kati Marton.

That was the week the Bosnian Serbs took 400 United Nations peacekeepers
hostage. Mr. Holbrooke picked up a secure telephone line to the State Department
and spoke bluntly to his fellow policymakers: Tell the Serbs to free the
hostages in 48 hours or we will bomb the daylights out them, he urged. For good
measure, send them a videotape of Baghdad after the gulf war.

No one took him seriously. One Administration official said the tirade "had kind
of a 'for my memoirs' quality to it." Nothing happened. And that left Mr.
Holbrooke having to support (and denounce) the latest policy ricochet.

Some people regard Mr. Holbrooke as too highly skilled at playing both ends
against the middle.

Marshall Harris, a Bosnia desk officer at the State Department who resigned in
protest in August 1993 and is now executive director of the Action Council for
Peace in the Balkans, praises Mr. Holbrooke for his words but questions their
meaning.

"For all of the tough talk and his accurately defining the problem and the
stakes in Bosnia, is he putting pressure on the Administration to actually adopt
a stronger policy?" Mr. Harris said. "I think the answer is no. The tough talk
is an attempt to defuse pressure on the Administration by meeting its critics
halfway."

In recent weeks, Mr. Holbrooke has gravitated away from Washington and toward
New York, where his wife lives and where he says his future lies. Once a
million-dollar-a-year man on Wall Street, Mr. Holbrooke complains jokingly to
friends that he is losing $10,000 a day as a public servant. He is contemplating
a return to Wall Street.

"I think he wants to leave," said a friend of Mr. Holbrooke at one Wall Street
firm.

Mr. Holbrooke says he has told his superiors all along that he did not plan to
stay through 1996; the failures of diplomacy in the Balkans may have hastened
his plans.

Mr. Holbrooke has seen American foreign policy fail before. More than 30 years
ago, he was a junior State Department officer in Vietnam (as were Mr. Lake and
Mr. Tarnoff). All served turns as special assistant to the United States
Ambassador; all were considered golden boys.

Barry Zorthian, the Pentagon's principal spokesman in Saigon then, remembers Mr.
Holbrooke as "very abrasive, very cocksure."

"I happen to be a friend of his, but there are people he rubs the wrong way,"
Mr. Zorthian said. Other friends agree that Mr. Holbrooke is both blessed with a
certain brilliance and cursed by the conviction that he is the smartest person
in the room.

At 35, Mr. Holbrooke fulfilled expectations when he became Assistant Secretary
of State for East Asian and Pacific affairs -- one of the youngest men to rise
that high in the State Department. But when the Carter Administration ended, he
faced a long exile from diplomacy.

Now, at 53, he finds himself once again an Assistant Secretary of State --
older, wiser, but unable to solve the problem of Bosnia.

"What did we learn in Vietnam?" Mr. Holbrooke asks rhetorically. "The only
unambiguous lesson is this: if the national interest is engaged, you must
succeed."

He pauses. "You can see how brilliantly we've applied that lesson in Bosnia."

LOAD-DATE: August 12, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Richard Holbrooke testifying in July about Bosnia on Capitol
Hill. (Karin Anderson for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              161 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 12, 1995, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Romuald Spasowski, 74, Dies; Polish Envoy Defected to U.S.

BYLINE: By DAVID BINDER

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 10;  Column 1;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 580 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 11


F. Romuald Spasowski, once an ardent Polish Communist and Poland's Ambassador in
Washington who then defected dramatically at the height of the Solidarity crisis
in 1981, died on Wednesday at his home in suburban Oakton, Va. He was 74.

The cause of death was cancer, his family said.

A diplomat for 37 years, Mr. Spasowski was serving his second term as Ambassador
in Washington when he made his break. He had also been Ambassador to India and a
Deputy Foreign Minister.

On the afternoon of Dec. 19, 1981, six days after the Communist Government
imposed martial law to quell a year-old rebellion spread by the Solidarity union
movement, Mr. Spasowski telephoned the State Department to announce his move.

The next day, with the blessing of the Reagan Administration, he said in a
statement broadcast around the world that he had defected to show support for
Solidarity and its arrested leader, Lech Walesa.

"The cruel night of darkness and silence was spread over my country," he said of
martial law.

Soon afterward, the Reagan Administration granted him asylum.

Mr. Spasowski toured the United States denouncing Warsaw and played a leading
role in the United States Information Agency's anti-Communist television
program, "Let Poland Be Poland." In Poland, he was branded a traitor and
condemned to death; his family property was confiscated and never returned.

After Solidarity won power in Poland in 1989, his sentence was revoked. Two
years ago, President Lech Walesa restored his Polish citizenship. But the new
Polish authorities never acknowledged Mr. Spasowski's rebellion against the
Communists. He died an American citizen.

In 1986 he published his autobiography, "The Liberation of One," which recounted
not only his gravitation toward Communism as a student but also his long journey
to Catholicism, the faith of his wife, the former Wanda Alina Sikorski (a cousin
of Poland's former Prime Minister, Gen. Wladyslaw Sikorski). Mr. Spasowski was
baptized a Catholic in 1985.

Francis Romuald Spasowski was born Aug. 21, 1920 in Warsaw. His father,
Wladyslaw, was a Communist intellectual whose treatise, "The Liberation of Man,"
was an important political manifesto. He and his father were arrested several
times by the Gestapo after the Nazi invasion and occupation in 1939. His father
committed suicide in 1941.

During the later years of the war, he hid in his mother's home in Milanowek,
where the Spasowskis harbored several Jewish families. For this, Israel honored
his mother after the war.

As Ambassador to the United States in the late 1950's, Mr. Spasowski held to
this legacy, publicly noting Poland's own history of anti-Semitism. In a speech
in Manhattan marking the 14th anniversary of the Warsaw ghetto uprising of 1944,
he said, "I will not say to you here that in Poland anti-Semitism has been
eliminated."

After Poland was liberated by Soviet armies in 1945, Mr. Spasowski joined the
Communist Party. He was a member of the Polish War Crimes Mission at the trials
of leading Nazis in Nuremberg, then started his career in diplomacy, serving in
Britain and Argentina before coming to Washington as Ambassador. In 1964 he
represented Poland in divided Vietnam as a member of the International
Commission for Supervision and Control, which was established to mediate peace
between Hanoi and Saigon.

He is survived by his wife, of Oakton, and a daughter, Maria Grochulski, of
Warsaw. A son, Wladyslaw, died in India in 1970.

NAME: F. Romuald Spasowski

LOAD-DATE: August 12, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: F. Romuald Spasowski (United Press International, 1981)

TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              162 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 12, 1995, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Business Digest

SECTION: Section 1; Page 33; Column 1; Business/Financial Desk

LENGTH: 702 words



Bond Prices Slump As Economy Picks Up
Treasury securities fell in price as new Government reports indicated that the
economy was somewhat stronger than thought. Market participants said the reports
did not bode well for another interest rate cut. The new 30-year bond lost more
than a full percentage point in price, bringing the yield to 6.970 percent, up
from 6.906 percent on Thursday. The market ignored the dollar's new strength,
and focused on a big supply of bonds that dragged prices lower. [36.]
Stocks were rocked by the bond market selloff, which undercut favorable economic
reports. The Dow industrials fell 25.36 points, to 4,618.30 -- that was 65.16
points for the week -- but the S.& P. 500-stock index fell less sharply, and
technology stocks rose. [37.]

Corn and wheat prices rose on expectations that foreign buyers would snap up
larger American corps. [32.]

A Partner for Westinghouse?
Harcourt General held talks with Westinghouse about joining its $5.4 billion bid
to buy CBS, several people familiar with the discussions said. Harcourt General,
parent of the retailer Neiman-Marcus, did not proceed very far in the talks, but
the fact talks were held indicates that Westinghouse would consider a partner.
Harcourt weighed an approach to CBS last year, various people said, but is
unlikely to join in this time, partly because of the deal's high price. [35.]

City May Privatize Jails
New York City asked for proposals to privatize all or part of the city's jails.
When it is clear how much interest private companies show, the city will decide
how to proceed. The city spends almost $750 million a year to run the jail
system. [1.]

Tobacco Farmers Fight Back
Tobacco farmers denounced President Clinton's call for regulations to reduce
teen-age smoking. A cooperative in North Carolina representing 180,000 growers
in five states joined the nation's five largest tobacco companies in suing to
block the plan, that would give the F.D.A. the authority to regulate the sale,
distribution and promotion of cigarettes. Farmers said that state laws already
barred the sale of cigarettes to minors, and that the Government should not
influence a teenager's decision on whether to smoke. The regulations proposed by
Mr. Clinton were based on the F.D.A.'s finding that nicotine is an addictive
drug and thus subject to the agency's control. [1.]

Morgan Stanley Jumps Into China
Morgan Stanley began China's first international investment bank with a Chinese
company and other partners from Hong Kong and Singapore. The investment is
expected to give Morgan Stanley an advantage over its competitors in winning
deals involving project financing, direct investment and equity and bond
offerings at a time when China needs to finance enormous infrastructure
projects. The new firm has a capitalization of $100 million and is headquartered
in Beijing. Ten Morgan executives will be based there, giving Morgan the largest
presence in Beijing of any American investment bank. [34.]

A Capitalist Farm Thrives in Vietnam
A capitalist showcase is blossoming on a farm in Vietnam. A Dutch farmer
recruited by a British entrepreneur is cultivating 75 acres of vegetables and
flowers in the highland area. Vegetables are being shipped out almost daily,
mostly for export to upscale restaurants in Hong Kong, Taiwan, Singapore and
Japan. The company is the first wholly foreign-owned agricultural and
horticultural investment in Vietnam. One attraction is that costs are lower than
elsewhere in Asia. The farm is headed toward its first year of profit. [34.]

S.E.C. Internet Service May End
A service offering free Internet access to S.E.C. filings will be discontinued
on Oct. 1. Executives said they hoped the Federal Government would take over the
service, known as Edgar. [35.]

In Recycling, New York City Pays
While suburban areas around New York make money by selling recycled metal, glass
and plastic -- Oyster Bay, L.I., gets $25 a ton and Mercer County, N.J. $9.50 a
ton -- New York City pays recycling operators $40 to $50 a ton to take away such
material. City sanitation officials call it "a fair deal." [23.]

LOAD-DATE: August 12, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              163 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 12, 1995, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS;
In Vietnam, A Venture Has Begun To Flower

BYLINE: By EDWARD A. GARGAN

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 34;  Column 1;  Business/Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1160 words

DATELINE: DALAT, Vietnam


Against a wool-gray sky, Rolf Bischoff Tulleken stood in the mud, grumbling
about the cabbages that marched away from him in strict, orderly ranks.

Around him, 75 acres of vegetables and flowers, some never grown in this cool,
highland area, stretched into the distance: undulating rows of lettuce,
broccoli, green beans, parsley, peas and radishes. Eight greenhouses stood in
one corner, bursting with lilies, carnations and tulips.

But Mr. Tulleken, 26, a Dutch farmer recruited by a British entrepreneur to help
turn around a bankrupt Vietnamese farm, was uninterested in the scenery. He was
too busy making sure that only the best cabbages made the cut for export. "It's
not uniform," he complained, flicking at the dark green leaves of one head.
"This is going to have to go to the local market."

Three years ago, Vietnam was creeping out of the cocoon of its socialist economy
and the farm's managers were wondering what to do with their clunky money-losing
operation in the south of Vietnam. And then along came a white knight, a British
businessman named Charles Target.

Mr. Target, 38, started Bio-Organics Vietnam Ltd. It is the first wholly
foreign-owned agricultural and horticultural investment in Vietnam and the core
of a Hong Kong investment company, Bowen Finance Ltd., that he founded with his
wife, Lisa Stewart, 37, who runs the company's fund management business.

While the Mobil Corporation, the Coca-Cola Company and other multinationals have
arrived with fanfare in Vietnam, they represent only a fraction of the foreign
investment.

Most of the 1,100 foreign ventures in Vietnam today are small undertakings, like
the Target-Stewart farm, that make and export everything from chopsticks to
coconut oil.

For Mr. Target, Vietnam offered a foothold in Asia at a fraction of the cost and
bureaucratic hassle of doing business in China or other Southeast Asian nations.
"In Vietnam, for a couple hundred thousand dollars, you can get a project," he
said.

And, with Mr. Tulleken's help, Mr. Target transformed the farm into a capitalist
showcase.

It was not all smooth sailing. A sudden switch in Vietnam Government regulations
doubled trucking costs, for example. And when Mr. Target tried to buy more land,
the town's governing People's Committee suddenly changed its asking price.

Despite such problems, the farm is running smoothly now and heading toward its
first year of profit, possibly this year. Vegetables are being shipped out
almost daily, mostly for export to upscale restaurants in Hong Kong, Taiwan,
Singapore and Japan. The farm's flower operation has also blossomed.

Yet Mr. Target knew very little about agriculture when he came to Hong Kong in
1991 and set up his investment company. But as a former venture capitalist in
London, he knew a lot about finding angles.

Serendipity played a role. Mr. Target's mother-in-law, Barbara Stewart, who
publishes a newsletter about the United Nations in New York, put him in touch
with someone who knew something about highland farming in Dalat. Mr. Target was
unimpressed with the contact but bowled over by the town.

He had never been to Vietnam and did not know what could be done there. But, Mr.
Target said, extensive knowledge of an industry isn't crucial to making an
investment decision. What really counts is seizing an unusual opportunity before
anybody else. In this case, the opportunity was Dalat's unique climate.

"In the end you have to find somebody who has a deal," he said. "Dalat is bliss
on a stick -- cool, sunny, just a wonderful place to grow vegetables. There are
very few places in Asia where you can grow high-end vegetables."

The farm collective he found here was unable to pay its bills or to raise money
to improve or expand its operations. Sensing a turnaround opportunity, Mr.
Target went shopping in the international fund-management network he and his
wife had worked with in London.

With money from Notz Stucki & Company, a Swiss money-management firm, and from
investors in Hong Kong, Mr. Target easily negotiated a 35-year lease for the
farm with the town's People's Committee. "They were keen to get off their land,"
he said.

Through a Dutch banker friend, he found Mr. Tulleken, 26, to run his new spread.
Mr. Target also imported tractors, built a cold-storage facility and a packaging
warehouse and hired a Vietnamese agricultural scientist, who had studied
artichokes in France for four years, to test and develop new varieties of
agricultural products.

"Until the end of 1993," Mr. Tulleken said, "it was mostly testing. We've tried
over 200 varieties of broccoli, about 100 varieties of cabbage. We're testing
beans and lettuce. It takes a lot of time and a lot of money. It's not like a
factory where you press the button."

One of his triumphs was finding a broccoli variety that thrived here. "When I
first sold some on the local market, people said, 'Why did you spray your
cauliflower green?' But everyone loves it now."

Things haven't always gone so smoothly. In 1993, when it looked as if the first
crop was coming along nicely, Mr. Target invited his investors to Dalat. "They
were very excited to see little cabbage shoots out of the ground," he
remembered. "But what they didn't know was that it was the wrong kind of
cabbage. The whole crop was lost."

The Target-Stewarts expect revenue from their farm to double to $3 million next
year from $1.5 million this year. So far, $4.5 million has been pledged to the
project -- about $1 million of it their own money. The couple, who are expecting
their second child any day now, intend to invest perhaps $10 million more to
acquire a 3,700-acre farm from a nearby town's People's Committee. That farm was
established by Cubans at the height of socialist amity.

For all his successes, Mr. Target has had to grapple with setbacks. Not long
ago, the Government ordered truckers to clamp containers onto truck beds rather
than just chaining them, a rule that cut by more than half the number of
available trucks that met the qualifications in southern Vietnam. "Overnight
prices on container trucks almost doubled," he said.

He has also seen warning signs that fortunes can sour quickly in Vietnam. His
negotiations to acquire the second farm dragged on for a year and broke down at
one point over the town government's sudden demand for a lot more money, he
said. In the end, he agreed to make it a substantial minority partner.

Another uncertainty is the attitude of his investors. While he expects his new
farm to break even this year and make money next year, he doesn't know how soon
they will want a return on their investment.

While Mr. Target is upbeat about his short-term prospects, the relative who
steered him toward Dalat in the first place is now warning him about the
pitfalls of doing business in Vietnam. "My mother-in-law," he said, "says that
once we start making a lot of money, they will take it all away."

LOAD-DATE: August 12, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Its vegetable-growing business has made Bio-Organics Vietnam
Ltd. a capitalist showcase in the town of Dalat. Rolf Bischoff Tulleken inspects
cabbages destined for export to other Asian countries. (Edward A. Gargan/The New
York Times)

Map of Vietnam showing location fo Dalt.

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              164 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 12, 1995, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

N. M. Gerstenzang, A Times Editor, 87

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 10;  Column 2;  Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 194 words


Nathaniel M. Gerstenzang, a former assistant foreign editor of The New York
Times, died yesterday at Evanston Hospital in Illinois. He was 87 and had moved
to Wilmette, Ill., in November from Maplewood, N.J.

During his tenure, Mr. Gerstenzang helped oversee foreign coverage of two Middle
East wars, most of the Vietnam War, the 1956 Hungarian uprising and Premier
Nikita S. Khrushchev's tour of the United States in 1959, a first for a Soviet
leader.

Khrushchev touched down in Disneyland and Coon Rapids, Iowa, generating reams of
copy at every turn. For channeling the flow, Mr. Gerst enzang won a Polk
Memorial Award.

Mr. Gerstenzang started at The Times as a copy editor in the sports department
in 1934, became an assistant to the foreign editor in 1948 and the assistant
foreign editor in 1954. He retired in 1970.

Born in Brooklyn, he graduated from New York University and its law school.
While working his way through law school he covered sports for The Evening Post.

He is survived by his wife of 60 years, Miriam; a daughter, Nina Chaitin of
Glencoe, Ill.; a son, James of Bethesda, Md.; six grandchildren, and a
great-granddaughter.

LOAD-DATE: August 12, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


This document could not be formatted for delivery. If your delivery request
included other documents, they completed successfully.

                              166 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 13, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

ART;
Power And the Folly, Frozen in Time

BYLINE: By TODD S. PURDUM

SECTION: Section 2;  Page 28;  Column 1;  Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1178 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


THEY HAD FACES THEN.

Calvin Coolidge's pickle lips. Alfred E. Smith's guffaw. Fiorello H. LaGuardia's
smiling scowl. Harry S. Truman's high-beam grin. They are the public
countenances of the mid-20th century, the time when advances in photographic
reproduction and a journalistic access to politicians unthinkably intimate by
modern standards combined to produce a priceless casual iconography.

These were the leaders of the Jazz Age, the Depression and the World War II,
and, not coincidentally, theirs are among the most vibrant and vital images in
"American Politicians," a civic family album of photographs from 1843 to 1993 on
display at the Corcoran Gallery of Art here through Sept. 4.

This retrospective stretches from the first photograph of an American President
-- a reverential daguerreotype of the retired John Quincy Adams -- to the
pallid, elaborately choreographed photo-ops of today. It traces the straight
line from Matthew Brady's myth-making portraits of the beardless Lincoln (Brady
pulled up the collar to shorten the Rail-Splitter's gangly neck) to Jacques
Lowe's myth-making portraits of the upturned chin of John F. Kennedy (with
children, parents and all those white, white teeth).

Through some 225 images, the show also charts the devolution of American leaders
from patriarchs of remote reserve, posed with books in hand as a sign of
erudition, to populist hurlers of baseballs and cuddlers of babies, to figures
of potential -- if not essential -- ludicrousness, as in Elliott Erwitt's 1958
triptych of Nelson Rockefeller holding court on an Albany street corner while a
dog first listens, then turns away, then relieves himself on a post.

But if the exhibition is a testament to the loss of innocence and the rise of
cynicism, it is also proof positive of how much has stayed the same in the
depiction of our politicians. The dour Michael S. Dukakis, his helmeted head
poking out of that dopey tank, is the lineal descendant of Silent Cal Coolidge,
who in the words of one caption "wears his rubbers" as he inspects a prop plane.

The photographs are leavened with a video sampler of campaign commercials from
Eisenhower ("The Man From Abilene") to Clinton ("I still believe in a place
called Hope") that also serves mostly to show how little has changed about the
marketing of candidates since the dawn of television, for all the current vogue
for computer graphics and soft-focus. The MTV generation has nothing on a 1968
ad for Richard Nixon, its silent, quick-cut scenes of chaos on the streets of
Chicago and carnage in Vietnam set to the clangorous soundtrack of "There'll Be
a Hot Time in the Old Town Tonight."

Susan Kismaric, curator in the photography department at the Museum of Modern
Art, where the show opened last year, writes in the accompanying catalogue that
her aim was not to illustrate the history of American politics but rather to
"attempt to trace how photography has pictured -- and helped transform -- the
American politician."

To that end, from an enormous range of possibilities, she chose pictures
representing significant stages in the development of photography, when
improvements in cameras, printing or wire transmission expanded photography's
reach and altered the popular image of politicians.

For example, Brady's sober 1860 portrait of a standing Lincoln was reproduced as
a line engraving, used on campaign posters and printed on thousands of cartes de
visite, for the first time giving the mass of voters a clear image of the man
they were electing. Lincoln himself attributed his election in part to the
portrait.

There is a big batch of pictures of Theodore Roosevelt because the development
of half-tone printing allowed reproduction of photographs in newspapers, while
his cousin, Franklin, reaped the benefits of the transmission of half-tones over
ordinary telephone lines beginning in the 1930's.

BY REFLECTING HISTORY AS IT has been, the show also reflects the lingering
whiteness, and maleness, of electoral politics. Blacks and women are not
unrepresented, but they are mostly unelected, like Frederick Douglass, the
suffragist Lucretia Mott and the young Martin Luther King Jr., whose perfect
preacher's suit is cruelly crumpled as he is manhandled across a police desk in
Montgomery, Ala., in 1958, his mouth open, his eyes wondering.

If the show is organized around technology, and thus chronology, its impact
remains visual and visceral. All the old favorites are here: T. R. piloting a
steam shovel at the Panama Canal; Coolidge in Indian war bonnet; F. D. R.
resplendent in Navy cape; Truman with the leggy Lauren Bacall draped atop an
upright piano; Adlai Stevenson's worn-through shoe; L. B. J.'s gall-bladder
scar; and J. F. K. silhouetted in the Oval Office in the haunting portrait that
George Tames, the longtime New York Times photographer in Washington, called
"The Loneliest Job in the World."

But it is the sleepers that are among the real delights, scores of images from
the years between the 19th century's Napoleonic poses and the sanitized,
security-conscious bubble that has increasingly prevailed around politicians
since Nov. 22, 1963.

Eerie foreshadowings crop up in unsuspecting places. An innocuous 1956 Life
Magazine essay on "The Nixons in Their Backyard," features the Vice President
playing with his younger daughter, Julie, and a dictaphone. (Shades of the 18
1/2-minute gap.)

Nixon is seen, not exactly relaxing, in a bamboo porch chair in a three-piece
suit, his feet propped on an ottoman just as they would be nearly 20 years later
in the Lincoln Sitting Room of the White House, in the darkest of his
post-Watergate maunderings with Henry Kissinger.

The sole exception to the chronological arrangement is the print that greets the
arriving visitor: a blow-up of Richard Avedon's wide-eyed Ike, photographed in
retirement in Palm Springs in 1964. The old warhorse has a quizzical look, his
pupils lifted, his eyebrows whitening wisps against his sun-tanned, pouchy face,
his lips pursed slightly as if to say, "I have seen all this, and more."

After the requisite images of 60's tumult, pictures of the 70's and 80's trail
off sharply, and that greatest of all modern image-makers, Ronald Reagan, is
notable by his near absence. That may be because, as Ms. Kismaric writes in her
catalogue essay, "The quality of the photographs of politicians that appear in
newspapers and magazines today has been seriously compromised as our culture has
given itself over to the cult of personality" and increased security that all
but eliminates unplanned moments.

The very last image is a paragon of planned spontaneity, a plotted inside joke.
It is a slightly blurry, head-on color print of a row of photographers, their
lenses trained on an unseen target, and it is the work of an amateur, Bill
Clinton, who turned the tables on the White House photographers in his rebuttal
at their annual dinner this spring.

"I just wanted you to see," Mr. Clinton said, "what it feels like to have your
picture taken when you're eating."

LOAD-DATE: August 13, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: John Kennedy campaigning with his running mate, Lyndon Johnson,
in Amarillo, Tex., in 1960, by Richard Pipes. (Museum of Modern Art)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              167 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 13, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

The Lonely Lifeguard, Scarcer Than Ever

BYLINE: By JACK CAVANAUGH

SECTION: Section 13CN;  Page 1;  Column 3;  Connecticut Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1697 words


ON a hot, humid early evening of the kind that has typified this sultry summer,
about 15 people were cooling off in Long Island Sound, off Horseshoe Beach in
Stamford. Among them were two young men who had gone out about 300 feet from
shore into deep waters well beyond the buoy that delineates the no-swimming
zone. Almost as far out, in water well over their heads, were two teen-agers who
did not appear to be strong swimmers. Nearer to shore another dozen or so people
of varying ages also bobbed in the waves.

Despite all the activity, the lifeguard stand on the beach was empty. For it was
6:30 P.M. and, as they do each evening, the lifeguards at Horseshoe Beach at
Cove Island had gone off duty at 6, as they had at the larger adjacent East End
and two other public beaches in Stamford. Though the beach itself was unguarded,
there were several attendants checking cars for beach stickers as they entered
the Cove Island parking lot, along with an attendant monitoring traffic flow
across the bridge leading to the beach.

Farther east along the Connecticut coast there were even more swimmers in the
water at public beaches at Norwalk, Westport, Fairfield and at state park
beaches in Westport, Madison and Rocky Neck. And in every instance there was not
a lifeguard in sight since, as in Stamford, they'd all gone home at 6 or
earlier.

No matter that the extraordinary heat and humidity has lasted well into many
evenings this summer; at most beaches in Connecticut anyone going swimming after
6 P.M. does so at his or her peril. And it's the same thing for early morning
swimmers since lifeguards in the state generally do not go on duty until 10 A.M.

Largely because of budgetary cuts, most beaches in the state are staffed fewer
hours today than they were two decades ago -- and with fewer guards. "When I was
at Hammonasset in the late 1970's and early 80's, we had 32 guards; now they
have 18," said Rob Smith, the manager at Rocky Neck State Park in East Lyme,
referring to the beach state park in Madison. The reason, he said, is "there's
less money."

And at many beaches the number of lifeguards decreases in August, which is
usually the hottest month of the year, when the water is at its warmest and,
therefore, most inviting. "We have to make do with a lot less guards starting in
mid-August when quite a few guards leave to go back to college," said Todd
Rainey, the beach director at Hammonasset.

"Sometimes on weekends in August we're down to as few as 7 guards compared with
18 earlier in the summer," he said. "And we get as many as 10,000 people on a
hot weekend day. As a result we have to fly a lot more yellow flags."

Mr. Rainey was referring to the flags that are flown at lifeguard stations
signifying that the stations are not staffed. (At staffed lifeguard chairs,
green flags are flown.)

"When I became the manager at Hammonasset in 1978 we were open from 9 A.M. to 7
P.M. every day," Mr. Smith said. Now, only one of the three state beaches,
Sherwood Island in Westport, has lifeguards on duty during those hours, and only
on weekends. On the other five days, guards staff the huge beach from 10 A.M. to
5 P.M. At that, there are only 18 lifeguards at Sherwood Island Beach even
though the state park draws as many as 20,000 people on Saturday and on Sunday,
many of them from the New York City area, said Luigi Tucciarone, an assistant to
the manager at the park. And the lifeguards have to work 55 hours a week, he
said.

And watch more people than ever in the water, although fewer seem to be swimming
than in the past. "There have been tons of people in the water -- more than I've
ever seen," said Tim Gallo, a 29-year-old lifeguard at Cove Island in Stamford
who is one of six school teachers who are spending this summer as lifeguards at
Stamford beaches. "And we've had more heat exhaustion cases and cuts than all of
last summer," he added.

John Roman, the chief lifeguard in Stamford, said that at Cove Island alone
there had been five cases of heat prostration and one of heat stroke in
mid-July. "And up until the last week of July, we had treated 411 people at Cove
Island for cuts and other injuries or because of heat exhaustion," Mr. Roman
said. "That's 100 more than we treated all of last summer.

"An awful lot of our time is spent on first aid," said Mr. Roman, who has
combined his career as a Stamford radio newscaster and reporter with that of a
lifeguard for more than 30 years. "That's why the first aid training that our
guards must have is so important."

Lifeguarding can even entail surrogate parenting. "A lot of parents don't watch
their kids as closely as they should and the guards notice it," said Pam Raila,
the chief lifeguard at Calf Pasture Beach in Norwalk. "So, at times, the guards
also have to double as baby sitters.

Or even give swimming lessons, as is the case at some public beaches in
Fairfield where Joe Ramirez, assistant waterfront director. Mr. Ramirez, a
teacher at Notre Dame High School in West Haven, has spent 15 summers working at
beaches in Fairfield. With one of the largest beachfronts in the state,
Fairfield has one of the largest lifeguard contingents -- 50 in all, with 32 on
duty at any one time. "Penfield Beach, the town's largest, used to have
lifeguards on duty until 8 P.M. but that stopped about three years ago," Mr.
Ramirez said.

Through the month of July, two drownings had occurred at Connecticut beaches.
The first was in early July when a 21-year-old man from Nepal vanished while in
the water off Hammonasset Beach in Madison while swimming with some Special
Olympics teammates. His body was recovered a week later. The athlete, Ramesh
Mali, was in the water in a section of the beach out of sight of the nearest
lifeguard. "The yellow flags were up at the closest lifeguard stations," said
Mr. Rainey..

That same week, a 14-year-old boy drowned while swimming at Southfield Beach in
the Waterside section of Stamford where swimming has been banned because of high
bacterial counts for more than 20 years. The day after the drowning, no-swimming
signs were erected along with a slatted fence near the high-water mark.

Rescues are rarely needed in the relatively tranquil waters of Long Island
Sound, but so far this summer there have been life-saving rescues at several
beaches including Cummings Park in Stamford and Compo Beach in Westport.

Though a beach lifeguard's job still has a certain aura and glamour about it --
fostered by 50's movies featuring Sandra Dee and Frankie Avalon -- the job has
lost a lot of its allure, mainly because of the low pay -- $6 to $8 an hour
depending on experience.

"It's hard to recruit guards nowadays, both because the responsibilities are
staggering and because of the greater potential of danger in treating cuts and
other wounds," said Mr. Roman, the chief lifeguard in Stamford. "Also, a kid can
go out and get a higher paying job with no responsibility at all. You've got to
want to do it."

Loretta Leist, 21, who has been a lifeguard at Cove Island in Stamford for six
years, said she started at $6.75 an hour and now earns $7.25. To save money for
the coming school year, when she will be a junior at the University of Miami,
Ms. Leist, like many other lifeguards, works a second job, in her case as a
lifeguard four nights a week at the Wilton Y.M.C.A.

Another lifeguard at the same beach, Kristin Corsello, who will start her junior
year at the University of Connecticut in September, said that during her three
years as a guard she has held down second jobs as a waitress and baby sitter in
addition to taking summer courses at the UConn branch in Stamford.

"I love the summer scene -- the beach and being around people outside," said Ms.
Corsello, whose younger brother, Ed, a varsity swimmer at the University of
Tampa in the fall, is also a lifeguard at Cove Island. "The pay isn't very good,
but it beats working inside in an office."

Because of the monotony and the nonstop concentration that is required,
lifeguards usually rotate constantly, spending two hours or less in the chair at
any one time. In Stamford, for example, Mr. Roman said he rotated guards after
one hour at a station. "After an hour, myopia can set in," he said, "and you can
stop seeing anything."

When they aren't at their stations or on breaks, lifeguards are available for
first aid and, at most beaches, are required to engage in most training
exercises. "Most people don't realize the responsibility that the guards have,"
Mr. Roman said.

Among the few cities and towns where lifeguards remain on duty later than 6
these days are Darien and New London, where guards are posted from 9 A.M. to 8
P.M. Gunnar Schonning, who runs the beaches for the Darien Parks and Recreation
Department, said that most of the 16 lifeguards at the town's two beaches are
high school students. "We know that they'll be here for the entire summer," said
Mr. Schonning.

The lure of the beach remains strong to many. Joseph Kerekes was a fixture at
Calf Pasture Beach in Norwalk until he was forced to retire at the age of 75 in
the early 1980's, and Ronald McCutcheon continued to patrol the beach in
Middletown until he was 85 years old. So far as is known, there are no
septuagenarian or octogenarian lifeguards in the state nowadays. But some keep
coming back for years.

Mike Shapiro, for example, has been a lifeguard at Ocean Beach in New London for
18 years with a four-year interruption for Army service during the Vietnam War.
Now 49 years old, Mr. Shapiro breaks away from work early Friday afternoon and
spends the weekend and part of Monday as a guard at busy Ocean Beach. "We have a
lot of fun," Mr. Shapiro said. "I'm not trying to be Peter Pan; I just like
doing it."

Mr. Shapiro's wife, Elaine, does not object. "How can I?" she said. "I met Mike
at Ocean Beach while he was on duty as a lifeguard."

As a longtime observer of the beach scene, Mr. Shapiro has noticed one
disquieting trend. "While a lot of people go in the water, not as many swim
anymore," he said. "Most of them just go in waist deep. I think it may be
because parents aren't teaching their kids to swim like they used to."

LOAD-DATE: August 13, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Stamford: Kathy Deluca at her station and, inset, John Roman,
head lifeguard, shows Mark Okrent how a swimmer in trouble might grab on. (Helen
Neafsey for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              168 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 13, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

DIARY

BYLINE: By JAMES SCHEMBARI

SECTION: Section 3;  Page 2;  Column 3;  Money and Business/Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1112 words



Automotive

The Long Goodbye
General Motors is finally saying goodbye to Electronic Data Systems. After
trying for at least the last year to find a way to profitably separate from its
subsidiary, G.M. has decided on a stock swap that will leave E.D.S. in the hands
of its shareholders. The computer services company has been a continuing source
of minor management headaches since G.M. bought it from Ross Perot in 1984. Mr.
Perot joined G.M.'s board of directors and spent years criticizing the company's
management until it bought him out for $742.8 million. Earlier this year, G.M.
contributed its E.D.S. shares to the automaker's underfunded pension plans,
meaning the company received little benefit from owning E.D.S. "Parting,"
Shakespeare wrote, "is such sweet sorrow." Or maybe just sweet.

Music

Looking for the Door
In what could be another who-needs-the-headaches deal, Time Warner was said to
be in negotiations to sell its 50 percent stake in Interscope Records back to
the record company's executives. Interscope has such artists as Tom Jones and
gangsta rapper Snoop Doggy Dogg. Time Warner has received a lot of grief,
especially from the Republicans, for distributing gangsta rap music because of
its violent and sexually degrading lyrics. Selling Interscope is probably the
simplest way for Time Warner to escape the controversy. It is unclear whether
the Republicans ever complained about Tom Jones.

Banking

Bank Attracts Very Big Investor
Yo! Who just put down more than $3 million to become a major shareholder of a
relatively obscure bank in Trenton, N.J.? O.K., that's not fair because you'd
never guess. White Eagle Enterprises, a New Jersey investment group, notified
the S.E.C. that it bought 23,100 shares of the Yardville National Bancorp and
now owns 7.1 percent, or about 165,100, of its shares. The man behind White
Eagle is Sylvestor Stallone, who didn't exactly make his name on Wall Street.
But analysts said New Jersey banks are prime takeover targets, so owning a hunk
of Yardville may be a good move. This is the man who just signed a three-picture
deal with Universal Pictures that was said to be worth more than $60 million.
Sounds like there may be more Warren Buffett than Rambo in Mr. Stallone these
days.

Securities Industry

Another Victim at Prudential
First, many of Prudential Securities' customers complained. Now it's the
brokers. The company in 1993 settled securities fraud charges that it misled
investors about the risks of limited partnerships. The company agreed to set up
a $1.4 billion fund to repay the thousands of investors who had lost money.
Those partnerships had been sold to them by the brokers of Prudential
Securities. One of those brokers, Betty S. Allen who had sold about $12 million
worth of the partnerships, had complained to an arbitration panel that all the
customer complaints about the partnerships made it impossible for her to find
other work in the securities industry. Her lawyer said the sales material for
the partnerships that was provided by Prudential to its brokers was misleading.
But brokers also got prospectuses, which laid out the pros and cons of the
investments. Didn't Ms. Allen read them? Ms. Allen wouldn't comment on that last
week. And now she doesn't have to. The arbitration panel awarded her $327,000.

Wall Street

A Good Start, Spoiled
Netscape Communications, the Internet software company, had a stunning debut on
Wall Street Wednesday. The initial public offering was priced at $28 a share,
but closed for the day at $58.25, up a dramatic $30.25. A lot of people made a
lot of money. But a lot of people lost a lot of money. The issue was so hot,
that the size of the offering was increased and still many investors couldn't
get stock at the offering price. So they had to buy when the stock began
trading. The first trade: $71 a share. And it stayed at around $70 until early
afternoon before it started to decline. It then fell almost $7 on Thursday and
closed unchanged, at $51.375, on Friday. That's a loss of almost $20 a share
since Wednesday's first trade. So, Netscape did have quite a stunning week, no
matter from where you look at it.

Publishing

Turn Off That TV
At first it sounded like refreshing news. Two new studies showed that over the
next few years Americans would increase their spending on books and would even
be spending more to read then they would on recorded music or home videos. The
key word here, of course, is spend. Spending will increase because the cost of
books will be going up, but the number of books sold is expected to almost
flatten out by 1996. It could be because of electronic publishing, as more books
go digital. Then again, maybe the reason will be that in 1996, we all could
still be stuck in front of the TV watching the O.J. trial.

Tobacco

The President Sets an Example
President Clinton came down hard on the tobacco companies last week. He proposed
regulations to keep cigarettes away from teenagers. He wants to ban cigarette
sales from vending machines and wants tobacco companies to stop brand-name
advertising at sporting events. "It is wrong to believe that we can take a
voluntary approach to this problem," Mr. Clinton said. How true. When asked if
he would voluntarily give up the cigars he occasionally smokes, he said, no, he
wouldn't. "I try to set a good example," he said. "I try never to do it where
people see. I admitted that I did, I did do it when Captain O'Grady was found
because I was so happy. It was a form of celebration." Mr. Clinton might have
just added to the traditions of smoking. Cigars are expected after a baby is
born. Smoking after sex is a classic icon. And now, having a good smoke after
resolving a national emergency. Perhaps that's why amid all the turmoil,
analysts continue to say that tobacco stocks are still a wonderful buy.

Sports

Can Nike Be Far Behind?
It's always interesting to watch capitalism crop up in unlikely places: Vietnam,
Russia, England. Yes, England. Money, and lots of it, is about to infect the
very English, and amateur, sport of rugby. England's national team is
negotiating a $2.4 million deal to sell promotional logo space on its team
jerseys, with about a third of the money going to players. And more eye-popping
in a sport in which the players often perform for nothing, Rupert Murdoch is
paying $500 million to broadcast games from South Africa, New Zealand and
Australia. "The whole ethos of rugby has been about sport, about a kind of
courtesy, decency and manners," one rugby expert said. Yes, and basketball used
to be played with peach baskets.

LOAD-DATE: August 13, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: A Family Walk -- Newspaper Strike Continues -- Detroit Free
Press employees Antoinette Martin and her husband, Ted Williamson, carrying
their son, Charles, 4, walk the picket line in front of the paper. Six unions
have been on strike at the Free Press and Detroit News since July 13.
(Associated Press)

Graphs showing number and amount of U.S. book sales from 1990 to 1997. (Source:
Book Industry Study Group)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              169 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 13, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Israel Faces The Limits Of Dissent

BYLINE: By JOEL GREENBERG

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 4;  Column 1;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 666 words

DATELINE: JERUSALEM, Aug. 12


A wave of demonstrations by Jewish settlers and their supporters, who have
camped on West Bank hills and blocked Israeli highways to protest the planned
expansion of Palestinian self-rule, has sharpened a debate on the limits of
legitimate dissent.

The Government calls the actions dangerous assaults on law and order, while the
settlers say they are following a democratic tradition of nonviolent civil
disobedience.

As Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization approach a final agreement
on the withdrawal of the Israeli military from areas in the West Bank and the
holding of Palestinian elections, the settlers have vowed to step up their
protests.

But Police Minister Moshe Shahal said the settlers were planning "a civil
rebellion" that could end in bloodshed, and he said that swift action would be
taken against lawbreakers. "It is inconceivable that a state should stand idly
by in the face of people who say they want to destroy it and create anarchy," he
told Israel Radio.

Justice Minister David Libai said a Cabinet subcommittee on law enforcement
would meet on Sunday to discuss the problem.

In an unusually speedy trial, a leader of a group that snarled traffic across
the country last Tuesday was sentenced to a fine of more than $3,000 or 10
months in jail. The man, Moshe Feiglin, a leader of a group called This is Our
Land, said he would go to prison.

Packing the jails is one of the avowed goals of the settlers, who say they hope
to bring the Government to its knees with a wave of popular resistance to its
policies.

They insist that Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin hold a referendum on any agreement
to expand Palestinian self-rule in the West Bank, arguing that it would not have
the support of most Israelis. They also contend that handing over wide areas of
the West Bank to the Palestinian police will endanger Jewish lives.

Eliakim Haetzni, a lawyer from the West Bank settlement of Kiryat Arba and a
leading advocate of civil disobedience, said that the aim of the campaign is
"paralyzing the army" and that recent protests were a dry run for responding to
possible Israeli Government attempts to dismantle Jewish settlements.

Faced with tens of thousands of resisting settlers and supporters who will
arrive to bolster them, Mr. Haetzni says, the army will find it impossible to
carry out orders to evict Jews from the settlements. He predicts that some
soldiers will refuse orders while many more will shirk duty under various
pretexts.

"The main front of the civil disobedience campaign is the military, because it
is a people's army," Mr. Haetzni said in an interview. "The message to Rabin and
the military command is that they don't have the troops for this."

The group that Mr. Haetzni leads has begun a petition campaign to get Israelis
to sign a declaration stating that the eviction of Jewish settlers is "inhuman,
anti-Zionist, and violates my conscience." Mr. Haetzni said that hundreds of
people have already signed, including many officers in the army reserve.

Literature distributed by the group compares the settlers' campaign to the civil
rights movement and the protests against the Vietnam War in the United States.

Unlike Mr. Haetzni, many leaders of the protests are immigrants from the United
States. "We see what protests and sit-downs can do, and it's time we bring these
concepts here," said Shmuel Sackett, a leader of the group who moved to Israel
from Queens five years ago.

But critics of the settlers say that their actions contradict the idea of civil
disobedience.

"They're talking about a rebellion, not disobedience," said Yishai Menuhin, a
leader of Yesh Gvul, a group that supported army resisters who refused to serve
in the occupied territories and in Lebanon after Israel invaded it in 1982.

"Civil disobedience accepts the legitimacy of the Government and seeks to change
specific policies," he said. "The settlers reject the legitimacy of the
Government. They call Rabin a traitor."

LOAD-DATE: August 13, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              170 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 13, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

MANY CITIES IN U.S. SHOW SHARP DROP IN HOMICIDE RATE

BYLINE: By FOX BUTTERFIELD

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 1;  Column 6;  National Desk

LENGTH: 1750 words

DATELINE: DETROIT, Aug. 8


The homicide rate in many of the nation's biggest, most violent cities dropped
significantly in the first half of the year, and if current trends continue, a
number of urban areas will close out 1995 with the fewest killings since crack
cocaine spawned a culture of gangs, guns and violence in the mid-1980's.

But some experts caution that the cause of the decline is unclear, with such
possible explanations as more aggressive police tactics, an increase in the
number of criminals in prison and changing patterns of drug use.

What is more, many criminologists also point out that census data show a
demographic shift in the population that could portend increases in murder again
as the number of teen-agers increases.

Some researchers even say the recent drop in homicide rates may be no more than
a return to a statistical middle ground after years of rapidly rising rates
dating from the advent of crack in 1986. A similar encouraging reduction took
place nationally from 1980 to 1985, only to have the figures skyrocket again
starting in 1986.

"It's like the Dow Jones average," said James Alan Fox, dean of the College of
Criminal Justice at Northeastern University. "What goes up must come down.
Certain cities are winning battles, but I don't think we have won the war
against crime."

On the other hand, many officials celebrate any reprieve from what had seemed to
a nervous public to be an irreversible trend for years.

"It is nice to see something that indicates progress, and I think the numbers
are large enough that they mean something," said Dr. Mark Rosenberg, director of
the National Center for Injury Prevention and Control at the Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention in Atlanta. "The homicide rate seems to be going down. It
is a very real phenomenon."

One of this year's winners is Detroit, which for as long as William Rice can
remember has been known as Murder City. Year after year, Detroit was among the
10 cities with the highest homicide rates. A local radio station once even put
up a billboard tabulating the city's daily death toll.

But for the last three years, Mr. Rice, now a homicide lieutenant in the Detroit
Police Department, has watched with surprise and pleasure as the number of
homicides has dropped. The city had a 9 percent decrease in the first six months
of 1995. If the trend persists, Detroit will record its lowest number of
killings since 1984.

"It is hard to get rid of the stigma," Lieutenant Rice said. Even so, he said,
he senses that "people are not as afraid."

The biggest reductions have been achieved in New York and Houston, which both
had nearly one-third decreases in killings in the first half of 1995. In both
cities, the figures represent an acceleration of a steady three-year drop in
killings, and if they can maintain the trend, it would be their lowest annual
homicide totals in almost 25 years.

Similarly, this year's homicide rate in Los Angeles was down 6.6 percent through
June, while it has fallen 19 percent in Chicago in the same time.

Of the five cities with the highest homicide rates in the nation last year,
four, New Orleans, Richmond, St. Louis and Washington, are recording decreases.

Even so, the trend is by no means universal.

The number of homicides is continuing to rise in Gary, Ind., which now has the
highest rate in the nation, as well as in Dallas and Phoenix. And in
Minneapolis, which has long enjoyed one of the lowest homicide rates, the number
of killings doubled to 51 in the first half of the year, from 24 in the same
period last year, Deputy Police Chief Greg Hestness said.

Nevertheless, the nation's overall homicide rate has fallen since 1991, when it
peaked at 10.9 per 100,000, dropping to 9.9 per 100,000 in 1993, the latest year
for which national figures are available. That calculation is based on data from
coroners' reports compiled by the National Center for Health Statistics.

The good news, the specialists say, is that all these changes show that violence
is not an immutable human problem. Over the very long run, in fact, historians
have recently turned up evidence that homicides rates were perhaps 10 times as
high in medieval Europe as they are today and that rates of killing dropped
significantly after the advent of the Industrial Revolution in American cities
in the 19th century.

Eric H. Monkkonen, a professor of urban history at the University of California
at Los Angeles, said that behind this long-term decline in violence lay a
civilizing process as the power of the state increased and people became more
disciplined by habits of factory work, public schools and regular churchgoing.

But criminologists say it is harder to predict, or understand, short-term swings
in homicide rates, which may not be statistically significant.

The current good news, for example, some experts warn, may actually mask an
important shift in the age of the population committing the most murders.

Over the last 15 years, killings by adults age 25 years or older have fallen
steadily, to 5.2 per 100,000 in 1993 from 8.4 per 100,000 in 1981, Professor Fox
said. But at the same time the homicide rates for people 24 years old or younger
have exploded, he said. Among those 14 to 17, in fact, the rate tripled to 18.6
per 100,000 in 1993 from only 6.2 per 100,000 in 1984.

Because the number of teen-agers is expected to grow by 15 percent between now
and 2005, the homicide rate could easily climb again, Professor Fox has warned.

Moreover, the experts point out, despite public perceptions about an all-time
crime wave, the homicide rate in the United States has not really changed much
in more than half a century. It reached 10 per 100,000 in 1933, slightly above
today's rate, according to the National Center for Health Statistics. Then the
homicide rate fell during the rest of the 1930's, the 1940's, the 1950's and
into the mid-1960's, dropping by almost half to 5.5 per 100,000 in 1963.

The reasons for the decline are unclear.

Then, beginning in 1964, as American involvement in the Vietnam War ballooned,
the baby boom generation came of age, the United States entered the
post-industrial era and the family structure showed the first signs of decay,
the homicide rate began moving sharply upward, more than doubling to 10.7 per
100,000 in 1974. After a drop in the late 1970's, a rise in the late 1980's and
another decline over the last three years, the rate is now less than the 1974
peak.

While politicians and law-enforcement officials have been quick to claim credit
for the decline, criminologists say it is far from clear how much of the trend
is attributable to get-tough-on-crime laws and increased enforcement.

Since 1980, the number of Americans in prison has tripled to 1.5 million. This
has clearly kept some adult criminals off the street and may have contributed to
the decline in homicide among those 25 and older, said Alfred Blumstein, a
criminologist at Carnegie Mellon University. But so far it has not measurably
deterred juvenile criminals.

In contrast to the skepticism of most criminologists, law-enforcement officers
tend to give greater weight to police efforts to reduce crime. Sam Nuchia, the
police chief in Houston, likes to point out that in 1991, just before he was
appointed, his city had 608 killings. This year he projects Houston will have
only 317 homicides.

"What we have done is get really tough on crime," Mr. Nuchia said. Under his
leadership, the Houston Police Department has added 1,000 officers, bringing the
total force to 4,900. It has also used computers to analyze the worst crime
spots in the city and has assigned officers to storefront stations in those
locations.

He has also established an anti-gang task force whose sole job, as he describes
it, "is to make life uncomfortable for gang members, to make them feel
uncomfortable carrying a gun in public."

Some of Houston's officers, following pilot programs in Kansas City and
Indianapolis, are now specifically trying to find people carrying guns by making
searches during routine traffic stops.

In New York City, where reports of murder, robbery, burglary and rape have
plunged to the lowest levels in 25 years, Police Commissioner William J. Bratton
and Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani have also been quick to credit new policing
strategies. Those strategies involve cracking down on a variety of minor
offenses like public beer drinking and graffiti vandalism as a way to search
suspects for weapons and pick up criminals with outstanding warrants.

Mayor Giuliani, who campaigned on a platform of being a tough law enforcer, has
received approval in the polls as he has taken credit for the drop in crime, and
just last week appeared on the front of New York magazine with Mr. Bratton and
the headline "The End of Crime As We Know It."

Some experts have theorized that a shift in drug habits, from crack to heroin,
in the last few years may help to explain the decline in killing. Crack is a
stimulant that makes users more impulsive and violent, while heroin is a
depressant. But Mr. Nuchia and other police authorities dispute this
explanation, pointing out that drug dealers, not users, account for most
drug-related killing.

Detroit, like a number of other cities, is also employing some of the more
assertive tactics, but a key to success, said Isaiah McKinnon, the city's police
chief, has been his effort to "improve the image of the police with the
community and get as many people involved as possible."

In the past, said Lieutenant Rice, a 24-year veteran of the Detroit police,
black residents were mistrustful of the police and offered little cooperation
during murder investigations. "We had to go door to door and nobody would talk,"
he said. "They knew nothing, they saw nothing."

But recently that attitude has changed, he said as he patrolled in an unmarked
car around a neighborhood of battered brick homes and vacant lots in downtown
Detroit.

Last August, for example, a host of witnesses came forward and helped identify
the killer of the popular owner of a convenience store, and this past spring a
group of witnesses provided crucial information after drug dealers fire-bombed
the home of a minister who had criticized their activities. The minister's wife
and 6-year-old daughter were killed in the attack.

Lieutenant Rice does not luxuriate in thinking about the lowering of the
homicide rate. "It doesn't lessen our workload," he said. "It just means we have
more time for each case."

LOAD-DATE: August 13, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: "It is hard to get rid of the stigma," said Lieut. William Rice
of the Detroit Police Department, referring to the city's reputation as Murder
City. However, Detroit had a 9 percent decrease in homicides the first half of
1995. (Peter Yates for The New York Times) (pg. 18)

Graph: "Homicides in the United States" shows the number of homicides per
100,000 from '25-'93. (Source: National Center for Health Statistics) (pg. 1)

Map/Diagram: "DEMOGRAPHICS: Murder Rates Across the Country" shows percent
change in the number of murders in the first six months of 1995 compared with
the first six months of 1994. (Source: Local police department) (pg. 18)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              171 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 13, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THE WORLD;
Fortune Cookie: Your Ignorance Clouds Asian Joy

BYLINE: By NICHOLAS D. KRISTOF

SECTION: Section 4;  Page 6;  Column 1;  Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1321 words

DATELINE: TOKYO


WHEN America ordered Japan 50 years ago to surrender or face "prompt and utter
destruction," the Japanese Government responded with the word "mokusatsu."

The Japanese Prime Minister claimed later, perhaps disingenuously, that he meant
this to mean an ambiguous "no comment." But American translators took it as a
firm rejection, based on the more common definition, "ignore, treat with silent
contempt." President Truman immediately gave the go-ahead for dropping the
atomic bombs on Hiroshima and Nagasaki, and then Japan surrendered on Aug. 15,
1945.

If there really was a misunderstanding over "mokusatsu," it was one of the most
lethal in the history of miscues. Yet looking back at the half-century of
American involvement in Asia since the end of the Pacific war, what is most
striking is the pattern of lethal miscues.

Gulf of Ignorance

The Vietnam War in particular is now seen as flowing from a tendency to
misinterpret nationalism as largely Soviet-inspired Communism. Americans have
traditionally shown a far richer knowledge of the china that they eat on than
the China that is the most populous nation on earth.

Half a century later, American ignorance of Asia remains a greater problem than
ever. Asia is almost certainly going to be more integral to America's future
than it has been during the last 50 years, for it has a weight of population and
wealth and arms that are likely to leave the rest of the world in the dust. Even
Indonesia, which most Americans think about for approximately 15 seconds a year,
now has a population of 190 million and is projected to have nearly as big a
population as America by the middle of the next century.

In economic terms, tiny Hong Kong is now richer per capita than its former
colonial master, England. Japan has more savings than any country in the world,
its banks are the biggest on the globe, and if the yen appreciates 20 percent
more it will nominally push the United States aside to have the biggest gross
national product in the world. In any case, although the United States has had
the biggest economy in the world for more than 100 years, many economists
believe that if output is adjusted for international prices, then China will
surpass the United States within a generation or so.

"This part of the world is going to grow in importance," said Walter F. Mondale,
the American Ambassador to Japan. "It's going to grow in wealth and in strategic
and political significance."

Yet while Asia has never been so important to the United States, and by almost
all measures will be more important to Americans in the next half-century than
Europe will be, Asia remains remote and alien in the American mind, except in
pockets on the West Coast that have linked themselves to trade and investment
with Asia. Over all, however much America's future lies across the Pacific,
America remains psychologically an Atlantic nation.

Mutual ignorance has fostered misperceptions ever since Asia and the West
discovered each other. In the 19th century, when the first Japanese visited
America, they noticed that American women wear high-heeled shoes. So they wrote
home that American women have heels that do not touch the ground, like dogs.

More recently, Vietnam was an American conflict as well as an Asian one. It was
not until this year that the United States was able to reach out and recognize
the Communist Government of Vietnam -- paradoxically, a regime that has less
legitimacy today than in the days when American planes were bombing it. Yet that
too has a certain symmetry, for when the recognition came it reflected almost
exclusively American reasons, including excitement at the opportunities in
Vietnam's economy.

'Rorschach Blot'

"Asia is sufficiently far away and exotic enough to Americans that it becomes a
Rorschach blot on which they perceive their greatest hopes and worst fears,"
said William H. Overholt, a managing director of Bankers Trust who has lived in
and followed Asia for a decade.

One gauge of American understanding of Asia is simply the flow of students. Some
250,000 Asians are studying in the United States, while about 7,000 Americans
are studying in Asia.

Likewise, most American high schools do not offer Asian languages as an option,
and much of American education still seems to follow the thinking of a Texas
Governor, James "Pa" Ferguson, who in 1917 vetoed a bill to finance the teaching
of foreign languages in classrooms. He explained: "If English was good enough
for Jesus, it's good enough for the schoolchildren of Texas."

In contrast, under the rule of Communist hard-liners in Beijing, rundown junior
high schools in even the most remote Chinese villages teach English to barefoot
peasant students as a requirement beginning in the seventh grade.

To be sure, Americans have never misunderstood Asian countries so disastrously
as some Asians themselves. No Westerner ever misinterpreted the situation in
China as catastrophically as Chairman Mao did at the end of the 1950's, when he
launched policies that produced the worst famine in world history, killing some
30 million people.

China understands even less of the American political process than America
understands of its. Chinese leaders periodically make what seem to Westerners to
be breathtakingly inane statements about conspiracies by America and Britain to
divide, conquer and weaken China. One reason China has repeatedly shot itself in
the foot over its policy toward Hong Kong is that it interprets every British
move as part of a grand conspiracy to ruin Hong Kong.

China and other countries sometimes do their best to be incomprehensible. The
great emperor Qianlong in 1793 ordered, "Be sure to prevent any contact between
the barbarians and the population," and it sometimes seems the order has never
been rescinded. If Americans know next to nothing about the Chinese peasantry --
who account for one person in six on this planet -- that is in part because the
Chinese Government restricts access to the countryside.

In studying how America can prepare for a Pacific century, it helps to consider
the one country that has really managed to re-tune itself from Europe to Asia.
If America is looking for a model, it is Australia. At the beginning of the
1980's, Australia was a European country that happened to be located at the tip
of Asia; now it in many ways is an Asian country of European stock.

The Government made a major push to emphasize the teaching of Chinese,
Indonesian, Japanese and Korean, and 180,000 Australians are now studying
Japanese -- more than three times the number of Americans who study Japanese. On
a per-capita basis, 50 times as many Australians study Japanese as Americans do.
In the Australian State of New South Wales, Asian languages are taught even at
most elementary schools, and by 2010 every student from kindergarten through
high school will be studying foreign languages.

Australia has also recruited Asian university students, so that 10 percent of
those studying on Australian campuses are now foreigners. More Indonesian and
Singaporean students go to Australia than to any other country.

The economy down under has also been redirected, with 63 percent of Australia's
exports now going to Asia. Australian companies are investing in Indonesia and
other neighbors, and Japanese now flock to Australia's Gold Coast to play golf,
snorkel, and eat beef; you can buy a calf in Australia for the price of a good
steak in Tokyo.

Australia shows that it is possible for a meat-and-potatoes country to boost its
ties to and understanding of the chopstick belt. Of course, Asia too needs to
try to understand the West and especially to make itself a bit more transparent.
But the question for America, looking back at the price it has paid in the last
half-century for its misunderstandings of Asia, is whether it too is ready to
try harder in the next half century.

LOAD-DATE: August 13, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Fifty years later, the gulf of understanding between the U.S.
and Asia remains wide: Japan's surrender on the battleship Missouri. (Sy
Seidman)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              172 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 13, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

There Goes (Varoom!) Esquire Magazine

BYLINE: By Timothy Foote;   Timothy Foote is a senior editor and writer for
Smithsonian magazine.

SECTION: Section 7;  Page 9;  Column 1;  Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1590 words



IT WASN'T PRETTY, FOLKS,
BUT DIDN'T WE HAVE FUN?
Esquire in the Sixties.
By Carol Polsgrove.
Illustrated. 335 pp. New York:
W. W. Norton & Company. $27.50.

IF you can, try to remember the gimmicks and the fun. All those "power charts,"
like the one in 1963 on "The Structure of the American Literary Establishment,"
with the agent Candida Donadio canonized at its "Hot Center" and editors and
book reviewers for The New York Times consigned to "Squaresville." The run-on,
whiz-bang headlines: "Is It Too Late for You to Be Pals With a Black Panther?"
The annual Dubious Achievement Awards. Eccentric close-ups like "A Day in the
Life of Chairman Mao," illustrated with Mao Zedong in a tub with a rubber
duckie. Gadfly covers like the one showing a mean Sonny Liston as Santa Claus.
Not to mention the cover with the college kid in a combat helmet and the line:
"If you think the war in Vietnam is hell, you ought to see what's happening on
campus, baby."

If you don't remember, not to worry. For anyone still interested in Esquire in
the 1960's, Carol Polsgrove has put together an overindulgent but lively account
of how the magazine, a "hot book" of that triumphant and disastrous decade,
cheekily tried -- and eventually failed -- to be funny about it.

The man who had most to do with this was Esquire's editor at the time, Harold T.
P. Hayes. One of those brilliant provincials who periodically take big cities by
storm, Hayes, who died in 1989 at 62, was an editor whose reach exceeded
everyone's grasp, including his own. He came to Esquire by way of North
Carolina, Wake Forest and the United States Marine Corps. In 1959, just before
he was given command of Esquire by its founding editor, Arnold Gingrich, Hayes
read James Thurber's memoir of Harold Ross and found the fabled editor of The
New Yorker wanting. Ross, he thought, spent too much time bleeding over his
writers, "reminding them to wear their overshoes . . . and playing practical
jokes on Alexander Woollcott." A magazine editor, Hayes insisted, ought to
address his times. "He is not placed on earth to serve selflessly the artistic
pretensions of his writers."

Hayes hoped to "shake people up" and help Americans get a better grip on what
was really going on around them. In a rare lapse into sheer fluff, Ms.
Polsgrove, who teaches journalism at Indiana University, describes one aspect of
Esquire's attitude as "irreverent, sassy and smart." Hayes preferred
"smart-assedness founded on a rational base." At times, spitball sociology was
more like it.

Ironically, it was not the gimmicks or provocative Hayes projects like
"California Evil" (after the Charles Manson case) or "The Final Decline and
Total Collapse of the American Avant-Garde" that made Esquire memorable. It was
the writing. Ms. Polsgrove does not make enough of the serious fiction that this
mass-audience commercial magazine managed to keep publishing, or of the powerful
essays like Rebecca West's remarkable reflections on "The New Meaning of
Treason." She does note that Esquire broke away from the gentlemanly beige prose
recommended by Strunk and White to pursue often merciless fly-on-the-wall
reporting served up with a twist and employing social satire, gross hyperbole,
intimately observed personal details and dramatic dialogue to make its pieces
work. Two have been justly celebrated. The first: Norman Mailer turned loose on
the 1960 Democratic National Convention; his piece, "Superman Comes to the
Supermart," opened up new rhetorical vistas in political reporting, not all of
them healthy. The second was a stylistic bombshell: Tom Wolfe's famous notes
from a California car show, sent as a letter to an Esquire editor, Byron Dobell,
which became "There goes (VAROOM! VAROOM!) that Kandy Kolored (THPHHHHHH!)
tangerine-flake streamline baby (RAHGHHHH!) around the bend
(BRUMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMM)."

Whether this was the New Journalism, or literary journalism with more panache,
it required a lot of writing talent. Hayes and Esquire had a genius for turning
novelists into journalists, for matching (or provocatively mismatching) writer
and subject -- William F. Buckley Jr. on sports; Simone de Beauvoir on Brigitte
Bardot. The magazine encouraged contrary points of view, sometimes even within
the same issue. But once the writer had agreed to a subject, Hayes fought for
the space and the freedom to let him have his say. His notes to writers make
some of the best reading in Ms. Polsgrove's book.

It is hard for an outsider to communicate what it is like to put out a magazine.
Ms. Polsgrove includes familiar names (among a legion of others): Gay Talese,
Tom Wolfe, Truman Capote, James Baldwin, Garry Wills, Michael Herr, Malcolm
Muggeridge, Dwight Macdonald, Leslie Fiedler, as well as Hayes's gifted
colleagues, like Byron Dobell and Clay Felker. Ms. Polsgrove relates some
memorable items on how Esquire got the story, some far flung, some not. Tiny
details stick in the mind: an Esquire team working on a literary issue finally
caught up with Allen Ginsberg in India, up to his neck in drugs and Ganges
water. Rising above principle, Hayes agreed to pay Cassius Clay (before he
became Muhammad Ali) $150 in cash if he would let Tom Wolfe tag along during a
New York visit. A greater bargain was Michael Herr, who approached the magazine
in 1967 merely hoping for accreditation to Vietnam. "I got him a visa and
advanced him $500, then forgot about him," Hayes recalled. Eventually, sections
from his book of Vietnam reportage, "Dispatches," ran in Esquire.

"It Wasn't Pretty, Folks, but Didn't We Have Fun?" suffers from a lack of
discrimination. Ms. Polsgrove seems to view Hayes and the 60's with unmixed
adulation. And as with any magazine, the paper trail of interoffice memos that
survives tends to deal with editorial messes. We learn a lot about William F.
Buckley Jr.'s settlement with Esquire after the magazine published Gore Vidal's
unfounded charge that Mr. Buckley was anti-Semitic, an assertion that Hayes
should have deleted. We learn too much about "An American Dream," Norman
Mailer's trashy little novel written as a stunt, month by month, which smuggled
into Esquire an account of the narrator exhilarated by killing his wife and
sodomizing her maid. Hayes had contractual grounds for refusing to print this;
instead he had Esquire's fiction editor, Rust Hills, obsfucate the prose so that
readers might overlook what was going on.

HAYES'S judgment grew shakier as the 60's rolled on. By then people did not need
Esquire to tell them what was really happening to the United States -- the only
stories were about war and race and student revolution, none of them much suited
to cool-hearted satire. Esquire's nonpartisan stance got lost in the shuffle.
People were being shook up all the time; doing it in a surprising way got
harder, required sillier, sometimes shameful editorial ploys. In 1968 Hayes sent
William S. Burroughs and Jean Genet to Chicago as part of Esquire's team to
report on the Democratic Convention; Genet speculated about the private parts of
Mayor Richard J. Daley's policemen. In 1969 Esquire had celebrities interviewing
themselves, as in Rod Steiger's "Let Us Now Praise Famous Me." By 1970 Hayes was
running a three-part story, "The Confessions of Lt. Calley," by John Sack, an
Esquire regular who had not only become a pal of Lieut. William Calley but
shared his agent and negotiated an expensive package for them both with Esquire
and Viking Press. Part 1, with a cover of Lieutenant Calley posed with four
Asian children, ran in November 1970, shortly before his court-martial began.

Hayes left Esquire nearly two and a half years later. Ms. Polsgrove plays it as
a classic case: lowbrow publishers concerned only with advertising pages succeed
in clipping the wings of brilliant high-flying editor. She is entitled to that
view. In any case, her book provides a better ending, at least for this
reviewer, who has fooled around with headlines for 30 years and more. In a fond
afterword, a former Esquire editor, Tom Hedley, by then a successful
screenwriter, reports on a lunch with Hayes years later. As they are parting,
Hayes suddenly says: "You know, I rejected your title for the Mao piece. . . .
'Easy on the Mao, Please. . . .' "

"You sure I wrote that?" said Mr. Hedley.

Said Hayes: "Funny how you remember the really awful lines."


Girl Stories and Hemingway

When Esquire began the New Varga Girl feature last fall, the magazine was taking
itself back to its roots. The monthly pinups are a 90's version of the
titillating drawings by Alberto Vargas that appeared in Esquire in the 1940's.
They were part of the idea fostered by Esquire's founding editor, Arnold
Gingrich, and its publisher, David Smart: that a men's magazine combining
articles by the likes of Hemingway with a touch of the risque would become a
hit. The blending of the literary and sexual fantasy was unheard of in the
magazine world until Esquire; that it succeeded in the midst of the Depression
is nothing short of extraordinary. In ESKY: The Early Years at Esquire (Rutgers
University, $27.95), Hugh Merrill, who teaches journalism at the University of
West Florida, gives a fascinating account of the magazine's founding and its
development through the 1950's. He also does a good job of explaining how and
why Esquire became a publishing force to be reckoned with. Also welcome are
reproductions of drawings, cartoons and advertisements from the early pages of
the magazine.   RUTH BAYARD SMITH

LOAD-DATE: August 13, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Harold Hayes (with cigar) and members of the Esquire staff,
1973. (DAN WYNN/FROM "IT WASN'T PRETTY, FOLKS, BUT DIDN'T WE HAVE FUN?")

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              173 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 13, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

A Yank at Oxford

BYLINE: By Judith Martin;   Judith Martin is the author of the Miss Manners
syndicated column and books, and two Washington novels.

SECTION: Section 7;  Page 14;  Column 1;  Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 879 words



SPECIAL RELATIONSHIP
By Robyn Sisman.
325 pp. New York: Dutton. $22.95.

NO real names, please; we're aiming for good taste. In the British novel
"Special Relationship," a saxophone-playing American, who goes to Oxford on a
Rhodes scholarship and later becomes President of the United States, is revealed
to have had a far more noble youth than a cynical and prying public suspects.

Jordan Hope has never tried drugs (but does not abstain ostentatiously -- there
is no question of it, because he has allergies) and is practically celibate (but
does not abstain ostentatiously -- there is little question of it, because the
few women at Oxford are all taken). Although he is vehemently, actively and
sincerely opposed to the war in Vietnam, he secretly offers to enlist to honor
an African-American who was killed there, his best friend from their childhood
in southern Illinois, where young Hope was scandalized by prevailing Jim Crow
laws. The decision not to fight was therefore not Hope's -- unbeknown to the
voting public, he had turned that power over to the fallen soldier's grieving
mother.

On the eve of his election to the Presidency, Hope is threatened with the
revelation that he has an illegitimate son from those Oxford days -- or, rather,
from what might be called a one-night stand if it were not portrayed as
beautiful, loving, memorable and conducted in anticipation of the Antioch social
rules: even at the last possible moment, he checks for explicit consent. Only a
very stern moralist could condemn this one slip, when the unsuspecting young man
(date conversation: "I was raised a Baptist") so obviously would have done the
honorable thing with great joy had he been allowed. True, he has since been
unfaithful to his intellectual, campaign-blond wife, but that was more out of
pain than lust. He was only trying to assuage his disappointment at not having a
house full of children, as he had always dreamed. Now that his brief, cherished
past has come back in the form of a possible son, as strapping, handsome and
idealistic as his young self, he feels like a caring parent.

The author of this fiction, Robyn Sisman, a London literary agent whose
book-jacket biography says she "attended Oxford at the same time as Bill
Clinton," has created, as her heroine, a London literary agent who is beautiful,
brilliant, talented, modest, successful, witty, unforgettable, a terrific cook,
adored by her debonair husband (who waits on her hand and foot) and horrified at
the idea of capitalizing on this almost-accidental encounter.

To help her with the logistics of warning the candidate in person, she turns to
the British editor of a glossy, celebrity-oriented American magazine, called The
Magazine. However tempted this choice of confidante is by the possibility of a
story on "sex and drugs and rock 'n' roll, with Oxford and Vietnam thrown in"
(as she chortles to herself, adding, "Move over, Woodward and Bernstein"), she
is a woman of honor. Fortunately, her skills as a hostess give her control of
the United States Government: "Le tout New York had crammed into the industrial
iron-meshed elevator, decorated with red, white and blue balloons, and
pronounced it fun." Her "status would soar, transforming her from trivial
magazine queen to an opinion former, a broker between the worlds of politics and
the media. . . . She would make sure that Jordan knew how much he owed her."

Meanwhile, the heroine has served as the American leader's inspiration to
greatness. As he puts it in a private victory speech: "Last week I was almost
beginning to lose faith in myself -- wondering if I was just a smiling dummy
with nothing inside, begging the world to love me. . . . You changed that. . . .
I suddenly felt as if I had a personal stake in the next generation. I was
darned if I was going to let the other guy win. . . . Knowing about Tom will
make me a better President."

Presuming that there is no literary merit or psychological insight at stake (and
there is no danger of that here), the tiny taste question this raises is: Which
is worse, smirky or smarmy? Is it better -- or, rather, less tasteless -- to
write something nice behind someone's back, and in a way that does not allow him
to protect himself, than to write something mean?

Niceness is less interesting, surely, because even in peekaboo literature, sin
allows for more variety than saintliness. But it also seems less fair, because
only the naive believe in obviously manufactured and sleazily libel-proofed
dirt. The shocking difference between this novel's approach and the usual
celebrity revelation is its sly insinuation that there must be truth here,
because there seems to be an element of loyalty. Who except a friend would take
the trouble to insinuate that a famous person is more respectable than generally
believed?

The answer is: a sophisticated braggart. Down here in Washington, we all know
that anyone not on the Presidential payroll who casually refers to any Chief
Executive as "the President," rather than using his nickname, and hints that
that President is far more self-sacrificing and idealistic than anyone now
realizes, is a showoff.

In real life, this shows more taste than spreading vicious gossip. In fiction,
it may show less.

LOAD-DATE: August 13, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              174 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 14, 1995, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Ex-Official's Life in U.S. Evokes Fear

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE

SECTION: Section A;  Page 11;  Column 4;  National Desk

LENGTH: 709 words


Chief among the Khmer Rouge figures living in the United States is a former
diplomat who was close to Pol Pot and defended his regime before the United
Nations.

The former official, Thiounn Prasith, the Khmer Rouge's representative at the
United Nations from the late 1970's until 1993, leads a quiet life in the New
York suburb of Mount Vernon.

Mr. Thiounn Prasith (pronounced choon pra-SIT), who is believed to be in his
60's, says he has given up politics and is devoting the rest of his life to his
family. But some Cambodian-Americans and some American officials say that he
continues to support the organization whose reign of terror in Cambodia from
April 1975 until January 1979 left hundreds of thousands of people dead.

A member of a prominent Cambodian political family, Mr. Thiounn Prasith declined
to be interviewed in person. But in a brief telephone conversation from his
Westchester County home earlier this month, he said that he was living in the
United States legally and that his presence had not been challenged by the State
Department.

Neither the State Department nor the Immigration and Naturalization Service
would comment on Mr. Thiounn Prasith's status, citing privacy laws.

Because of Mr. Thiounn Prasith's prominence among the Khmer Rouge, he is of
interest to the Cambodia Genocide Program, a State Department study of genocide
under the Khmer Rouge. The program, which started this year, is based at Yale
University and is directed by an Australian historian, Ben Kiernan.

Cambodian-Americans say Mr. Thiounn Prasith was instrumental -- with Ieng Sary,
another Khmer Rouge official -- in encouraging exiles to return home and help
the revolution in 1975 and 1976. Many who returned were later branded as
bourgeois and executed.

Among them was a professor at the New York State University at Stony Brook,
Sokhom Hing, a Cambodian nationalist who had lobbied against the American war in
Indochina, according to those who knew him. Records at Tuol Sleng, the Khmer
Rouge torture center, indicate that Mr. Hing died there, according to John
McAuliff, director of the U.S.-Indochina Reconciliation Project, a private group
that grew out of the antiwar movement.

Mr. Thiounn Prasith may not have known exactly what fate awaited the returning
Cambodians who were condemned as too bourgeois by the the Khmer Rouge, "but he
should certainly be a candidate for responsibility in the deaths," Mr. McAuliff
said in an interview.

That Mr. Thiounn Prasith was allowed to remain in the United States after his
diplomatic role ended "raises serious questions," he added.

Mr. Thiounn Prasith said in the telephone conversation that he did not encourage
Mr. Hing to return, but rather tried to dissuade him. Some scholars say that
given the convoluted and increasingly paranoid reasoning of the Khmer Rouge
leadership as their experiment in remaking society ran out of control, Mr.
Thiounn Prasith may himself have been seen as an enemy for sending home educated
exiles. He declines to discuss any political questions.

Mr. Thiounn Prasith's last public international role was as a Khmer Rouge
representative in talks in Jakarta, Indonesia, in February 1989 among several
Cambodian factions and representatives of the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations, a regional group that was negotiating to end the Cambodian civil war.
An accord was finally reached in Paris in October 1991. Elections under United
Nations supervision followed in two years, after several hundred thousand
refugees returned home from border camps in Thailand.

But throughout the 1980's, the Khmer Rouge continued to hold Cambodia's United
Nations seat, giving Mr. Thiounn Prasith a base in New York and a diplomatic
passport.

During that time, the United States came under strong criticism at home and
abroad for in effect supporting the Khmer Rouge, whose main backer was China, in
an effort to force Vietnam to give up Cambodia and its hope for a
Hanoi-dominated Indochina.

Critics continue to charge that the policy, however strategically successful it
was in forcing the withdrawal of Vietnamese troops, gave the Khmer Rouge
breathing space. The State Department recently agreed to set up the genocide
investigation now based at Yale.

LOAD-DATE: August 14, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Thiounn Prasith, a former diplomat who defended the Khmer Rouge
at the United Nations. (United Nations Photo, 1980)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              175 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 14, 1995, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Steve Case At a Crossroad

BYLINE: By STEVE LOHR

SECTION: Section D;  Page 1;  Column 2;  Business/Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1643 words

DATELINE: VIENNA, Va.


Steve Case knows from painful experience how quickly technology markets can
shift, destroying a once-promising business.

In 1983, Mr. Case left a good marketing job at Pepsico Inc. to try to cash in on
the latest trend in consumer technology, the Atari video game. So he joined a
fledgling company that was starting an on-line service for users of the popular
Atari computer-game machines.

Mr. Case points from his spacious office in suburban Virginia to a red-brick
building nearby, the former home of the long-forgotten Control Video
Corporation. "I arrived there just in time for the death of the video game
business," he recalled.

Things have improved immeasurably for him since then. Mr. Case, 36, is president
and chief executive of America Online Inc., the nation's leading on-line
computer service, which offers everything from E-mail to magazines to hundreds
of forums for interest groups, from golfers to gay men and lesbians. In 1995,
the number of America Online members paying monthly fees has more than doubled,
to 3.3 million, and the company's stock price has surged.

Mr. Case has been called the "Bill Paley of cyberspace," a pioneer in the new
medium of on-line services, just as the former CBS chairman led the way in
television. These days, Mr. Case finds himself getting dinner invitations from
Alvin Toffler, the "third wave" futurist, and requests from the Gap to appear in
one of its ads for khakis. (He did.)

Yet Mr. Case and his company now find themselves facing challenges as never
before. Once, the attacks on the company came mainly on the cultural front, from
an elitist Internet community contemptuous of America Online and its members for
being technologically lowbrow. Today, as the frontrunner in the on-line
industry, America Online must fend off threats to its fast-growing business --
from the rapid growth of the Internet, powerful new corporate rivals, even
experts questioning its accounting.

On Aug. 24, the Microsoft Corporation will enter the on-line business with the
access software for Microsoft Network mounted on the company's next-generation
operating system, Windows 95. No one knows how quickly -- or how successfully --
Microsoft's on-line business will grow, but estimates put it at up to nine
million subscribers in the first year, well ahead of America Online.

The Justice Department is investigating whether Microsoft's use of Windows as a
marketing tool for Microsoft Network gives the company an unfair advantage in
the young but fast-growing on-line business. No industry executive has prodded
Justice more forcefully or more publicly to stop Microsoft than Mr. Case.

Last week, the Justice Department announced that it was still investigating
Microsoft, but that it would take no action before the Microsoft Network starts
up, if at all.

America Online even has a designated "Microsoft watcher," Scott Geltz, a
28-year-old staff member with an M.B.A. from Georgetown and an animus for the
Redmond, Wash., software giant. Above the desk in his tiny office is a picture
of William H. Gates, the Microsoft chairman. Beneath the picture, in large block
letters, are these words: "THE ENEMY."

Mr. Case said: "Fear of Microsoft has helped this company enormously. Despite
all our growth and the rise in our stock price, no one here is congratulating
themselves. We're totally focused on the future."

America Online's future will be filled with increased competition -- and not
just from Microsoft. Powerhouses from telecommunications, like AT&T and MCI,
have recently entered the on-line business. America Online's traditional rivals
like Compuserve, a unit of H & R Block Inc., and Prodigy Services, a joint
venture of I.B.M. and Sears, Roebuck, have given their services face lifts or
new management or both.

The other big threat to America Online comes from the popularization of the
Internet, the global computer network. Once the bailiwick of researchers, the
Internet is increasingly accessible to consumers equipped with more powerful
computers, modems and specialized browsing software like that offered by the
Netscape Communications Corporation, whose initial sale of shares set records
last week.

As the Internet becomes easier to use, it appears to pose a threat to on-line
services like America Online, whose appeal to many subscribers has been as a
hand-holding middleman making 'Net technology less forbidding.

Doubts about America Online's ability to withstand the pressure in an emerging
field of fast-changing technology are the reason that while the company's stock
is a highflier, it has also attracted droves of short-sellers, who are betting
that its share price will fall.

Questions have also been raised about the accounting used to show earnings at
America Online. Abraham J. Briloff, emeritus professor of accounting at the City
University of New York, presented a paper on Friday at an American Accounting
Association conference in which he called the company's accounting practices
"in-your-face arrogance."

In his paper, Mr. Briloff scrutinized America Online's financial statements
during the nine months ended last March, when the company had rapid growth in
membership and made a series of acquisitions.

Among the practices Mr. Briloff questioned were the company's accounting for
acquisition costs and the deferral of marketing expenses to bring in new
members, which increases reported earnings in the near term.

In an interview, Mr. Briloff said his paper was not meant to suggest that
America Online did anything illegal or in violation of accounting rules, but to
show the leeway companies have in accounting for certain transactions.
(Deferring subscription marketing costs, for example, is routine in the magazine
business and Compuserve recently decided to defer some marketing costs.)

Yet Mr. Briloff said that by applying more rigorous accounting assumptions,
America Online's results would be break-even. "Push the pencil a little more,"
he said, "and it comes out negative."

"But," Mr. Briloff added, "it doesn't really matter to the stock price of a
company like America Online. Investors are buying a concept. They don't care
about earnings."

In many ways, Mr. Briloff is right. Last Thursday, America Online reported its
results for its fiscal fourth quarter, which ended on June 30. The earnings, at
13 cents a share, were slightly below Wall Street's expectations. Yet the
company's share price jumped $5.25 a share, to $65.25, another new high for the
stock. (On Friday, the share price declined $2.875, to $62.375.)

Investors seemed to focus on stronger-than-expected revenues, at $152 million,
up more than threefold from the year-earlier quarter. The average subscriber was
spending more time on line, at 6.5 hours a month, up 30 percent from the year
earlier, generating more revenue.

Jim Callinan, a portfolio manager for Putnam Investments in Boston, a large
America Online shareholder, explained that he focused on subscriber growth and
revenues per subscriber, not earnings.

Building the first mass-market brand in cyberspace is Mr. Case's mission. He
speaks of amassing a global audience of "tens of millions of members" over the
next several years, with the key being "communities of people communicating with
each other."

To go abroad, the company formed a $100 million joint venture last February with
Bertelsmann, the German media giant. To pull America Online into the Internet
world, the company has spent more than $150 million in the last year on
acquisitions including Advanced Network and Services Inc., which has maintained
much of the Internet backbone for the National Science Foundation. The company
also recently purchased Global Network Navigator. G.N.N. has a popular site on
the Internet's World Wide Web that serves as a directory to other Web sites,
where graphics as well as text are displayed.

America Online's strategy for the Internet is twofold. First, it is integrating
access smoothly into its current on-line service. Second, it will begin a
separate service later this month for more sophisticated computer users who want
direct access to the Internet, which will compete with access providers like
Netcom and PSI.

But wherever it goes, America Online's focus is on fostering interest-based
communities on line. The company has many suppliers from the world of
traditional media, including ABC, CBS, The Atlantic Monthly, Wired, The New York
Times and many others. But the service's members spend 60 percent of their time
communicating with one another.

"This medium is about participation, and not just a place to find information
and download bits," said Kathy Ryan, a vice president.

The same mantra is heard throughout America Online's brick-and-mirror-glass
headquarters. These communities will increasingly be linked to content created
for the on-line environment, which the company wants to foster with start-up
capital in its new Greenhouse project for on-line entrepreneurs.

That is what America Online understands and that should be its lasting
competitive advantage, insists Theodore Leonsis, senior vice president. "This is
new medium, not a technology or software business," said Mr. Leonsis, who
predicts that the on-line business will be "Microsoft's Vietnam."

For Mr. Case, a founder in 1985 of Quantum Computer Services Inc., later renamed
America Online, these are challenging times. But he sounds confident that
America Online will prove its detractors and short-sellers to be wrong. "The
investment debate," he said, "comes down to two different views of the future."

"One view," Mr. Case explained, "is that we're a leader in an exciting new
field, and we could become another Wal-Mart, Home Depot or even a Microsoft. The
other is that we're a very fragile franchise about to be battered by competition
from Microsoft and the Internet. We'll see."

NAME: Steve Case

LOAD-DATE: August 14, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Steve Case, president of America Online.

Graph: "Hedging Bets" tracks daily closing stock price and monthly closing short
positions of America Online. Graphs run from mid-July 1994 through mid-August
(for the former) and late-July (for the latter) (Source: Bloomberg Business
News)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              176 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 14, 1995, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Cambodians in U.S. Say the Dark Shadow of the Khmer Rouge Is Back

BYLINE: By ASHLEY DUNN

SECTION: Section A;  Page 11;  Column 1;  National Desk

LENGTH: 1705 words

DATELINE: LOWELL, Mass.


In the rolling hills of northeastern Massachusetts, 42-year-old Yin Sarun
thought he had finally found peace from the nightmares that had haunted him
since he fled the killing fields of Cambodia nearly 15 years ago.

It was 1993 and he was starting a new life in this old mill town, as a teacher
in the growing community of Cambodian refugees. He had just settled his family
into a white clapboard house, and his nightly visions of the rotting corpses of
those killed by Khmer Rouge soldiers had begun to fade.

But then he noticed something in the local Cambodian-language newspaper that
sent him reeling back to the terrors of his homeland.

It was an article by the Khmer Rouge leader Khieu Samphan urging Cambodians to
support the Communist group, which brutally ruled Cambodia from 1975 to 1979. As
time passed he saw article after article denying the widely held view that the
Khmer Rouge had been responsible for the deaths of hundreds of thousands and
possibly more than a million Cambodians.

"I thought they were all gone," Mr. Yin Sarun recalled thinking of the Khmer
Rouge. "After all this time, I am still not free."

More than 15 years after the Khmer Rouge and their radical brand of agrarian
Marxism were driven from Cambodia by the Vietnamese army, they are casting a
shadow of fear in Cambodian immigrant communities across the United States.

In cities like Lowell, St. Paul and Modesto, Calif., a sense of paranoia and
mistrust has been rekindled among refugees who thought they had escaped that
world long ago. Former victims talk in hushed tones of Khmer Rouge recruiters
seeking donations or political support for their continuing guerrilla war
against the Cambodian Government. They talk of chance encounters on the street
with former Khmer Rouge soldiers. Some talk of anonymous threats and murders,
which exist more as rumor than fact.

And they watch with bewildered horror as the Khmer Rouge gain supporters,
particularly among the young, among refugees who admire their platform of
strong-willed rule and xenophobic hatred of the Vietnamese.

Reattidara-J.R. Loeum, a counselor at Middlesex Community College here, said he
once asked 25 high school students how many supported the Khmer Rouge. He was
stunned when nearly half the class raised hands. "They just couldn't believe
that Cambodians could kill their own people," he said.

During their regime, the Khmer Rouge transformed Cambodia, emptying the cities
of people, abolishing religion and money, forcing millions into labor camps and
embarking on a killing binge.

Since 1979, when the Vietnamese invasion of Cambodia set off a flood of
refugees, nearly 150,000 Cambodians have settled in the United States. Among
them were thousands of Khmer Rouge who fled alongside their victims into the
camps in Thailand and then to the United States.

No one knows how many Khmer Rouge retained their ideology here, or how many
remain politically active. But they exert a power that transcends their
ambiguous numbers, feeding on the poverty and isolation of refugee communities.

"The Khmer Rouge are still active in the United States, and people are afraid,"
said Craig Etcheson, manager of the Cambodia Genocide Program, a State
Department study of Khmer Rouge genocide based at Yale University.

Mr. Yin Sarun said that when he talked among strangers, he reminded himself of a
slogan he heard daily in the labor camps: "The organization has eyes like a
pineapple."

"Everyone knows this saying," he said. "It makes me feel scared and sad at the
same time."

The police in several cities with large Cambodian populations say they are
unaware of any crimes associated with Khmer Rouge members. But rumors of their
presence are so powerful that some gangs have learned to intimidate victims by
saying they are Khmer Rouge.

"It's a common threat," said Lieut. John Reis of the Providence, R.I., police,
an expert on Asian gangs in the Northeast. "The young kids don't fall for it,
but the old do."

When the exodus of refugees began, Lowell, a city of 103,000 people 25 miles
northwest of Boston, offered the hospitality of local church groups and jobs at
the factories of companies like Raytheon, Wang Laboratories and Digital
Equipment. It soon became home to the second-largest Cambodian community in the
nation, with about 6,500 people, surpassed only by Long Beach, Calif., with
18,000, according to the 1990 Census.

Cambodian jewelry stores, markets and restaurants have sprouted along busy
streets like Pine and Merrimack. At dinner time, the air is filled with the
smell of staples like spiced meat and pickled white fish.

Across from Pailin Plaza, a small Cambodian mini-mall that takes its name from
the gem-rich region that has become the heart of the Khmer Rouge insurgency in
Cambodia, teen-agers in the latest jogging outfits and fluffed hairdos smoke on
the sidewalk as women in sarongs walk past with bags of groceries.

The scars are still deep for those who survived the Khmer Rouge, and the
struggle to establish themselves in this new world has not always been
successful. In the muffled quiet of the Trairatanaram Buddhist Temple in nearby
North Chelmsford, a monk pointed to a dark corner where two dozen photographs
hang.

"This one is a suicide," said the monk, pointing to a photo of a young girl. "He
died in a gang killing. This one was murdered by her husband."

David Sao, who was one of the first Cambodians to arrive in Lowell and now runs
an insurance agency on Pine Street, said he began noticing meetings of the Khmer
Rouge in the late 1980's. Once, he said, they tried to recruit him.

"They are not ashamed to say they are Khmer Rouge," Mr. Sao said.

When asked for signs of the Khmer Rouge's rising influence here, residents point
to The Cambodian Press, a Cambodian-language newspaper published twice a month
here and given away at Cambodian grocery stores and restaurants around the
country.

One of only four Khmer-language newspapers in the country, the publication has
printed articles supporting the view that the killing of Cambodians under Pol
Pot and other Khmer Rouge leaders was actually conducted by a "fifth column" of
Vietnamese and their Cambodian supporters.

An article in June 1994 said: "From 1975 to 1979, Vietnamese agents and the
5,000 Cambodians from North Vietnam infiltrated into Pol Pot's Government at
every level. They destabilized the Cambodian Government by forcing people to
work, killing them and starving them to death. They disrupted Pol Pot's
Government, then informed the world that 'Pol Pot killed three million
Cambodians.' Hanoi took advantage of this crisis which it had created."

In the same issue, the newspaper published a survey finding that most Cambodians
in the United States supported the Khmer Rouge.

Some refugees simply ignore the newspaper. "I have no time to read it," said
Kang Malavy, a co-owner of the Khemara Restaurant on Westford Street. "Since my
customers get mad, I asked those people not to put it in my restaurant anymore."

But others, even those who lived through the killing fields, say they believe
the articles.

"I read The Cambodian Press," said Abraham Yim, a 49-year-old survivor whose
legs bear purplish scars earned in the labor camps. "You know, in the Khmer
Rouge, they had a group that belonged to the Vietnamese. The Vietnamese inside
the Khmer Rouge are the ones who killed the people."

The publisher, Eang Bunthan (pronounced ING boon-TAHN), chuckles at the talk
that The Press is a front for the Khmer Rouge. "I am not a Khmer Rouge
supporter," he said. "I am a supporter of national unity. They are
nationalists."

Mr. Eang Bunthan, 52, a cherubic, slightly balding man, came to the United
States in 1973, two years before the Khmer Rouge seized power in Cambodia. He
started the newspaper in the mid-80's, and he said circulation was now 3,000 to
5,000.

He has become active in Republican politics; he was appointed to the
Massachusetts Asian-American Commission by Gov. William F. Weld. In his office,
he proudly displays a certificate from the Republican Party signed by Speaker
Newt Gingrich.

"To stop the suffering, we must forget the past," Mr. Eang Bunthan said. "I can
forgive everyone. East and West Germany came together. North and South Vietnam
came together. Why not my country?"

Other refugees find it more difficult to forget, but they are being forced to
accept, at least for now. Unlike the Nazis, who have been pursued by
international tribunals and crusaders for 50 years, the Khmer Rouge have, for
the most part, not been prosecuted.

"There are so many people who have never been brought to justice," said Thel T.
Sar, a 27-year-old refugee who now works as a probation officer in Lowell. "For
the innocent, the fight has become pointless."

Mr. Sar, who was only 8 when he was sent to a Khmer Rouge labor camp, led a
petition effort in June 1994 seeking to oust Mr. Eang Bunthan from the state
Asian-American Commission, saying he did not represent the Cambodian-American
community. Despite 200 signatures, the result, he said, was "zero."

He remains hopeful. "There will be justice," he said. "Maybe not in my time,
maybe not in my children's time, but there will be justice."

Paul Tun, a 39-year-old software programmer in San Jose, Calif., also tried to
seek retribution, but found only ambiguity. He was the only one of nine family
members to survive the war. All died in the same village in Pursat Province,
where they had been taken after begin forced from their home in Phnom Penh.

Through friends, Mr. Tun learned that one of the Khmer Rouge leaders from the
village lived in San Jose. Walking house to house in a Cambodian neighborhood,
Mr. Tun finally found the man, whom he had been required to call Bu Yeng, or
Uncle Yeng, in a run-down apartment building. "His mother, father, children,
they were all alive," Mr. Tun said. "He had all the people in his family. My
brothers and sisters were dead."

He had intended to confront Bu Yeng. But as he faced Bu Yeng, he realized that
he had neither the will nor the evidence to judge him. He left after talking for
a few minutes.

"Some were Khmer Rouge by consequence, some by will," Mr. Tun said. "I still
don't know what he was."

LOAD-DATE: August 14, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Eang Bunthan at prayer in a Buddhist temple in Lowell, Mass. He
publishes The Cambodian Press, a nationally circulated newspaper that has
printed articles supporting a revisionist view of the Khmer Rouge and Cambodia's
killings. He says the Khmer Rouge are nationalists.; At the Khemara Restaurant
in Lowell, Kang Malavy, an owner, no longer allows The Cambodian Press to put
copies of the free newspaper there because it makes some of her customers angry.
(Photographs by Ed Quinn for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              177 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 15, 1995, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

BOOKS OF THE TIMES;
Life Is Like A Box Of Sequels

BYLINE: By MICHIKO KAKUTANI

SECTION: Section C;  Page 15;  Column 5;  Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1130 words



GUMP & CO.
By Winston Groom
242 pages. Pocket Books. $22.

Hello, my name's Forrest, Forrest Gump. People call me Forrest Gump. Maybe
you've already heard of me. More and more people has, ever since all these
fellers come along to tell my life's story.

First there was that writer feller, Mr. Winston Groom, who way back along there
in 1986 wrote this book with my name on its cover jus' as plain as day: "Forrest
Gump." And then there was all them movie people who made themselves a movie
'bout my adventures. They got that nice actor, Mr. Tom Hanks, to play me and
that pretty lady, Miss Sally Field, to play my mama. I reckon that movie was
some big success, cause Mr. Winston Groom has now gone and wrote another book
called "Gump & Co.," which is supposed to tell you even more 'bout my life. As
if you folks didn't already know more 'bout my past than my poor ole pea brain
can recollect.

I may jus' be an idiot, but I gotta say all these biographies have got me mighty
vexed. Mr. Winston Groom says in his first book that I'm something he calls an
"idiot savant," which I guess is some fancy way of sayin' I'm good at math and
number stuff like that, but awful slow at jus' about everythin' else. Those
movie people, they didn't say nothing about the "savant" thing, though; they
jus' made me out to be this nice dimwit who goes around sayin' things like "life
is like a box of chocolates" and "stupid is as stupid does." I don't know what
any of that means exactly, and when people come up to me on the street now and
repeat them words like they're some kind of wisdom or something, I have to say
you could knock me over with a feather.

It's funny how things work out. In the movie, them fellers made a whole lotta of
other changes to my story too. As Mr. Groom tells it, I'm this huge feller: 6
foot 6 and 240 pounds, but then those movie people go ahead and have that
talented but real normal-size Mr. Tom Hanks play me, instead of Arnold
Schwarzenegger. Which maybe has some thin' to do with the fact that Mr. Groom
also says in that first book of his that Jenny didn't even love me in the
beginnin' but was more interested in my body, and then went off and married this
other feller by the name of Donald anyways. I have to say I personally like the
movie version better, where me and my Jenny get to get married, and I get to
play with our son, Little Forrest, at the end. But that's all I have to say
about that.

The other thing that sets me to wonderin' is how them Hollywood fellers had me
meetin' all these famous people. Oh, Mr. Groom, he had me meetin' President
Nixon and Raquel Welch and goin' to Vietnam, of course, but Mr. Tom Hanks, he
got to meet Elvis and John Lennon and President Kennedy and Governor Wallace and
actually affect how things went down in history. Now, even I knows that changing
history has got to be harder than that.

But maybe this is where Mr. Groom got his idea for his new book, cause this new
book, it's just chockfull of stories 'bout me hookin' up with one famous person
after another. Like I've said before, everybody makes mistakes, which is why
they put a rubber mat around spittoons, but for the life of me I can't see
myself associatin' with some of the nasty folks Mr. Groom says I do in "Gump &
Co." I mean I may be a idiot, but most of the time, I'm jus' tryin' to do the
right thing.

Sometimes, readin' this new book, I think Mr. Groom is mad at me for something
or is in such a hurry to make hisself some more money that he's gone plumb outta
his mind. He writes like I would leave Little Forrest at home in Alabama, while
I went gallivantin' around the world with all these high muckety-mucks, that I
would actually pal around with fellers who talk 'bout "meanness, dirty tricks an
stuff." I don't know what I did to make Mr. Groom say such things 'bout me: so
far all's my story done for him is brung him his picture in People magazine.

According to "Gump & Co.," a Mr. Oliver North, a genuine colonel, recruited me
for something called Iran-contra, and took me off to Iran where we met this old
feller with a beard who we done made a business deal with. Mr. Groom, he says
Mr. North tried to blame me for the whole mess when things didn't turn out so
good later on. And then, says Mr. Groom, this other feller named Mr. Ivan
Bozosky hired me for his company and tried to make me take all the blame when
things began goin' south. Seems like I musta spent most of the 80's and 90's --
most of "Gump & Co.," anyways -- gettin' throwed in jail, gettin' rescued and
gettin' throwed back in again. Just thinkin' about it is enough to make my
stomach do a flip-flop.

According to Mr. Groom, I was a mighty busy boy. I got sent by the Army to
Alaska, where I got mixed up with troubles concernin' this big boat named the
Exxon Valdez. I got sent to Germany, where I helped bring down the Berlin wall
by tossin' a football over to the other side and then gettin' chased across the
border by this group of fans. And I got sent to Iraq where I met a Mr. Saddamn
Hussein.

Now my mama always said people should try and avoid gettin' a swelled head, and
I have to say here that those Hollywood folk and especially Mr. Groom in this
here new book seem to have blowed up my importance. I didn't mind so much them
movie people showin' me teachin' Elvis how to dance, but this "Gump & Co.," it's
actually got me doin' stuff like endin' the cold war and affectin' the course of
peace in the Middle East.

People tell me this is what they like to call satire, though I have to say the
humor of it all escapes me. I suppose the reason folks like readin' this sort of
thing is cause the world's such a crazy place these days that folks like
thinkin' an idiot like me was behind all the stuff that happened, instead of
Nobody at all. They act like there ain't no reason, no logic, behind the way
history happens, that it's really better not to know too much cause it's all
jus' about luck and coincidence anyways, like me and Jenny runnin' into each
other all over the place, and my makin' a success out of that shrimping company
even though I ain't got no brains for business. They seem to think that
history's gone so nutty, with all them people like President Kennedy and his
brother and John Lennon gettin' killed and all, that only an idiot like me is
suited for telling the tale. They act like being stupid might be some kinda
blessin.'

Anyways, I have gotta disagree with that. Like Tom Hanks said in the movie, I
didn't ever want to be called stupid. I always wished I coulda been as smart as
my boy, Little Forrest.

So, if I ain't oversteppin' my bounds, I wanna say that this new book "Gump &
Co." is stupid. Well, stupid is as stupid writes. And that's all I have to say
about that.

LOAD-DATE: August 15, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Winston Groom (Fred R. Conrad/The New York Times)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              178 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 15, 1995, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

In Quincy, Mass., Bittersweet Memories of the Day the War Ended

BYLINE: By SARA RIMER

SECTION: Section A;  Page 12;  Column 2;  National Desk

LENGTH: 686 words

DATELINE: QUINCY, Mass., Aug. 13


Don Brown was just out of South Boston High School when he joined the Army Air
Forces, and was sent to the South Pacific. It was January 1944.

"I felt, 'I'm a Catholic, I'll leave this up to the Lord,' " Mr. Brown, who is
72 now, recalled. " 'If He sees fit that I don't come back, O.K., but I'll do
the best I can while I'm there.' "

He was at an air base on Iwo Jima 19 months later when the news came that the
Japanese had surrendered. "We took all the booze that was in our whole outfit
and poured it into an ashcan," he said. "We really had a time. It was like the
Fourth of July."

But there was anguish mingled with his joy, Mr. Brown said. "I felt very sad
because they used the atomic bomb on those people," he said. "It was a wholesale
slaughter. I still think we should have dropped the bomb -- but not in the
middle of those two cities."

The bittersweet nature of that day, Aug. 14, 1945, tugged like a gentle
undercurrent at a Victory Day celebration here beside Boston Harbor this
weekend.

Fifty years ago, 32,000 men and women worked day and night at the Quincy Navy
Shipyard to support the United States in World War II. The plant has now been
shuttered for 10 years, and the crowd today was small, and mostly older.

Mr. Brown and some of the other men from Quincy and other parts of the Boston
area who did the best they could while they were there -- in Europe, Japan and
at Pearl Harbor -- watched the modest parade and speeches. Afterward, they stood
around in the hot sun, telling the war stories that they say not too many people
want to hear nowadays.

Sgt. Charles A. MacGillivary, who destroyed six German machine guns during the
Battle of the Bulge and later received the Medal of Honor for his bravery, was
among those honored today.

Now 78, he wore the sleeve of his jacket pinned over the place where his left
arm had been. "I got hit New Year's Day, 1945," he said.

Arden Schofield, 77 and rail thin, recalled the five months he spent in a German
prisoner of war camp in 1944. "I went down to 80 pounds," he said. "I remember
chewing on a bone like a dog. I would've been gone in two or three days.

"Then April 1st -- Patton's men came into our barracks. I could hear them
cheering and hugging each other. I couldn't walk. I was on my back. I just sort
of smiled."

"In my opinion," he added, "General Patton was the greatest general this country
has ever had."

The other veterans nodded in agreement.

Mr. Schofield said he had been flown to Paris, and then to a hospital at Fort
Devens, Mass., which is where he was when he heard that the Japanese had
surrendered.

He said he still had the battered mess kit he found at the prison camp. Inside
the kit he keeps the dozens of pieces of paper on which he had written, while
slowly starving, lists of foods he craved.

"I wrote down 30 kinds of meat -- boiled ham, minute steak, corned beef, smoked
ham, meatloaf, pork sausage, hamburger. Potatoes -- mashed, boiled, buttered,
sweet, creamed, french fries. Fruits -- apples, oranges, apricots, prunes. Candy
-- chocolate, fudge, caramels, butternut fudge, taffy, peanut brittle."

Mr. Schofield, a retired junior high school teacher, said he still visited local
schools, with his mess kit, to talk about the war.

"What happens today in this generation will be forgotten 25 or 50 years from
now. I'm guilty, too. The generation before me was in World War I. I probably
wasn't as interested in that generation."

Theresa Davis stayed home in Quincy during the war, but served in her own way.
She went to work at the shipyard canteen.

Mrs. Davis came down to the harbor today to honor two men. One is her brother,
Joseph Saulnier, who was killed on D-Day in the invasion of Normandy. He was 23.
"He was in the Canadian engineers," she said. "The man next to him stepped on a
land mine."

Twenty-three years later to the day, on June 6, 1967, her son Richard was killed
in Vietnam. He was 19, and a Green Beret. His Silver Star hangs on the wall of
his mother's living room.

"Some of them don't come home," Mrs. Davis said. "That's war. That's what I tell
myself."


LOAD-DATE: August 15, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Recalling the events of 50 years ago, World War II veterans and
civilians spoke with pride and sadness on Sunday at a Victory Day celebration
near Boston Harbor in Quincy, Mass. James Fahey of the Navy Archive Museum in
Quincy showed onlookers a samurai sword taken from a Japanese officer. (Ed Quinn
for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              179 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 15, 1995, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

CHIEF OF AIR FORCE GROUNDS 5 PILOTS

BYLINE: By ERIC SCHMITT

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1288 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 14


The Air Force plans to announce on Tuesday that it is effectively ending the
careers of at least seven officers who were initially given slaps on the wrist
for their role in the downing of two Army helicopters over Iraq last year.

The unusual action comes as the result of a growing anger by lawmakers,
surviving family members and even senior military officials that no one had been
held accountable for the incident, which killed 26 people, including 15
Americans. This feeling intensified after the acquittal in June of the only
person to face a court-martial in the accidental shooting, Capt. Jim Wang.

Although the seven officers were reprimanded months ago for their involvement in
the incident, several have received favorable evaluations, awards and choice
assignments.

But responding to the growing pressure, the Air Force is grounding the two F-15
fighter pilots who mistakenly shot down the American helicopters and three
officers on the radar plane who failed to prevent the accident. The five --
including Captain Wang, whom a military jury in Oklahoma cleared of all criminal
charges in June -- will be grounded for at least three years and will most
likely be assigned to nonflying jobs.

Angry that officers who were reprimanded for their role in the incident were
promoted or awarded plum jobs, Gen. Ronald R. Fogleman, the Air Force Chief of
Staff, wrote scathing "letters of evaluation" for the permanent files of the two
F-15 pilots, three radar-plane controllers and two generals overseeing the
operation in northern Iraq, citing their poor judgment and failure to uphold Air
Force standards.

Such unusual criticism from the Air Force's top officer effectively dooms the
officers' careers. "Their chances for promotion now are essentially zero," a
senior Pentagon official said. "I wouldn't be surprised to see them retire."

Nonetheless, the Air Force action is unlikely to appease angry family members or
lawmakers, who are determined to have more hearings on the causes of the downing
and the extensive investigation that followed.

"All I can say is this an effort to suddenly make the military look accountable
when a congressional investigation is taking place," said Joan Piper, the mother
of Second Lieut. Laura Ashley Piper of the Air Force, a victim in the downing.

In a 15 1/2-minute videotape that will be distributed throughout the Air Force
this week and reviewed by all Air Force personnel by Oct. 1, General Fogleman
explains his actions, saying, "We are held to a higher standard by the public,
and we are held in high regard by the public because of the integrity we
demonstrated by holding ourselves accountable."

General Fogleman, a 53-year-old decorated fighter pilot in Vietnam, also rebuked
at least seven officers who wrote the favorable evaluations.

Today, Defense Department officials sought to portray General Fogleman's actions
as an aggressive effort to set a new standard for accountability. His
evaluations were approved by Air Force Secretary Sheila Widnall and the Deputy
Defense Secretary, John P. White, and they are expected to be announced on
Tuesday.

Still, the Air Force's handling of the matter up to this point has raised
serious questions about a military culture that produced commanders who awarded
the same officers whom they had only recently reprimanded for one of the worst
accidents in American military history.

"If you look at their records it looks like nothing went down," said one senior
officer about the personnel files of the Air Force officers about whom General
Fogleman wrote letters of evaluation.

The incident, on April 14, 1994, occurred while the two F-15C Eagle fighter
pilots were patroling what was considered a no-flight zone above Kurdish areas
of northern Iraq, over which Iraqi helicopters and planes had been banned after
the Persian Gulf war.

The pilots mistook the two Army Blackhawk helicopters for Soviet-made Hind
aircraft, and fired on them. Everyone aboard was killed.

Charges of negligent homicide were brought against one of the fighter pilots,
but were later dismissed. Prosecutors, who had dropped charges against four
other officers, argued that Captain Wang was the person most responsible for the
deaths because he failed to issue a warning that could have averted the
catastrophe. Captain Wang's supporters said he was being made a scapegoat, and a
10-officer tribunal agreed by acquitting him.

But even before Captain Wang's acquittal on June 20, the Air Force knew it had a
credibility problem on its hands, and one that was magnified after the jury's
verdict.

"We cannot tolerate actions which appear to condemn inappropriate conduct one
moment, condone it the next, or even worse, reward it," General Fogleman said in
a message to Air Force commanders on July 11.  "Accountability is critically
important. To do less will undermine good order and discipline of the force and
destroy the trust of the American public."

Mr. White, the Deputy Defense Secretary, ordered the Air Force and Army on July
24 to review the adequacy of the administrative sanctions issued in connection
with the downing, and any discrepancy between those punishments and subsequent
evaluations, awards and promotions.

In addition to bringing criminal charges, the military can also punish offenders
with administrative sanctions. And that happened to many of the pilots,
radar-plane crew members and supervising officers in the Iraq operation. But
these reprimands do not go into an officer's permanent personnel file, and are
discarded after two years.

More significantly, commanders in this case did not seem to take the reprimands
into account when promotions, awards and new jobs were handed out, Pentagon
officials said. The Air Force review will try to fix this problem, they said.

Regarding the specific action taken, Pentagon officials said that the F-15
pilots being assigned desk jobs are Lieut. Col. Randy May and Capt. Eric
Wickson, who each shot down one helicopter. Captain Wickson's assignment as a
flight instructor at Columbus Air Force Base in Mississippi, has been canceled.
Colonel May will be transferred as commander of an F-15 squadron in Germany.

The radar plane controllers who have been grounded are Captain Wang, Captain
Joseph Halcli and Lieut. Ricky Wilson, Pentagon officials said.

In addition to these five officers, General Fogleman wrote critical evaluations
of two generals. One is Brig. Gen. Jeffrey S. Pilkington, who was the commander
of the operation in northern Iraq from his headquarters in Incirlik, Turkey.
General Pilkington is now vice commander of the Air Intelligence Agency in San
Antonio.

The other is Brig. Gen. Curtis Emery 2d, who was a colonel and General
Pilkington's top aide for air operations at the time of the incident. General
Emery is now a senior officer with the Ballistic Missile Defense Organization in
the Pentagon.

Under Pentagon rules, both generals could be forced to retire at the colonel
rank. It was unclear today if the Air Force would transfer them to other jobs or
seek to demote them in retirement.

In addition, the Air Force has rescinded a commendation that Col. James O'Brien,
a top aide to General Pilkington in the Iraq operation, was awarded for his
service.

General Pilkington, through a spokeswoman, declined to comment today on the Air
Force action. Captain Wang did not respond to a message left with his lawyer.
The other officers could not be reached for comment.

Military legal experts said today that they could not recall a comparable
instance when a branch of the service re-evaluated the punishments in
determining whether subsequent awards and promotions were consistent with the
reprimands.

LOAD-DATE: August 15, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: August 16, 1995, Wednesday

CORRECTION:

The headline of a front-page article yesterday about disciplinary action against
five officers involved in the downing of two American helicopters over Iraq
referred to them incorrectly. The five were two F-15 pilots who mistakenly shot
down the copters and three officers aboard a radar plane who failed to prevent
the accident; not all five were pilots.


                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              180 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 15, 1995, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

Hillary Clinton Urges Attention to Gulf War Ailments

BYLINE: By TODD S. PURDUM

SECTION: Section A; Page 15; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 539 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 14


Hillary Rodham Clinton urged a Presidential commission today to leave no stone
unturned in investigating why thousands of veterans of the Persian Gulf war
returned with various illnesses, even as a panel of independent medical experts
suggested that the Pentagon might have been too hasty in concluding that there
was no evidence of a "gulf war syndrome."

"No issue is off-limits and every reasonable inquiry should be pursued," Mrs.
Clinton told the first meeting of the President's Advisory Committee on Gulf War
Veterans' Illnesses. President Clinton formed the commission to evaluate the
undiagnosed illnesses that have afflicted many who served in the Persian Gulf
during military operations in late 1990 and early 1991.

Symptoms have included chronic fatigue, memory loss, rashes, respiratory
problems, insomnia, gastrointestinal problems and recurrent infections. Some
veterans have suggested that the ailments resulted from battlefield conditions,
like exposure to chemical pollutants from burning oil fields.

Mrs. Clinton has taken an interest in the issue since she received complaints
from veterans during her work on health care last year, and the commission
invited her to speak.

Addressing the group today at the Capital Hilton here, she said, "Thousands of
veterans who were healthy when they left for the gulf war are now ill." She
added, "Based on the research to date, however, experts have concluded that
there is not enough evidence to call this a syndrome."

Even before Mrs. Clinton spoke, the Institute of Medicine, a not-for-profit
research group affiliated with the National Academy of Sciences, issued a report
saying the Defense Department had not adequately explained its conclusion that
the illnesses did not constitute a definable syndrome unique to Persian Gulf
veterans.

The Institute of Medicine report said the Pentagon had "made conscientious
efforts" to evaluate the health of 10,020 American veterans of the gulf who
complained of unusual illnesses. But the report went on to say that the Pentagon
had failed to support its preliminary conclusion that there was no single
syndrome but rather a variety of illnesses.

Moreover, the report said, it appears likely that some patients "have developed
illnesses that are directly related to their Persian Gulf service," including
psychological stress and infectious diseases that are rare outside the Middle
East.

The Institute of Medicine report said the Pentagon's study did not adequately
discuss such possible links between the veterans' health problems and their
service in the gulf.

In his remarks to the Presidential commission, the Deputy Defense Secretary,
John P. White, said the Pentagon was continuing its scientific investigation of
the illness and "doing all we can to get to the bottom of this."

The Secretary of Veterans Affairs, Jesse Brown, noted that it took the
Government 20 years to conclude that Agent Orange, a defoliant used by American
forces in Vietnam, caused a variety of illness among soldiers who served there.
Mr. Brown said it must not take that long to find the causes and treatments for
the ailments afflicting Persian Gulf veterans.

The commission is to send Mr. Clinton its report by Dec. 31.


LOAD-DATE: August 15, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: August 16, 1995, Wednesday

CORRECTION:

An article yesterday about Hillary Rodham Clinton's address to a Presidential
commission formed to investigate the cause of undiagnosed ailments suffered by
veterans of the Persian Gulf war misstated the date by which the commission is
to report to President Clinton. It is Dec. 31, 1996, not this year.


GRAPHIC: Photo: Hillary Rodham Clinton, urging the President's Advisory
Committee on Gulf War Veterans' Illnesses yesterday to search for explanations
for why thousands of veterans have complained of health problems. (Agence
France-Presse)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              181 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 15, 1995, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

A Year After Boat Exodus, Threat to Castro Dissipates

BYLINE: By TIM GOLDEN

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1894 words

DATELINE: HAVANA, Aug. 11


A few blocks from the tourist hotel where rioters had shattered the windows, a
few more from the downtown stores they had dared to loot, an industrial mechanic
named Roberto sat with some friends in the afternoon heat, recalling how the
Revolution had trembled.

"We never saw anything like that before," the lanky 37-year-old said, leaning in
the doorway of his decrepit apartment building. "They were throwing rocks at the
police!" The gathering fell silent for a moment, and then Roberto added, "But
that passed."

A year after Cubans' discontent erupted in a spate of boat hijackings, a flood
of refugees and the most serious street disturbances since Fidel Castro seized
power in 1959, the threat that the Government faced last summer has faded, say
diplomats, political dissidents, officials and many ordinary Cubans.

Reflecting modest economic reforms, some Havana streets where Cubans had offered
a symphony of complaints now buzz with snack vendors, bicycle repair shops and
small, family-run restaurants. Farmers' markets that were legalized last fall do
brisk business in everything from piglets and goats to snake oils and spaghetti
sauce.

While continuing to ration bread after five years of economic devastation, the
authorities are spending more generously on circus. Uncharacteristically
interesting films draw restless teen-agers to the theaters, and unemployed
workers are staying home to watch pirated offerings like "Jurassic Park" and
"Forrest Gump" on television. Power blackouts have been reduced from as long as
12 hours a day last summer to 8 hours a week.

For those still inclined to protest, the Government has at times deployed
legions of uniformed and plainclothes police officers, including a new Special
Brigade of paramilitary agents.

For those still eager to emigrate, a new American policy of deporting
undocumented Cuban migrants has left long visa lines outside the United States
diplomatic mission here as virtually the only viable option.

Official statistics and interviews with scores of Cubans suggest that most
people's lives have become only somewhat easier to bear. After the collapse of
the Soviet bloc and its economic support system for the island, hope seems as
rare in most households as a steak dinner or a full tank of gas. Yet if most
Cubans still share a deep sense of frustration about life under the hemisphere's
only Communist Government, many people say the desperation that defined the
country's mood last year has increasingly given way to resignation.

As a robust-looking President Castro prepared to celebrate his 69th birthday on
Sunday, many Cubans were again skeptical that significant political change might
come to the island before his death.

"Most people have accepted the idea that there is not going to be any change
here that does not come from within the Government," said a Roman Catholic
priest, who like many other Cubans spoke on condition that he not be identified.
"They are learning patience again, because what alternative do they have? They
saw what happened last year and they think, 'Why take the risk if nothing is
going to change?' "

With critical shortages of food, electricity and public transportation last
summer, Cubans' anger flared -- as it had before -- in conflicts over the
illegal flight of refugees from the island.

That June and July, emigrants began pouring off the island. Small groups of
refugees seized state-owned vessels and fled to southern Florida, where they
were received as heroes. Others left on makeshift rafts. On July 13, Cuban coast
guard ships chased a tugboat stolen from the Havana harbor out to sea and rammed
it until it sank; at least 37 people drowned.

After hundreds, possibly thousands of young people rioted on Aug. 5, throwing
stones at the police and ransacking stores, Mr. Castro announced that the
Government would no longer try to stop the rafters. The exodus that followed
left more than 32,000 Cubans in American refugee camps.

"It was something that had not happened in 36 years of revolution," the head of
the Young Communists Union, Victoria Velazquez, said of the street disturbances.
"We were not prepared for something like that."

Some officials who sought last year to avoid any open discussion of the unrest
now acknowledge privately that the rioting had shaken the Government badly, if
only briefly. In public, Cuban leaders have taken to mythologizing the quick and
careful suppression of the disturbances by the police as one more heroic page in
their history.

"Aug. 5 was not a bad day for the Revolution, but rather a great victory," Mr.
Castro said last month, attributing the disturbances to local agitators
encouraged by the United States. "There has to be an Aug. 5 every time these
kinds of elements, the enemies of the Revolution, try to play the game of the
imperialists."

In an apparent effort to purge memories of the defiance, the Government
commemorated the anniversary of the disturbances with a huge march along the
Malecon, the boulevard that runs along the Havana waterfront. Thousands of
uniformed and plainclothes police officers were stationed in the area just in
case, and the theme of the rally was "Cuba Lives."

Even the most upbeat officials do not contend that people on the island are
living well.

But after five disastrous years that saw the economy contract at least 34
percent according to official figures (some foreign economists estimate the
collapse at closer to 50 percent), officials are starting to say for the first
time that the worst is over.

In 1994, the authorities say, the economy grew 0.7 percent. For the first half
of this year, they say the figure was 2 percent.

Except for some increases in vegetable production, nearly all of the rebound has
come in exports and joint ventures involving foreign companies. Many of the
plants, farms and factories where most Cubans work have continued to stagnate,
if not to deteriorate further. But the sense of at least a potential recovery
has been magnified by palpable changes on the street.

Lines of waiting commuters, once endless, have begun to shrink as the Government
has reorganized its transportation system, distributed hundreds of thousands of
bicycles and taken donations of buses, tires and batteries from cities in Canada
and Europe. With steadier fuel supplies and the refurbishing of several big
electric generating plants, blackouts have been cut back sharply in the capital.

The farmers' markets that were legalized last October have nearly doubled to
about 250, and more are being opened around Havana, the country's political
tinderbox. Despite tight control over the licensing of self-employed workers,
street vendors and garage repair shops have spread. Family-run restaurants,
outlawed last year, have been allowed to reopen.

For the growing numbers of Cubans who have some access to American dollars or to
the foreign-exchange certificates provided as an incentive to state workers,
restaurants, nightclubs and stores that sell imported items in dollars have
mushroomed. As excess Cuban currency has been soaked up by price increases on
items like rum and cigarettes and by cuts in subsidies, the value of the peso
has strengthened sharply against the dollar.

"For people who have money, this is glorious," said Vladimir Torres, 21, a
former mechanic's apprentice who was selling young goats the other day at a
bustling agricultural market outside Havana. "The people who don't -- they are
still hungry."

The modest improvements have not relieved Cubans from having to dedicate hours
each day to finding food, getting to work and otherwise taking care of their
basic needs. But that circumstance itself, many Cubans opposed to the Government
lament, might be enough to undermine any anti-Castro cause by keeping people too
preoccupied to rebel.

Boredom being a handmaiden of the counterrevolution, the Government has doubled
the daily television schedule from 6 hours to 12, going heavy on sports
programming and recent American movies. The Young Communists Union has started
up scores of neighborhood computer instruction centers, put on salsa concerts
and karaoke shows in poorer neighborhoods, and is taking 400,000 young Cubans
camping and to the beach.

Even as the pressure has lessened, the Government has continued to play on the
concerns of many Cubans that any alternative to their current troubles might
entail the loss of the benefits they still have.

Reports by the state-run news media tell of food shortages and political turmoil
in Russia and the former Soviet republics. By contrast, officials praise the
"stable" economic successes of China and Vietnam, where the Communist Party
retains power.

In a similar vein, the official cast of Cuban history has grown steadily more
nationalistic. Communist solidarity is rarely mentioned anymore. Instead, the
Revolution is portrayed as part of a long continuum of anti-imperialist
struggle. Marx and Lenin still have their place, but it is far smaller now, for
instance, than that of the Cuban patriot Jose Marti.

The imperialist threat and the defense of social equality have also been central
themes in a strong Government campaign against a pending Congressional proposal
to tighten the United States economic embargo on Cuba.

The Republican bill, sponsored by Sen. Jesse Helms of North Carolina and Rep.
Dan Burton of Indiana, would impose sanctions on foreign companies that do
business with Cuba and press for the return of properties confiscated from
private owners since the Revolution.

"In a country like Cuba where 85 percent of the families own their housing by
virtue of the laws of the Revolution and the work of the Revolution, all of
those families would lose the ownership of their homes," Mr. Castro warned in a
speech last week. "It is something so stupid that we were almost about to send a
telegram to Helms and Burton and tell them: 'Hey, thanks very much. You are
really helping us.' "

Diplomats say the Cuban Government might also thank the Clinton Administration
for a migration agreement in May that has helped eliminate a major source of
political volatility in summers past.

Aware that they will now be deported from the United States if caught, Cubans
have all but given up trying to reach American shores by raft and boat.

Some dissidents argue that the more significant change has been not in the
quality of people's lives, but in the renewal of some Government controls.

When scores of squatters moved into an Old Havana building recently, the police
were in place to evict them swiftly and without incident. When the Government
held local elections last month with its usual one-party slate, it reported a
turnout of 97.1 percent and only a small percentage of blank and nullified
ballots.

Only a few anti-Government activists have been imprisoned for any length of time
in recent months, and several prominent dissidents have been released. But at
the same time, the police and party organizers have kept those they view as
potential troublemakers at home with a series of strong warnings, dissidents
say.

"I wish people were ready to protest, but I do not see it," said one well-known
human rights campaigner, Elizardo Sanchez. "The repressive strategy is to keep
people from coming together, and it works. If they do not come together, it is
very hard for them to protest."


LOAD-DATE: August 15, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: August 16, 1995, Wednesday

CORRECTION:

An article yesterday about the Cuban economy misstated President Fidel Castro's
birthday in some editions. It is Aug. 13, not Aug. 12.


GRAPHIC: Photos: Jose Rolando of Havana makes a living repairing and refilling
disposable plastic cigarette lighters. Given what he calls the "open road" of
capitalism, he finds a way to make ends meet. "You can work 6, 8, 10, 12 hours
until you resolve your problem," he said; Members of the Service and Credit
Agricultural Cooperative are boosting profits on their rice crop by 25 to 30
percent now that they can sell it on the open market. Before sale they dry the
rice in the sun, shuffling their feet through the pile to turn the kernels.
(Photographs by Stephen Ferry for The New York Times) (pg. A6)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              182 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 16, 1995, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Face-Off at Small Colleges on Arming of Security

BYLINE: By NORIMITSU ONISHI

SECTION: Section B;  Page 11;  Column 1;  Metropolitan Desk;  Education Page

LENGTH: 1617 words

DATELINE: FREDONIA, N.Y.


Ted Mackey, a campus security officer, locked the dormitory door behind him and
stepped, a little breathlessly, into the night.

As he stood under a lamppost, only a few passing summer students disturbed the
steamy stillness of this rural campus off Lake Erie. Officer Mackey knew that
the State University at Fredonia, a campus of 5,000 about 50 miles southwest of
Buffalo, had recorded no serious crime in more than a decade, and that the
surrounding area was essentially peaceful. Still, he said, he felt unsafe with
nothing more than a club and a can of pepper spray dangling from from his hip.
He and other officers want to carry guns -- but the college has decided against
letting them.

"Just because we have guns, we're not going to change overnight and suddenly
become a paramilitary unit," he said. "I'm walking around inside these dorms,
closing 30 to 40 windows a night, when I should be practicing law enforcement
out there."

Most urban state colleges began employing armed police officers at least a
decade ago. Now, smaller suburban and rural colleges everywhere, like Fredonia,
are considering guns on campus, too, pushed by the fears, generally
unsubstantiated, of parents, students and officers.

Throughout the country, the new debate over arming campus officers has produced
similar conflicts: administrators and faculty, particularly at colleges with
little or no violent crime, contend that guns are just not needed and would
tarnish the campuses' sanctuarylike atmosphere. The officers, in response, say
that colleges are not sanctuaries and that, in an increasingly violent society,
educators are romantically clinging to an outdated notion of campus life.

Underlying the educators' strong feelings against arming the officers are their
vivid memories of the hostility toward campus police during the Vietnam war era,
when campus police forces first grew. By contrast, their students today do not
seem at all hostile to the officers; many either support arming them, or appear
indifferent to the idea.

Of the 27 state-financed SUNY campuses with public safety officers, 11 have
armed officers, including three that made the move since the summer of 1994 --
Stony Brook, New Paltz and Plattsburgh. The issue is being debated on the
remaining 16 campuses, said Bruce McBride, who oversees public safety for SUNY.

Usually, colleges have either sworn public safety officers, who have police
powers on campus, or security guards, who are generally not as well trained and
do not have arrest or search powers.

During the decade that Donald A. MacPhee has been president of Fredonia, he has
repeatedly rejected officers' pleas for guns. After much soul-searching, he
commissioned a report on crime last fall.

"My views were shaped during the 60's and 70's, as a faculty member and dean on
three University of California campuses, when great groups of students
confronted the campus police," he said. "I wanted to make sure my own values
were not putting the campus at risk."

Mr. MacPhee decided not to arm the officers in late May, he said, because of the
low level of crime on campus and in the surrounding village of Fredonia. Between
1990 and 1994, the campus reported no violent crimes. It did report more than
500 thefts, 33 drug violations and the seizure of 10 firearms (most described as
hunting weapons).

"My preference would be to maintain the current environment," Mr. MacPhee added.
"But in SUNY there's been a trend for more arming. And if we extrapolate from
the trends, I suppose some day the campus will be armed."

That trend appears nationwide. The fear of outsiders and the fear of fellow
students -- heightened by incidents like the fatal stabbing of a Harvard student
by her roommate in May, or the class taken hostage, at gunpoint, by a SUNY
Albany student last December -- are fueling the growth and professionalization
of campus police forces, said Douglas F. Tuttle, president of the International
Association of Campus Law Enforcement Administrators.

Nearly 70 percent of 351 public and private colleges with more than 5,000
students employ sworn and armed officers, according to a 1993 survey by Mr.
Tuttle's group. But only about a quarter of smaller colleges do so; most have
only security guards.

The Federal Department of Education's compilation of campus crime statistics and
the Department of Justice's survey of campus law enforcement agencies, both to
be released late this year, should give the first clear view of campus crime.
But what officials have found since the passage of the Federal Student
Right-to-Know and Campus Security Act in 1990, which requires colleges receiving
Federal funds to release crime statistics, is that most campuses are very safe,
compared with municipalities.

At William Patterson College, a public institution in Wayne, N.J., the
administration has rejected officers' demand for guns, partly because it said it
wanted to preserve the suburban campus's special atmosphere. But last year the
student government and newspaper endorsed arming the officers, said Yoni
Greenbaum, 25, the editor in chief of The Beacon.

"The real world has drugs," he said. "We have drugs. The real world has domestic
violence. We have it. The real world has guns, and the truth is we already have
guns. In an age when safety is involved in everything, whether it's sex or just
crossing the street, it's hard to believe there's any special place left."

At Fredonia, it was perhaps a measure of the students' lack of interest that
when the college mailed questionnaires on arming last fall, the return rate was
roughly 40 percent for staff and parents -- but 8 percent for students. "I just
threw the thing in the trash," said Josh Ficarra, 21, a recent accounting
graduate.

Significantly, however, students who do support armed campuses are split along
racial lines. Some minority students on predominantly white campuses have
expressed worry about being singled out by campus police. Black students were
among the most vocal opponents when Butler University, a small private college
in Indianapolis, decided to arm its officers last fall, said Timothy M. Murrell,
the director of safety.

At SUNY's Old Westbury campus on Long Island, which is discussing arms, minority
students' misgivings grew last year when a white student said she had been
attacked by a black man and later admitted she had slashed her own face.

Juan Quezeda, 22, a senior from Corona, Queens, said he understood the students
and the officers because he worked part time in public safety.

"My Latino and black friends say public safety would take their new power and
brutalize," he said. "They would be worse than New York City cops. But in a lot
of incidents -- if there are fights or gun shots -- public safety can't do
anything until the Westbury police gets here."

Although requirements vary from state to state, most sworn officers on campuses
have as much police academy training as their municipal counterparts and are
often better educated. At Fredonia, most of the 14 officers have undergraduate
degrees and a few have master's degrees, said Ann M. Burns, the public safety
director.

Officers at state colleges receive their authority from their employers' status
as state agencies. At private colleges, their authority typically has depended
on the local municipality, although increasingly even those police forces are
becoming autonomous. More than a dozen legislatures have passed laws entitling
private college forces to have arrest powers, as long as the officers meet local
police training standards.

That is the catch-22, said Mr. Tuttle of the international association. Because
more campus officers are police-trained, they inevitably demand to carry guns.

Without guns, Ms. Burns said, her officers at Fredonia have grown demoralized,
as they are called "wannabes" or "rent-a-cops."

"If you see a cop without a gun, there's something missing," said J. Francis
McCaffrey, chief of police at John Carroll University near Cleveland, where only
he can carry a gun. "People say, 'You can't do anything to me.' "

At John Carroll, a small Jesuit college, crime is not a problem. But officers
tell of a few incidents. "An officer walked in on two new hires in food services
and caught them stealing the night deposit," Mr. McCaffrey said. "They whacked
him on the head with a short stick. That probably would not have happened if
he'd been carrying a gun."

Opinions on arming campus police also seem to mirror regional attitudes toward
guns. There is little resistance in the South, Mr. Tuttle said, or in
California, where the University of California at Berkeley has its own SWAT
team. A few states, including Iowa, Oregon and Delaware, permit no guns. But it
is in the Northeast that opposition seems the fiercest.

The City University of New York system stopped employing Pinkerton security
guards and hired in-house peace officers, who are trained at John Jay College of
Criminal Justice, after eight people died in a rampage during a basketball game
at City College in 1991. Jose A. Elique, director of safety, said the 19
campuses' presidents can have armed officers. But so far, only Lehman College in
the Bronx does.

The aversion to arms is so intense, Mr. Elique said, that on three campuses --
John Jay College, Queens College and the School of Law at Queens College -- the
officers can't even carry pepper spray or clubs.

"If something ever happened, city police officers would probably be here within
minutes," Mr. Elique said. "But it's somewhat ironic this is the largest urban
university system in the country, possibly in the world, and we're still
fighting for pepper spray and handcuffs."

LOAD-DATE: August 16, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Ted Mackey, a security officer, on the campus of the State
University at Fredonia, N.Y., 50 miles southwest of Buffalo. He says he feels
unsafe without a gun and with only a club and a can of pepper spray on his hip.
(Don Heupel for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              183 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 16, 1995, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

ON THE SET WITH: Forest Whitaker;
The Camera Has 2 Sides

BYLINE: By VERONICA CHAMBERS

SECTION: Section C;  Page 1;  Column 1;  Living Desk

LENGTH: 1382 words

DATELINE: PHOENIX


IF a movie maker were casting the part of a film director, Forest Whitaker
wouldn't seem the obvious choice. He is not loud. He is not manic. During the
filming of Terry McMillan's novel "Waiting to Exhale," which he is in fact
directing, the cast and crew were enamored of him almost to the point of
obnoxiousness; you couldn't help thinking that if one more person called Mr.
Whitaker a gentle giant . . .

And perhaps it was because of Mr. Whitaker's linebacker size that he made such
an effort to keep a calm atmosphere on the set. Unlike some directors who change
their minds on whims and experiment while the crew's time ticks away, Mr.
Whitaker, 35, carefully plotted every aspect well in advance. "Months ago, my
director of photography and I figured out how we wanted to shoot each scene,"
Mr. Whitaker said. "Then in rehearsals we went over it all again. By the time we
get on set, I feel pretty confident that the performances will work and I know
what the shots will look like."

"Waiting to Exhale," which finished shooting in May and is to be released in the
fall by 20th Century Fox, is Mr. Whitaker's second turn as a director (his first
was an HBO special "Strapped," in 1993). He is usually on the other side of the
camera.

Most famous for his performance as Jody, the British soldier who becomes a
prisoner of the I.R.A. in the 1992 hit "The Crying Game," Mr. Whitaker made his
acting debut at 22 as a football player in "Fast Times at Ridgemont High," the
80's answer to "American Graffiti." It was a talented group with whom to begin
in films: his Ridgemont High classmates included Jennifer Jason Leigh, Sean Penn
and Phoebe Cates.

Since then, he has worked with Clint Eastwood in the starring role of the
Charlie Parker biographical movie, "Bird"; with Martin Scorsese in "The Color of
Money"; Spike Lee in "Do the Right Thing"; Oliver Stone in "Platoon," and Barry
Levinson in "Good Morning, Vietnam." Even as he is in late-summer
post-production on "Waiting to Exhale," he can be seen in two movies, "Smoke"
and the action adventure "Species."

He laughed at the suggestion that becoming a director may make him a more
opinionated actor. "I get into my work when I'm acting," he said. "I focus on
what I'm doing and I don't get into whether or not they shoot it this way or
that way. As a director, you've got to let go of the scene and keep your eye on
the overall story. Film making, for me, is really about storytelling."

It was the vivid storytelling of "Waiting to Exhale" that appealed to the
director in Mr. Whitaker. The tale of four black women in Arizona who find
friendship with one another while searching for love, respect and peace of mind
was on best-seller lists for months, partly because of its straight, candid talk
about women, men and relationships.

But well before the cameras began rolling, there was controversy. Black women of
many ages and backgrounds identified passionately with the novel's heroines, and
when Mr. Whitaker was chosen by the producers (Deborah Schindler and Ezra
Swerdlow) and Ms. McMillan to convert the novel to film, there was much rumbling
about the decision to choose a black man to tell what so many saw as essentially
a black women's story.

"I never felt like the difficulty of my directing this story is that I'm not a
woman," Mr. Whitaker said. "I can only tell the story as I see it and perceive
it."

And earlier this year, as Mr. Whitaker was making this film about relationships,
he himself became engaged. He refuses to discuss his relationship, but did say,
"Making a film about learning to feel good about yourself, your friendships and
your relationships was very appealing to me."

Unlike many in the film industry who are transplants to Southern California, Mr.
Whitaker grew up in Los Angeles. His father sold insurance and his mother was a
school teacher. Mr. Whitaker attended the University of Southern California as a
voice major. He switched to theater, and after two years at the U.S.C., he won a
scholarship to the Drama Studio in Berkeley, Calif.

He found success relatively quickly. "When I think of the characters I've
played, I don't see them as defying stereotypes." he said. "I try to go to the
motivation of each one of them as a human being. As a human being, you don't
wake up every morning thinking about your race and you're gender. If you're
Charlie Parker, you're thinking about your music. In 'Species,' I play a
psychic. That character was trying to communicate with this being. The fact that
he was black was secondary."

After directing a string of music videos between acting roles, Mr. Whitaker
directed his first feature film, "Strapped," for HBO. It was a high-energy
portrait of teen-age gun runners in the inner city, and "Strapped" made him a
director to watch.

On the set, Ms. McMillan said she had been very conscious of criticism of her
approval of Mr. Whitaker. She said: "I've been approached by people who want to
know, 'Why did you get a man to direct "Waiting to Exhale"?' But it's not about
gender, it's about his understanding of the work."

The film stars well-known and lesser-known unknown actresses: Angela Bassett,
who was nominated for an Academy Award for her role as Tina Turner in "What's
Love Got to Do With It?"; the singer Whitney Houston; Loretta Devine (one of the
stars of "Dream Girls" on Broadway), and Lela Rochon (who had small parts in
"Harlem Nights" and "Boomerang").

Design touches illustrate each character's personality. Mr. Whitaker said:
"Angela's character is surrounded by water colors -- the upper ranges of the
oceans, indigo and darker blues. Earlier in the film, when she throws out her
husband's stuff, she hangs up a big ocean painting. There's a big aquarium in
her bedroom. It was like that for every actress."

In one scene, Bernadine, Ms. Bassett's character, goes to the office of her very
wealthy husband and confronts him about his affair with his white secretary and
the financial mess he has left her in. In the book, it is almost comical, as
Bernadine charges into the office, slaps the secretary and yells curses at her
husband. Ms. Bassett and Mr. Whitaker decided to give it drama: this is more
than an angry woman putting her soon-to-be ex-husband in check -- this is the
disintegration of a marriage.

In Mr. Whitaker's movie, even the low-down dirty men have filled-out
personalities -- in some cases, more so than in the book. "All the characters
had to be three dimensional," he insisted. "It's easy to say that the man is a
dog. But they've been in a relationship for 11 years. There was a reason that
Bernadine stays. All of that has to come across in the film."

Before the take begins, Ms. Bassett entered the room in silence. She talked only
to Mr. Whitaker and no one approached her unless necessary. "Angela gives 100
percent every time," Mr. Whitaker said. "She never settles. My job is to help
her."

The first assistant director addressed the cast and crew. Mr. Whitaker never
spoke to the crowd. He rarely spoke to more than one person at a time, and even
then his voice was almost a whisper. When he had directions for an actor, he did
not bellow across the room from his director's chair: he got up, walked over and
whispered into the actor's ear. The only word Mr. Whitaker screamed was
"Action!"

As Ms. Bassett began the scene, there were tinges of the toughness that
underlies her performance as Tina Turner. She slapped the secretary so hard she
knocked her over.  Then she confronted her husband, who tried to play the heavy
with her. But she was not having it. He told her he would come by on the weekend
to see the children and bring her some money to tide her over: $3,000. But Ms.
Bassett looked as though she were the one who had been slapped. "Three whole
thousand?" she said, incredulous, as Ms. McMillan mouthed the words along with
her.  "That must be the cost of her Clairol bill!" Ms. McMillan smiled.

After the take, Mr. Whitaker whispered, "That looked good" to no one in
particular. Sitting in the corner waiting for the next setup, Ms. Bassett seemed
to be on the verge of tears, caught in the scene's emotional power. Mr. Whitaker
went to her, took her hand and consoled her. For him, the gesture wa not out of
place: it was just part of his job.


NAME: Forest Whitaker

LOAD-DATE: August 16, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Forest Whitaker directing Terry McMillan's "Waiting to Exhale."
(pg. C1); Forest Whitaker conferring with Angela Basset, left, and Whitney
Houston, two of the stars of "Waiting to Exhale." (Nicola Goode/ 20th Century
Fox) (pg. C4)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              184 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 17, 1995, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

CLOSE TO HOME;
War Legacies From Fathers To Children

BYLINE: By JAMES SCHEMBARI

SECTION: Section C;  Page 1;  Column 1;  Home Desk

LENGTH: 795 words


MY father said he couldn't see a thing that day 50 years ago. He was too far
away but knew that right across Tokyo Bay on the U.S.S. Missouri, World War II
was coming to an end, and with it, the most exciting adventure of his life.

He still talks about it. He also talks about the kamikaze at Okinawa that
slammed into his battleship, the U.S.S. West Virginia, and also about the one
that missed. As the pilot pulled out of his dive, obviously with a change of
heart, he smiled at my father and his gun crew as he flew by. Then they shot him
down.

He has told me about the continuous thunder of the 16-inch guns during the
Battle of Leyte Gulf, how he later almost went down in a stricken whaleboat
during a storm and how he was wounded near the Philippines. He has even told me
how much he enjoyed Navy food.

My experiences in Vietnam were benign by contrast, and I am thankful for that.
But I went to Vietnam nonetheless, and it is my father's stories that took me
there.

Growing up, I could never get enough of them. I remember being shooed into the
kitchen to eat with my cousins during big family dinners and hearing the
grown-ups in the dining room talking about the war. Uncle Jimmy fought in
France, Leo at the Battle of the Bulge, Harry at Guadalcanal. My father saw the
flag go up on Iwo Jima.

My aunts worked in defense factories, Mom welded fighters for the Navy. My
parents' stories came together when Mom took a room at a boardinghouse run by my
father's mother. Dad, home on leave, fell in love.

The author Studs Terkel has called it the good war, the whole nation coming
together to accomplish one great thing. My family had every reason to be proud
of their roles in winning that war and every right to brag about it over dinner.

To a boy, it seemed like one grand event, a heroic battle against evil that the
good guys won.

So for me, when high school ended and with the draft in full gear, there was
only one clear path and that was into the Navy, just like my Dad. Just like my
Dad, I asked to be stationed on a battleship (although I didn't get it), as if I
hoped to fight his war. I even left with one of his old uniforms folded in my
duffel bag.

Vietnam was the wrong war for all of that. I came home knowing that I had not
been on the side of the angels like my father, and was bewildered that my time
had not been as rich as his. I felt I had wasted four years of my life.

A few months ago, I stood with my children, 8, 5 and 3, at the Navy Memorial in
Washington. We had been passing it and I asked my wife to pull over. "I just
want to see it," I told her. "Just for a minute."

While my children played in the fountains, while my wife stayed in the car and
read a book, I moved along the 22 bronze reliefs of naval history and relived my
own. One actually showed a ship that looked strikingly like mine engaged in a
supply operation at sea that I must have taken part in hundreds of times.

When you go to a national monument, you don't expect to see a part of your life
up there in bronze. And suddenly, I wanted to talk about it.

I called my children over and knelt down beside them. Then for the first time in
their lives, I told them what I had done in the war. My finger moved along the
bronze as I explained what the ship was doing, how the supply lines were strung,
how we would try to keep a steady 12 knots. I told them about the massive air
war we waged and my place in it. I told them about exotic countries and people.

It felt good to tell them my stories, even though I had promised myself I never
would. My father and I took home different things from our wars. I had taken
silence. I could never imagine, after so lovingly nurturing their lives,
squandering my children by giving them up to such insanity. For all the right
reasons, my father was proud when I joined the Navy; silence was my way of
keeping my children from ever wanting to.

So I have kept my mouth shut around the dinner table. No romance, no adventure,
and, I hope, no longing to be like Daddy when they become old enough to put on a
uniform.

After I finished my stories in Washington, instead of bolting back to the
fountains to play, my children started asking me questions. Enough, I told them,
we have to get back to the car.

But there is still one more war story I need to tell them. This one I'll have to
make up because it comes not from the past, but now, from a father's fear.

I'll tell them I had never been more scared in my life, frightened that I'd
never get a chance to meet their mother or ever get to hold them in my arms. It
will be an exaggeration and a corny thing to say, but by the time they grow up,
they'll know what I was really trying to tell them. And maybe it will have been
enough to keep them safe.

LOAD-DATE: August 17, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              185 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 17, 1995, Thursday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

'Shanghai Triad' To Open Festival

BYLINE: By MEL GUSSOW

SECTION: Section C;  Page 13;  Column 1;  Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 928 words


Movies that explore the process, art and influence of film making will dominate
the 33d annual New York Film Festival. Many of the films look inward,
investigating the art they are exemplifying. In the festival at Lincoln Center
(from Sept. 23 to Oct. 6), "Citizen Langlois," a toast to Henri Langlois, the
founder of the Cinematheque Francaise, could be matched with "Son of Gascogne,"
a tribute to the New Wave. Among the other 26 programs in the festival are
Carlos Saura's "Flamenco" (an encounter between flamenco dancing and films);
Mark Rappaport's fictional consideration of the career of Jean Seberg; "The
Celluloid Closet," a history of gay cinema, and a documentary about movies in
New Zealand (made by the actor Sam Neill).

This year's festival draws the majority of its selections from the United States
and France, while also showing works from 15 other countries including China,
Japan, Taiwan, Spain and Senegal.

The series will open with "Shanghai Triad," the newest film from Zhang Yimou,
the director of "To Live" and "Raise the Red Lantern." In a change of pace, the
Chinese film maker moves from the realism of his epics to a studio-based film
that makes lavish use of sets and costumes. The film is about rival gangsters in
the Shanghai underworld of the 1930's. In it, the director "tips his hat to the
popular genres that have sustained cinema," said Richard Pena, chairman of the
selection committee. Mr. Zhang is one of many directors scheduled to attend the
festival.

Closing night is reserved for "Carrington," by Christopher Hampton, a playwright
and screenwriter directing his first feature, the story of Dora Carrington (Emma
Thompson) and the Bloomsbury group. Jonathan Pryce was named best actor at the
Cannes International Film Festival for his performance as Lytton Strachey.

The new centerpiece spot, the third highlighted film, will feature Kathryn
Bigelow's "Strange Days." One of nine American films in the festival, "Strange
Days" offers a mordant view of American society at the millennium, when reality
collides with virtual reality. Ms. Bigelow's film, which stars Ralph Fiennes and
Angela Bassett, will be shown Oct. 7 at Alice Tully Hall.

Mr. Pena said the central cinematic theme of the festival was accidental. "After
the smoke cleared" from the selection committee's deliberation, he realized that
several films shared that interest. He said that the theme was timely because
this was the centenary year of film making, "when notions of cinema are in the
minds of people" -- especially in the minds of those who choose films for the
New York Film Festival.

Those movies that do not deal directly with the subject of movies often focus on
other aspects of the performing arts. Three films have roots in the world of
music: Ulu Grosbard's "Georgia," acclaimed when it was shown out of competition
at this year's Cannes festival, with Jennifer Jason Leigh and Mare Winningham
playing sisters who are rival singers; "The Neon Bible," by Terence Davies, in
which Gena Rowlands is a former nightclub singer, and "Shanghai Triad," which
stars Gong Li, Mr. Zhang's leading actress, as, in Mr. Pena's words, "the most
famous chanteuse in Shanghai."

American independent cinema will also be represented by Hal Hartley's "Flirt,"
Noah Baumbach's "Kicking and Screaming" and "The Gate of Heavenly Peace," Carma
Hinton and Richard Gordon's documentary about the massacre in Tiananmen Square.

"Carrington" is one of several selections concerned with the literary arts. In
"The Convent," directed by Manoel de Oliveira, a couple played by Catherine
Deneuve and John Malkovich stop at a convent in Portugal as Mr. Malkovich's
character tries to determine the true identity of Shakespeare. Pedro Almodovar's
"Flower of My Secret" deals with a popular novelist.

Three major film artists will have retrospectives. Fifty years after "Rome: Open
City" first played in New York and established the art of Neorealism, the
festival will honor Roberto Rossellini with a presentation of three of his
classic films: "Open City," "Paisan" and "Germany Year Zero," grouped under the
title "Rossellini War Trilogy."

The Russian director, Grigory Kozintsev, known as a cinematic interpreter of
Shakespeare, will be celebrated with a presentation of nine of his films,
including "Hamlet," "King Lear" and "Don Quixote." In the rediscovery category,
there will a special retrospective of newly restored film shorts of Max Linder,
a French silent comedian greatly admired by Charles Chaplin and others.

Mr. Pena, now in his eighth year as the head of the New York festival, made it
clear that politics would share the screen with esthetics. He pointed to Ken
Loach's "Land and Freedom" (about the Spanish Civil War), "Sixteen Oh Sixty," a
new Brazilian film by a first-time director, Vinicius Mainardi (Mr. Pena
considers this "sharp-edged comedy" a potential sleeper) and "Dead Presidents,"
by the Hughes Brothers (Allen and Albert), about a Vietnam veteran who returns
to his home in the Bronx and drifts into crime.

Other films include Tran Anh Hung's "Cyclo," Suzan Pitt's "Joy Street," Hou
Hsiao-hsien's "Good Men, Good Women," Cheick Oumar Sissoko's "Guimba," Matthieu
Kassovitz's "Hate," Gianni Amelio's "Lamerica," Djibril Diop Mambety's "Franc"
and Jafar Panahi's "White Balloon."

The films were chosen from 1,500 candidates by a committee that includes Wendy
Keys from the Film Society of Lincoln Center (the presenter of the festival),
the film critics Stuart Klawans, Jonathan Rosenbaum and David Ansen, and Mr.
Pena.

LOAD-DATE: August 17, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: August 18, 1995, Friday

CORRECTION:

An article yesterday about the 33d annual New York Film Festival at Lincoln
Center misstated the festival's opening and closing dates. It runs from Sept. 29
through Oct. 15, not from Sept. 23 through Oct. 6.


                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              186 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 18, 1995, Friday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 800 words



INTERNATIONAL   A2-8

U.S. REACTS TO REPORTS FROM IRAQ
Based on troop movements and warnings from Iraqi defectors that Saddam Hussein
considered attacking Kuwait and Saudi Arabia, the Pentagon said it was sending
ships and supplies to the Persian Gulf. Many observers fear that the United
States may be overreacting. A1
A shootout at a Saddam Hussein family dinner led to defections. A8
CHANCE RISES FOR BALKANS PEACE
News analysis: The Balkan wars aimed at carving ethnically uniform swaths of
territory may now be virtually complete, and peace prospects may be stronger
than ever. A1
MEXICO CITY'S POLLUTION
Mexico City's smog is caused by leaks from millions of steel tanks containing
bottled gas used for cooking and heating according to a study by an American
scientist. The findings contradict a decade of environmental policy. A1
RUSSIA BLAMED IN AMERICAN DEATH
Relatives of an American disaster relief expert who disappeared in Chechnya in
April said that he was executed by Chechen rebels who were told by Russian
intelligence agents that he was a spy. A3
BOMB IN PARIS INJURES 17
The French police said 17 people were wounded when a bomb exploded near the Arc
de Triomphe in Paris. No one took responsiblity for the blast, or for one last
month that killed 7 people. A3

Despite protests, Vietnam will put a dissident monk on trial. A7
Managua Journal: Nicaragua's capital gets a facelift. A2

NATIONAL   A10-20, B6-7

CLINTONS' PARTNERS INDICTED
A grand jury indicted the Clintons' business partners in the Whitewater land
venture and the Governor of Arkansas on 21 counts of fraud, conspiracy and
making false statements in obtaining loans.  A1
INCENTIVE IN GAMBLING VOTE
Indian tribes in Washington State have put an initiative on the ballot that
could pay every voter up to $100 if they approve unlimited gambling on
reservations.  A1
TAP WATER IS CALLED A RISK
A study said tap water in the Corn Belt is dangerously contaminated with
agricultural weed-killers that pose serious health risks.  A10
USING VOODOO AGAINST CRIMINALS
On Wednesday night, a voodoo priestess enticed Ogoun La Flambeau, a voodoo god
of war and fire, to prowl the Bywater neighborhood of New Orleans and punish
dope peddlers and other criminals.  A10
PARTISAN MEDICARE DEBATE
Democrats are holding meetings around the country to raise alarms about the
Republicans' plans on Medicaid and Medicare.  A20
TWIST IN ATLANTA SHOOTING
The man whose complaint led to charges against the man once known as H. Rap
Brown said that the police pressured him into making the identification.A18
SMOKERS AND HEART ATTACKS
British researchers reported that smokers in their 30's and 40's suffer five
times as many heart attacks as nonsmokers of the same age.  A20
Simpson jurors to have a second tour of the murder scene.  A10
With Hurricane Felix weakening, tourists returned to the coast.  B6
Law D20
Middle aged and studying law.

METRO DIGEST   B1

BRADLEY CONSIDERS PRESIDENCY
A day after he announced he would not run for re-election, Senator Bill Bradley
of New Jersey said he was considering entering the 1996 Presidential race as an
independent.  A1
CONFLICT OF INTEREST CHARGES
The involvement of two top Republican officials in a fund-raising venture has
drawn criticism from watchdog groups and Democratic lawmakers, who say it puts
pressure on people doing business with the state to contribute money. A1
Business Digest D1
Weekend C1-26
Where to go for in-line skating.  C1
Elegant bastion of good manners.  C1
For Children C12
Theater: "What You Said." C2
"Troilus and Cressida." C3
Film: "The Baby-Sitters Club." C6
"Hyenas." C6
"Jupiter's Wife." C8
Music: Frances Lucey.  C3
Alanis Morissette.  C5
Terence Trent D'Arby.  C10
Marriner at Mostly Mozart.  C14
The Foo Fighters.  C17
Dance: Young composers and choreographers at Lincoln Center.  C5
Restaurants C21
Architecture: A museum design by Steven Holl.  C18
Art: Outdoor sculptures.  C1
Art in Review C19
Art in children's books.  C24
Books: "The Electronic Republic," by Lawrence K. Grossman.  C25
Home Video D18
Sports B8-16
Baseball: Yanks face key 10-game West coast trip. B9
Mets' Alfonzo has a herniated disk.  B11
Column: Araton on boxing B9
Lipsyte on Mantle, Seles and Tyson B9
Olympics: The story behind NBC's TV rights coup B9
Obituaries D17
Howard Koch, screenwriter.
Editorials/Op-Ed A24-25
Editorials
U.S. plan for Bosnian peace.
The detective's tapes.
Parochial school models.
Letters
Bob Herbert: Just your typical myopia.
Allan Gurganus: A letter to Granddad, the tobacco farmer.
Amatzia Baram: In Iraq, the West wins.
Chronicle B2
Crossword C24

LOAD-DATE: August 18, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              187 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 18, 1995, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Vietnam to Try Dissident Buddhist Monk Despite U.S. Protest

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHENON

SECTION: Section A;  Page 7;  Column 1;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 583 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Aug. 17


Rejecting protests by the United States and human rights groups, Vietnam has
announced that the nation's most prominent dissident monk will go on trial on
charges of "sabotaging religious solidarity."

The trial date for Thich Huyen Quang, 77, has not yet been announced, but
foreign diplomats in Hanoi, the Vietnamese capital, said it could begin within
days.

His conviction, they said, is almost certain given that his 68-year-old chief
deputy was found guilty of similar charges after a one-day trial and sentenced
this week to five years in prison.

Diplomats and human rights groups said the timing of the trials may be linked to
last week's visit to Hanoi by Secretary of State Warren Christopher, the
highest-ranking American to visit Vietnam since the end of the Vietnam War.

Mr. Christopher, whose visit marked the establishment of full diplomatic
relations between the former enemies, urged Government officials in Hanoi to end
its harassment of dissidents, including religious leaders who oppose tight
controls on religious groups. Vietnamese officials responded by telling the
United States not to meddle in Vietnam's internal affairs.

The State Department has expressed concern both over the treatment of the monks
and over the prison sentences imposed last week on a group of Vietnamese human
rights advocates, including two Vietnamese-Americans.

Hanoi's leaders clearly fear that the monks of the Unified Church of Vietnam,
who have a long history of public protest, could be a threat to the stability of
the Government, just as they helped topple American-backed Governments in South
Vietnam in the 1960's and 1970's.

The Unified Church and other independent Buddhist groups were banned by Vietnam
in the 1980's, and the Government created a single, state-sponsored umbrella
federation called the Vietnam Buddhist Church to oversee all Buddhist worship in
the country. The Unified Church refused to disband, however, and its leaders
have repeatedly criticized Vietnam's Communist leadership over its human rights
record.

A report Wednesday from the official Vietnam News Agency said Thich Huyen Quang,
who is the patriarch of the Unified Church, and the church's third-ranking
official, Thich Long Tri, would both go on trial on criminal charges of
undermining "religious solidarity." The report did not cite the possible
penalties faced by the two monks.

On Monday, the second-ranking official of the church, Thich Quang Do, and five
other members of the federation were given prison sentences after a one-day
trial in Ho Chi Minh City on charges of "undermining the policy of unity," a
national crime under Vietnam's criminal code.

Thich Quang Do, a writer and scholar who is the Secretary General of the Unified
Church, received a five-year sentence, while the others were given prison terms
ranging from two-and-a-half years to four years. The prison term of one of the
defendants, a lay Buddhist woman in poor health, was suspended after she asked
for leniency.

After a separate trial last week, nine other Vietnamese human rights advocates,
including two Vietnamese-Americans, were sentenced to prison terms of 4 to 15
years for their part in an organization that called itself the "Movement to
Unite the People and Build Democracy."

The nine defendants were arrested in November and December 1993. According to
the Vietnam News Agency, they were charged with "acting to overthrow the
people's government" by producing political documents.


LOAD-DATE: August 18, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              188 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 18, 1995, Friday, Late Edition - Final

THEATER REVIEW;
Surfing Through Shakespeare

BYLINE: By BEN BRANTLEY

SECTION: Section C;  Page 3;  Column 1;  Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1436 words


Early in Mark Wing-Davey's deliriously overcooked production of "Troilus and
Cressida," at the Delacorte Theater in Central Park, that fabled Greek warrior
Ulysses decides to go channel surfing.

He's delivering his famous "degree" speech, about the internal chaos in the
Greek camps seven years into the Trojan War, but his fellow soldiers can't be
unglued from the television set, which seems to be tuned to CNN.

So the ever-crafty Ulysses, played by Steven Skybell, picks up the remote
control. And as he discourses on what happens "when the planets in evil mixture
to disorder wander" (something of which anyone associated with this production
should have a deep understanding), he begins flipping through the stations,
creating a Babel-like succession of dissonant voices. Ah, what a person has to
do to get a little attention these days.

This technological image winds up being more appropriate than one might
initially suspect. Mr. Wing-Davey's disjunctive interpretation of Shakespeare's
most sour-natured play is like nothing so much as the sort of fever dream that
descends after a surfeit of random television browsing in bed.

Imagine such a dream of more than three hours woven from snippets of "Apocalypse
Now" and "Platoon," clunky gladiator movies, a college debate forum, the
Penthouse version of "Caligula," something involving a mummy's curse and a very
stylized production of a Moliere play. And that's only for starters.

"Troilus and Cressida," the most unclassifiable of the works in the canon, has
never been an easy play to put over. A startlingly cynical look at the notions
of courtly love and honor in the war immortalized by Homer, it is, in a sense,
the flip side of the martial cheerleading of "Henry V."

For years, the play confounded critics who expected nobility and compassion from
their Shakespeare. Dryden went so far as to rewrite it from top to bottom to
make it more appropriately heroic, and it remained largely unproduced for
centuries.

But in the aftermath of World War I, "Troilus" was embraced as a play for the
modern age, reflecting an increasing suspicion of military glory. It has since
been done in productions set in the Crimean War, the Civil War, the Vietnam War,
the post-apocalyptic future, ad nauseum, and used as a platform for pacifism,
feminism and oracular statements about Western civilization in a state of
decadent twilight.

So, really, what else can possibly be done to poor "Troilus"? Mr. Wing-Davey, an
English director best known here for his haunting interpretation of Caryl
Churchill's "Mad Forest," solves the problem by incorporating the elements of
all previous productions (and then some) into one gigantic heap of cultural
compost.

Accordingly, this "Troilus" has room for soldiers dressed in olive drab
camouflage suits, medieval armor, Grecian togas, Japanese kimonos and "Road
Warrior" tatters. The sound and the musical score (by Dan Moses Schreier and
Mark Bennett) run from abstract Asian melodies to "Boogie Woogie Bugle Boy" and
the Doors; the weapons, from lances to carbines.

More distractingly, the characters are themselves conceived as a medley of
theatrical and historical styles. Young, love-blinded Troilus (Neal Huff) is
played in the convention of a classically trained actor doing Romeo.

His faithless Cressida (Elizabeth Marvel) first appears looking like a cocktail
waitress from Caesar's Palace. Her prurient uncle, Pandarus (Stephen Spinella),
suggests a Kabuki version of an 18th-century courtier. And the demented
prophetess Cassandra (Catherine Kellner) looks like a contemporary waif with
fantasies of belonging to Bloomsbury.

Straddling the centuries is nothing new in interpreting the classics. Ask
directors like JoAnne Akalaitis, Howard Davies or Mark Lamos. And Mr. Wing-Davey
is obviously saying something about the eternal relevance of such themes as the
moral devastation of war, the confusion of love with lust and the
uncomprehending clashes of different cultures.

But at some point, disparate ingredients must be melded into a fluid style that
lets the story tell itself. Here, you can't see the play for the anachronistic
clutter. (Why is Ulysses reading a Dianetics magazine? Is that a laptop computer
Troilus has brought on stage with him for his penultimate scene? And what on
earth is that motorized peacock?)

More than anything, this production seems like an unedited, self-indulgent chain
of free associations with the text. Every thematic aspect is given a grotesque
visual equivalent by Derek McLane, the scenic designer.

The ubiquitous presence of Helen of Troy, the adulteress who started the whole
war, is signified by a billboard-sized portrait of Tamara Tunie, the actress
playing Helen.

The idea that the Trojans idealize women in unrealistic ways is indicated (no
kidding) by the presence of actresses on pedestals in a scene in the palace of
Priam (Henry Stram). And lest you think there's anything more than nasty old
carnality between Helen and Paris (a Billy Idol-like Bill Camp, who speaks with
maddeningly overripe diction), Mr. Wing-Davey has provided a massage parlor-ish
orgy scene for them that would do Bob Guccione proud.

Much of this smacks of the desperation of a director who, when in doubt, simply
brings on the gimmicks, a tendency that reaches its pinnacle when Cassandra
shows up with a vacuum cleaner to deliver her doom-saying prophecies. Mr.
Wing-Davey appears less to have thought through the play than to have pasted
things onto it.

Understandably, this approach cramps the actors, although many of them are
valiant in their attempts to transcend it. Cutting the titanic Achilles (Paul
Calderon) down to human size by portraying him as a wacked-out druggie doesn't
really work. And Tim Blake Nelson's scurrilous Thersites, the leprous clown who
delivers mocking commentary (replete with updated obscenities) on the action,
doesn't benefit from being pitched as one sustained, vicious kvetch.

But Mr. Skybell and Boris McGiver, as Hector, manage their key thematic speeches
with grace and clarity, without seeming too much like the captains of debate
teams. Mark Kenneth Smalz is both winningly comic and oddly touching as Ajax,
here a vain, dimwitted muscle man.

Within the confines of his bizarrely stylized persona, Mr. Spinella delivers
some acute and wonderfully funny line readings. And Mr. Huff is fine in
conveying the callow impetuosity of Troilus, although a bit sloppy in his
overwrought reactions to Cressida's infidelity.

Cressida herself, perhaps the least credible figure on the page, here emerges
miraculously as the most credible person onstage. An affectingly uneasy mixture
of surface sophistication and adolescent uncertainty, Ms. Marvel's Cressida
adroitly reconciles the character's contradictions by attributing them in part
to the intoxication of a young woman just becoming aware of the effects of her
sexuality on men.

Beneath the bile of "Troilus and Cressida," there is a softer current of
melancholy, a sense (also particularly evident in the sonnets) of how the
vicissitudes of time and politics erode the human urges to be virtuous and
heroic. This came across in Mr. Wing-Davey's production only once, when Troilus
and Cressida were earnestly swearing their loyalty to each other in high-flown
terms that were obviously destined to be shattered.

The stage was quiet and nearly bare at that moment, and one was aware of nothing
but the actors. Fleetingly, memories of the eloquent simplicity of the New York
Shakespeare Festival's recent production of "The Tempest" came to mind.

It is worth noting that the most pervasive image in the play, first struck by
Ulysses's description of a "universal wolf," is that of something pushed to such
excess that it ultimately devours itself. It is a lesson that Mr. Wing-Davey
obviously chose not to heed.


TROILUS AND CRESSIDA

By William Shakespeare; directed by Mark Wing-Davey; sets by Derek McLane;
costumes by Catherine Zuber; lighting by Christopher Akerlind; sound by Dan
Moses Schreier; original music by Mark Bennett; choreography by Daniel Banks.
Presented by the New York Shakespeare Festival/the Joseph Papp Public Theater,
George C. Wolfe, producer. At the Delacorte Theater, Central Park West, enter at
81st Street.

WITH: Neal Huff (Troilus), Stephen Spinella (Pandarus and Calchas), Elizabeth
Marvel (Cressida), Catherine Kellner (Cassandra), Steven Skybell (Ulysses),
Henry Stram (Menelaus and Priam), Tim Blake Nelson (Thersites), Paul Calderon
(Achilles), Boris McGiver (Hector), Bill Camp (Paris) and Tamara Tunie (Helen).

LOAD-DATE: August 18, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Neal Huff with Elizabeth Marvel, and Stephen Spinella as
Pandarus. (Sara Krulwich/The New York Times)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              189 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 19, 1995, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS;
Vietnam's Oil-Rich Dreams Go Largely Unfulfilled

BYLINE: By EDWARD A. GARGAN

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 32;  Column 1;  Business/Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1024 words

DATELINE: HO CHI MINH CITY, Vietnam


One hint of oil's importance here, if not its potential, is the three offshore
oil rigs engraved on the back of a piece of Vietnamese currency, the 5,000-dong
bank note, worth about 45 cents.

For Vietnam, and for the dozens of global oil companies that have descended on
this country, the South China Sea once stirred dreams of great oil wealth. But
it has not turned out that way.

Last year, with virtually all the oil still coming from fields operated by
Vietsovpetro, a joint venture with Russia, Vietnam had oil exports worth $976
million, 27 percent of the country's export revenue. Still, the recent
experience of oil companies here suggests that while there is some oil and
natural gas, there are also a lot of dry holes.

American companies left Vietnam in the mid-1970's, not long after the United
States military departed, and did not return until President Clinton lifted a
Federal embargo against doing business with Vietnam in February 1994. One of
them was Mobil, which has done some drilling and concluded that about 10
trillion cubic feet of gas will be found offshore -- what Steven Hall, vice
president of Mobil Vietnam Inc., described as "a significant" amount, but far
less than the estimated reserves in Indonesia and Malaysia.

Mr. Hall said that most estimates of Vietnam's potential oil reserves were
between three billion and five billion barrels.

"These numbers, too, are small compared to Indonesia and Malaysia," he said.
"The meanest field in Indonesia operated by Caltex has 10 billion barrels," he
said referring to Caltex Petroleum, a joint venture of the Chevron Corporation
and Texaco Inc. "That's been operating since 1945," Mr. Hall noted. "But even
with these smaller reserves, that doesn't mean they can't be profitably
produced."

At the moment, Mobil is cooperating with the Vietnamese Government to produce a
natural gas master plan for the country. There are no gas pipelines or big power
plants, the sort of expensive infrastructure that Vietnam will need to produce
power for its expanding economy.

British Petroleum, one of the first foreign companies into Vietnam, was awarded
a license to begin drilling off Danang in 1989. "We drilled three wells, and are
about to start a fourth," said a senior executive for the company, who spoke on
the condition of anonymity. We did find hydrocarbons, but not in commercial
quantities."

But elsewhere, he said, "we had the fortune to find gas," adding, "We anticipate
that our investment will have a commercial return."

Last year, British Petroleum announced that it had discovered two trillion cubic
feet of gas 230 miles offshore.

"That's enough to keep Ho Chi Minh City in gas for 20 years," the B.P. executive
said. "We're now studying the feasibility of building a pipeline to power
stations near Ho Chi Minh City. It's not by global standards significant, or
even particularly significant by Far East standards. However, in the Vietnam
context, it is significant in that it provides a national resource to drive the
country."

Vietnam has said that it expects to begin using its domestic gas reserves for
power production by the end of 1998.

All of the nation's oil is currently exported, most of it to Singapore, where it
is refined. Vietnam then repurchases the oil it needs for its own use. It has no
refineries of its own, although there are plans to build one.

Last fall, Prime Minister Vo Van Kiet announced that a refinery would be built
in central Vietnam, near Vung Dung Quat, roughly 370 miles north of Ho Chi Minh
City, formerly Saigon, the old South Vietnamese capital. Most major oil
companies insist that building the refinery there makes no economic sense --
long pipelines would be required to move the oil to power plants in the south,
and Singapore's advanced refineries are not all that much farther away from Ho
Chi Minh City. The decision appears instead to have been prompted by political
considerations.

Since the end of the war, Vietnamese leaders have worried about the disparities
between the northern and southern regions of the nation. As a result,
considerable effort has been expended to make major investment projects in the
center of the country as a way of economically unifying north and south. Whether
such a strategy can work, either economically or politically, is unclear.

Still, foreign oil companies are prepared to invest substantial amounts in
pursuit of gas and oil. Unlike most foreign investments, the oil industry's
commitments run into the hundreds of millions of dollars -- indeed, a single
drilling effort can cost $25 million.

British Petroleum, according to its executive here, together with the Norwegian
state oil company Statoil, will have invested $350 million by the end of the
year. BHP Petroleum of Australia, a unit of Broken Hill Proprietary, has
reportedly invested $300 million, and Shell Oil, part of the Royal Dutch/Shell
Group, is said to have laid out $120 million so far. About 12 percent of all
foreign investment in Vietnam to date has been made by oil companies.

What worries some experts in the field, though, is the relative sparseness of
the finds so far.

Amy Myers Jaffe, senior editor at Petroleum Intelligence Weekly, said that many
companies expected Vietnam to be a "hot spot" -- or, as she put it, an
"elephant," and were disappointed. "Oil companies are always trying to think:
'Where can I get a billion barrels?' " she said. "Everyone is under pressure to
find enormous fields. If you were a company and you were slow to go there, you
probably saved yourself a lot of money because now we know the geology isn't
what they expected."

As a result, there has been, among some American companies, some tentativeness
toward Vietnam. The Exxon Corporation, according to Ed Burdwell, a spokesman,
"is interested" in Vietnam, but currently has no areas under contract.
Similarly, Chevron, Tenneco and Texaco all have yet to get involved in oil
exploration off Vietnam.

"Vietnam goes through phases," said Marie Belsey, the country manager for
British Gas, in Hanoi. "It's talked up and talked down. But nobody's walked away
yet."

LOAD-DATE: August 20, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Map: A refinery is to be built near Vung Dung Quat, on Vietnam's
central coast, a location that some say was politically motivated. (The New York
Times)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              190 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 19, 1995, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

COMPANY NEWS;
VIETNAM TELECOMMUNICATIONS IN TRANSMISSION DEAL

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 33;  Column 1;  Business/Financial Desk

LENGTH: 73 words


Northern Telecom Ltd. said yesterday that its advanced transmission system had
been chosen by the Vietnamese telecommunications authority and Telstra
International Ltd. for Vietnam's new fiber optic network. No financial terms
were disclosed. Telstra International is the network's prime contractor. The
transmission system will run from Hanoi to Ho Chi Minh City with connections to
major towns and cities, Northern Telecom said.

LOAD-DATE: August 20, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              191 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 20, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THE MAN INSIDE BILL CLINTON'S FOREIGN POLICY

BYLINE: By Jason DeParle;    Jason DeParle is a staff writer for the Magazine.
His last article described the relationship between Representative Bob
Torricelli and Bianca Jagger.

SECTION: Section 6;   Page 33;   Column 4;   Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 9603 words


THE NEWS ARRIVED IN A NOTE MARKED urgent by a red dot. In a few hours, it would
plunge the Bosnian war into a desperate new phase. But for the moment, the note
brought a smile to the open, impish face of Anthony Lake for it told him that
the warplanes were finally on the way. "They've turned the keys," he said to the
other officials at the interrupted White House staff meeting. At long last, the
United Nations was going to punish the Bosnian Serbs for their barbarous
assaults on Sarajevo.

Lake walked down the hall to the Oval Office, where he offered the welcome news
to President Clinton. The President congratulated him on the breakthrough, and
Lake warned him not to specify in public which country had sent the planes. The
Serbs, he warned, might take hostages. When the phone rang at 4:34 the next
morning, May 26, Lake's fears were being realized. Gen. John Shalikashvili, the
Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, was calling. Lake had to delay their talk
as he groped for the key to convert his home phone to a secure line. Yet the
crux of the general's report was scarcely secret. Serbian commanders, enraged by
the bombing, had fired the single deadliest shell of the war, killing 71
civilians in the town of Tuzla. They were about to take hundreds of U.N.
hostages. And over the next few months, the killing -- or as Lake says, the
"evil" -- that he had hoped to contain would rage out of control.

IT WASN'T SUPPOSED TO BE THIS hard, this job that Lake self-mockingly calls
"national security adviser of the free world." Not in the aftermath of the cold
war and the end of superpower rivalry. And not for William Anthony Kirsopp Lake,
whose whole career was a preparation for the post. After three decades of
striving to reconcile American power and principle, Lake came to office at a
time that seemed uniquely blessed. The nation's enemies had collapsed. Its
ideals had triumphed. And Lake had what appeared to be an unparalleled chance to
pursue what he called "democracy's promise of a better, safer world."

Instead, he wakes up each day to an ambivalent President, a contentious
Congress, a public tempted by isolationism and a world of perverse new crises.
It is a heavy load and it falls on a man whose marriage is faltering, whose old
friends are carping and whose health shows the strain of the relentless work --
but who still insists he is "having fun, every day." Arriving on a campus amid
rumors that he would be hanged in effigy for his Bosnia policy, Lake scribbled a
characteristically whimsical response: "No noose is good noose."

Yet there is a noose -- around Lake and the Administration's foreign policy more
generally -- and it can be summarized in two words: Bosnia policy. The
Administration has had its foreign policy successes, in Haiti and elsewhere. But
the failures in Bosnia have overshadowed these developments in part because they
represent the collision of the two great historical lessons of the last
half-century. One is the lesson of Munich: that aggression in the heart of
Europe must not be appeased. The other is the lesson of Vietnam: that foreign
crusades can easily trap Americans in blood baths. One lesson says get in; one
says stay out. Lake's failed attempts to reconcile them paint a disturbing
picture of American power in the post-cold-war world.

For Lake, the events in Bosnia have also revived the conflict that has most
troubled him throughout his unusual career. That is the conflict between ideals
and interests -- and when it comes to Bosnia, most Americans have spent some
time in its grip, appalled at the carnage and appalled as well at the risks of
getting involved. The conflict between ideals and interests arises perpetually
in American foreign policy, in places from Chechnya to China. And perhaps no one
better personifies the competing traditions, of expansive idealism and
constrained national interest, as Anthony Lake, who has given half his heart to
each faith for more than 30 years.

To a job traditionally held by unambiguous embodiments of American power -- men
like Henry Kissinger -- Lake brings the most puzzling resume. It reads like a
story of twin brothers separated at birth. He served as Kissinger's young
confidant; he resigned in protest and became head of a voluntary service
program. He still gets a look of teen-age excitement when he talks about well
digging in Kenya. But no one confuses him for a bureaucratic naif. "I mean this
in a complimentary sense," says one of his White House colleagues, who compares
Lake with the most Machiavellian figure of the Bush Administration. "He's the
closest thing we have to Richard Darman in terms of bureaucratic gamesmanship."

Lake's awkward, self-mocking demeanor adds to the identity puzzle. Though he
acts as the President's first contact with the gravitas world of generals,
admirals, diplomats and spies, he makes no effort to appear Olympian. He jokes
about the size of his ears and claims to revel in his anonymity. "One more
potted plant imitation," he said one day as he took his place at a Presidential
ceremony. Odd things can move him, as when he rushed to rescue a dangling
modifier in the middle of a lunchtime conversation: "Whew -- almost a
grammatical error on the record."

He is by design the most obscure member of the Clinton foreign policy team,
surely the only national security adviser ever to stand beside the President in
a New York Times photograph and be described as an "unidentified" man. Yet apart
from the President and Vice President, Lake may also be the most powerful
influence on foreign affairs.

Part of Lake's advantage is the edge that security advisers always hold,
proximity to the President. Lake alone sees Clinton on a daily basis, and it is
his job to broker the constant clashes between (and within) the defense,
diplomacy and intelligence agencies. But Lake gains an additional edge from the
colorless qualities of his would-be rivals, Warren Christopher, the Secretary of
State, and William J. Perry, the Secretary of Defense. "There are very few times
that Tony ultimately is reversed or changed or modified," says Leon Panetta, the
White House chief of staff.

Given the rough ride of the past few years, that is not always a compliment. But
Lake brought his struggles over ideals and interests to a happier resolution
during the debates last year over Haiti. He had mostly delegated the issue
during his first year in office, when the humiliations included an American
military ship being chased away by a mob on a Port-au-Prince dock. By April
1994, the attempts to dislodge the island's military dictators had reached a
dead end.

Lake convened a meeting in his office to discuss the numerous calls for
tightened economic sanctions. Looking ahead, he told the group he thought the
move would inflict great pain on average Haitians without driving the rulers
from the island. If Clinton started down that road, he argued, the number of
refugees would grow, and with it the pressure to finish the job militarily. No
one else at his level was yet talking invasion, and Lake sent off those in
attendance -- senior but not top representatives of the Defense and State
Departments -- to start making that case to their principals. Lake began doing
the same with Clinton.

"This was a decisive turning point," says one of those officials. "Tony forced
the policy process to confront the full implications of the decision. This is
the way policy ought to be done." By last fall, Lake found himself on a flatbed
truck in the Port-au-Prince slum district of Cite Soleil, greeting a crowd that
stretched to the horizon. "Bonjour," he began, and tens of thousands of
exhilarating "bonjours" roared back.

But which, in the end, defines him: the success in Haiti or the lack of it in
Bosnia? Lake's struggles over his own identity can be seen in the contorted
label he assigned to his beliefs, then quickly abandoned, early in the
Administration: "pragmatic neo-Wilsonian." Lake returned to the subject of his
conflicting identities one night earlier this year, as he returned on a military
jet from a follow-up trip to Haiti. "Can I trust you not to make me sound like a
jerk," he began, "if I talk to you about something philosophical?"

For the next half hour, Lake reviewed the journey that took him from Kissinger's
staff to the nonprofit world, from what he called the "hard stuff" of making
decisions about the Vietnam War to the "soft stuff" of third-world development.
"I left the 'hard stuff' for the 'soft stuff,' " he said. "I was in two
different worlds. I could do them both." Though he was wrapped in a blanket,
fighting the flu, Lake's face came alive as he struggled to make his point, one
that seemed as personally important as it was difficult to express. "Now, I
think, our society has come back to where we were in World War II, that there
are evil forces out there, and there's not so much a distinction between the
'hard stuff' and the 'soft stuff,' between fighting terrorists and promoting
small-scale development."

He capped his talk with an idiosyncratic metaphor that suggests the synthesis is
not as smooth as he thinks. "I think Mother Teresa and Ronald Reagan were both
trying to do the same thing -- one helping the helpless, one fighting the Evil
Empire," he said. "One of the nice things about this job is you can do both at
the same time and not see them as contradictory."

That, at least, is his hope.

ONE AFTERNOON AT THE END of May, Lake got on an airplane to Massachusetts -- and
for a confused moment he thought he was back in Vietnam. He was describing the
life he had led there as a Foreign Service officer three decades ago. Then,
suddenly, he lost his train of thought. "I'm totally disoriented," he said,
shaking his head and staring down at a sunny outline of the Jersey shore. "I
thought for a moment that was the Vietnam coast."

It's never far away, that place where Lake first tried to do his share of good,
only to see the effort go disastrously awry. Vietnam consumed him for the better
part of a decade -- as an ambassador's aide in Saigon, a vice consul in Hue and
a keeper of the war's top secrets inside the Nixon White House. He resists the
idea that he took away anything so neat as lessons, but when talking about
Bosnia, Lake sometimes offers them nonetheless. Don't forget, he said, that good
intentions "can lead to a war of murderous naivete."

It didn't seem so complicated at the start, when Lake set off in 1963 with what
he would later call "incredibly naive optimism." He was a New Frontier Democrat,
fresh from Harvard and Cambridge universities, sure of his nation's purpose and
power. "I wanted to go to Vietnam because it sounded interesting and exciting
and because it was on the front lines of democracy," he said. "I believed we,
the United States, could do anything if we worked hard enough and thought hard
enough."

Lake could not have known the foreshadowing involved when he spent the flight to
Saigon reading Graham Greene's novel "The Quiet American." It is the classic
derision of a figure much like the 23-year-old Tony Lake -- an earnest, educated
young man from New England who hopes to bring democracy to Vietnam. But in
Greene's version the quest brings senseless death. "I remember thinking to
myself, 'What does Graham Greene know?' " Lake says. "Because that's exactly
what I believed."

Lake's ancestors had often gone forth in the world carrying torches. His
mother's father, William Hard, was a muckraking journalist raised in India by
missionary parents; his father's father, Kirsopp Lake, was a prominent British
theologian who emigrated to teach at Harvard. Lake's younger sister, Lydia, says
the history of service and distinction was captured in the portraits of
relatives that lined the family's walls. "There's a tiny streak," she says,
"where Tony feels the import of carrying on the family name: he's the last of
the Kirsopp Lakes." Lake seemed wary when asked about the family past. "I know
where you're going," he said accusingly, and then he finished the thought
himself. "It's probably true to some degree -- some degree of missionary
impulse. Dangerous stuff."

Lake's older sister, Anne Lake Prescott, insists that the moral clarity of the
Second World War gave her brother two early and fundamental beliefs -- that evil
exists and that organized resistance can defeat it. His father rushed to join
the Navy; his mother organized victory gardens. When I protested that Lake was
only 6 when the war ended, Prescott, who teaches literature at Barnard, clung to
her point even tighter. "Yes, but that's when those synapses are formed," she
says. She calls his voyage to Vietnam Lake's turn at "going out to fight the bad
guys."

Lake recounted his Vietnam odyssey in an extraordinary article he wrote with his
wife, Antonia, for The New York Times Magazine in 1975. It took the form of a
long, intimate letter in alternating he-she passages. (She: "Remember the
letters you wrote the year before we were married, about service, adventure and
the chance to change the world?" He: "It was heady stuff. But, increasingly, the
reality of the war intruded upon the romance.") It is a confessional piece of
writing, all the more surprising given how little Lake is willing to reveal of
his inner life today.

Part of it covers political insights, like those absorbed one day in 1964 on a
battlefield littered with enemy dead. Among them was a young man with "a thin,
scholarly face," a face that reminded Lake of his own. "If somebody like that
was prepared to lay down his life," he decided, the enemy was powerfully
motivated indeed. But Lake also found that the war had him personally
"responding in ways I did not understand." He describes holding a gun as he rode
with a military escort through an area that had recently been ambushed. "With
the gun came the hope that someone would fire at us from the clumps of trees
lining the road, so I could fire back," he wrote. "Usually doubtful that I could
shoot another person, at that moment I was emotionally prepared to do so."

Lake had been telling Vietnam stories in a lighthearted fashion one day, but
when I asked about that one, he suddenly grew uncomfortable. "It's a stupid
story. You can quote me." Yet as he returned to the memory, 30 years later, it
did not seem stupid at all; it appeared to embody the deep ambivalence of a man
usually hoping, and often doubting, that power can be harnessed to moral ends.
"It wasn't that I wanted to kill somebody," he said. "I think it was excitement.
You know, there is nothing more powerful than a weapon that could take somebody
else's life." Lake dropped his voice and started to mumble. "It was sort of a
'welcome to the human race moment,' " he said. "We are carnivores."

By the time Lake left Vietnam, the adventure in democracy building was well on
its way to disaster. In January 1965, thousands of Buddhist demonstrators set
fire to the American Government library in Hue, where Lake was vice consul. Lake
braved the mob and tried to put out the fire, inspiring a Boston Herald article
headlined, " 'Tough Tony' Lake Faces Down 3,000 Howling Buddhists." Asked why he
did it, Lake even now sounds a bit like "The Quiet American." "They were burning
books!" he said. His wife and young son were evacuated a month later, and Lake
soon followed them home. He was troubled about the war but did not yet oppose
it. "I still thought, somehow, we could find the clean colonel."

Instead, in time, he found Henry Kissinger. After two years of deepening
disillusionment inside the State Department and two years of graduate school,
Lake joined Kissinger's staff in June 1969. He immediately won an extraordinary
measure of confidence, sitting in on the Paris peace talks when their existence
was so secretive they were concealed from the Secretary of State. He had just
turned 30.

Lake had signed on dazzled by Kissinger's intellect and convinced he would
negotiate an end to the war. Kissinger orchestrated its escalation instead,
pushing the invasion of Cambodia 10 months later, at which point Lake resigned
in protest. But the two men -- pupil and teacher, idealist and realist -- stay
linked by a complicated bond of mutual usefulness and fascination, even as Lake
now holds Kissinger's old job. Lake was milling about during a state visit to
Kiev this spring when an old Ukrainian veteran asked for his autograph. Watching
Lake blush, someone in the entourage asked what he had signed. "Henry
Kissinger," he said.

The grip of Lake's mixed feelings -- not just toward the man but also to the
interest-driven world view that Kissinger embodies -- comes through in a story
Lake tells about his graduate-school exams. He was asked to attack or defend a
Kissinger statement of classic Realpolitik: that statesmen should concern
themselves with the foreign policies of other countries, not how those countries
treat their own citizens. Lake wrote an enthusiastic defense, "supporting
Kissinger's proposition on logical grounds." That night, Lake went to see a film
about Nazism in Europe and when he returned the next day for oral exams, he
startled his professors by arguing the other side. "I totally threw them off,"
he says.

A quarter-century later, Lake is still benefiting from his resignation, which
lent him a reputation for unusual conscience. "He chucked it all, for ethical
reasons," says R. Nicholas Burns, now the State Department spokesman, who
regards Lake as a kind of moral model. But Lake acknowledges that his tutelage
in wartime Realpolitik had its moral gray zones. Soon after joining the staff,
Lake learned that Kissinger was involved in wiretaps of other young aides.
Though Lake says he found the practice "repellent," he decided not to confront
Kissinger about the wiretap summaries flowing into the office safe. (And after
he resigned, Lake was tapped, too; he sued Kissinger and eventually won a letter
of apology.) "I was already arguing with him on Vietnam," Lake said. "I worried
it would sound paranoid to go to him and say, 'What's in the safe?' "

Lake resigned, but did so in a muted way that diminished its public effect.
Along with two colleagues, Roger Morris and William Watts, Lake argued that the
invasion of Cambodia would destroy that country and escalate the violence at
home -- prescient predictions given the savageries of Pol Pot and the explosion
at Kent State. (Kissinger mocked them as "my bleeding heart friends.") But Lake
said nothing in public, instead joining Morris in a letter to Kissinger
expressing "our regard and respect for you." Morris has called the quiet
resignation "the biggest failure of my life." But Lake says, "I would probably
do the same thing again, because I thought you could have more influence that
way."

The great adventure "on the front lines of democracy" had come to a bitter end.
Lake's wife would write that the experience had soured her on power in general,
but the future national security adviser had not given up. "I retain the belief
that I found so attractive in the Kennedy years," he wrote in 1975, "that
problems created by man can at least be ameliorated by man, and that we must
try."

Lake was still trying two decades later on a snowy day in 1991 when he first met
Bill Clinton. After leaving Kissinger, Lake had worked in Senator Edmund
Muskie's 1972 Presidential campaign, finished his doctorate and served as
director of International Voluntary Services, a private agency that sent
volunteers across the third world. He went back into political battle on Jimmy
Carter's campaign and reaped a choice reward: the State Department's Office of
Policy Planning, which he directed from 1977 to 1981. Throughout the Reagan and
Bush years, he taught international relations at Mount Holyoke College in
western Massachusetts and raised cattle on his 130-acre farm in nearby
Worthington.

Then one November afternoon, he took a drive to Boston, where his old State
Department deputy, Samuel Berger, was waiting to introduce him to Clinton. They
set off to find the candidate before a suburban fund-raising dinner but soon
became hopelessly lost amid the snow and the cul-de-sacs. Arriving late, Lake
had to wait through the dinner, then settle for a 10-minute car ride with the
weary candidate; Clinton asked one question about arms control but mostly
quizzed Lake on how the ailing economy was affecting his neighbors.

A journey of wrong turns and backed tracks, culminating in a truncated
conversation with a leader not terribly interested in foreign affairs -- it
might have seemed like an ominous metaphor. But Clinton used foreign policy
adeptly as a candidate and much of the credit accrued to Lake, who soon became
his leading unpaid adviser. As a domestic candidate, Clinton needed someone he
could turn to and say, "Handle it," and Lake did, helping position Clinton as
both more moral and more muscular than his tired Republican opponent, in places
as diverse as Haiti, Bosnia and China.

Among those impressed was George Stephanopoulos, the campaign aide turned White
House counselor. "The easiest way to say it is he's moral without being a
moralist," he says. "There's this quote by Camus, something like perhaps we
can't stop killing children but we can limit the number of children killed. It's
always struck me that Tony's internalized that message. He's deeply moral and
deeply realistic at the same time." Yet it is one of the curiosities about Lake
that just as many who have worked with him closely find the moral talk
skin-deep. "Tony always has his famous integrity to march out," says Michael
Janeway, a colleague in the Carter State Department. "Tony is really an
apparatchik. Perhaps the weightiest thing he's done is position himself well."

And immediately after the election Clinton found himself in a number of
embarrassing retreats. After vowing that "I would never send those poor people
back" to Haiti, Clinton announced before the inauguration that he would do just
that. After demanding an urgent response in the Balkans, Clinton responded with
tortured ambivalence and inaction. There was a poignancy in such developments
for Lake, since he had co-written a 1984 book, "Our Own Worst Enemy," that
warned candidates to watch their words. "What they say now," he wrote, "will be
held against them."

The book's larger point was that American foreign policy was being poisoned by
ideological fights at home, and he argued that public, partisan security
advisers were among the problems. Indeed, Lake may have given more advance
thought to what a national security adviser should and should not do than anyone
who has held the post. Lake had seen two predecessors, Kissinger and Zbigniew
Brzezinski, turn themselves into superstatesmen who eclipsed the Cabinet. In his
view, this sacrificed the more important role of presenting Presidents with the
full range of their advisers' views. He sought the quieter broker style
exemplified by Bush's adviser, Brent Scowcroft.

Yet Lake acknowledges that there's no such thing as a pure broker and that his
model "revolves around what can be a dilemma." He says his primary
responsibility is to "make sure that the President is getting all points of
view," but he also offers his own recommendations "because if you don't have
views, you shouldn't be doing the job." And the dual roles, broker and adviser,
"can come into tension, obviously." Lake said he erred on the side of plain
broker during his first year, but he has since become quicker to assert his own
views "because it helps move issues to a resolution." Recently, Lake has even
moved into the role of public diplomat, after first insisting a security adviser
should never usurp the position of the Secretary of State. On Aug. 9, Lake led a
mission to Europe to seek a breakthrough on Bosnia amid mutterings that he was
pulling an end run around the State Department.

More often than not, what moves Lake from broker to activist are issues that
touch his internal compass, his sense of "evil." When Rwandan refugees poured
into Zaire in July 1994, Lake personally marshaled the impressive American
relief mission. He became the White House equivalent of a Central African desk
officer, miring himself in the details of water bladders, cargo planes and local
airport layout.  (But he had been extremely cautious about any military
involvement as the slaughters were taking place. In one country, the two Tony
Lakes emerged, idealist and realist.)

A second, very different example of Lake's advocacy can be seen in his strong
support for NATO's eastward expansion, against those counseling deference to
Russian sensibilities. Lake can give long geopolitical arguments for the move,
but he says it "absolutely" also connects to his early thoughts on evil as a
child whose parents were caught up in World War II. "We don't have evil out
there right now, but human nature has not changed." Lake cares enough about the
word "evil" that he insisted last spring that the President use it on his visit
to Babi Yar, the ravine outside Kiev where the Nazis machine-gunned more than
100,000 people, mostly Jews. Speech writers had substituted a euphemism about
the "depravity" of man, but Lake does not think man is depraved; he thinks that
most people are basically good, yet evil lurks among them. "If you can't use
'evil' at Babi Yar, when can you use it?" Lake said, savoring his small victory
as the motorcade pulled away.

BUT THERE ARE ALWAYS MORE than enough evils to resist. The perpetual questions
are: which ones and how? Neither Christopher nor Perry has succeeded in the role
of a public spokesman, and Lake's occasional attempts to fill the vacuum play to
his weaknesses as well; he is neither comfortable nor effective in the
limelight. With the Clinton foreign policy under assault for lacking a central
theme, Lake tried to offer one last September in remarks to the Council on
Foreign Relations. Lake claimed to see a single international struggle taking
shape, pitting the "face of a tolerant society" against a list of enemies that
included "extreme nationalists and tribalists, terrorists, organized criminals,
coup plotters, rogue states." America's job, he suggested, remained the same as
it has always been -- to throw "ourselves with determination into the fight."

If only it were so simple. As the writer James Fallows noted in a subsequent
radio commentary, Lake was impaled on an old dilemma. "Because the United States
was founded on universal theories of liberty," it has always felt some stake in
fighting foreign tyranny. But because American power has limits, "some tyranny,
somewhere, must be ignored. The eternal question has been how and where to draw
that line." The implication of Lake's speech, Fallows said, was "that we don't
need lines at all -- everything that's bad, we'll be against."

The day-to-day limits start with the national mood -- what is often described as
isolationism but might more accurately be called incoherence. On the one hand,
the public continues to expect American dominance in the world; on the other
hand, there is no public willingness to pay the price, either with blood or
money. The point came home earlier this year when Lake joined Shalikashvili for
a day at the battleground at Gettysburg. They toured Rodes's Hill and Little
Round Top and the scene of Pickett's futile charge, walking across the fields
where three days of fighting produced more than 40,000 casualties. Then, in the
battlefield bookstore, they reflected on a Somali mission that had been labeled
a disaster because it claimed the lives of 18 soldiers. "Something has broken
down in the debate about the use of force," Shalikashvili said, in words
especially noteworthy coming from the leader of the notoriously cautious
Pentagon. "Eighteen people died so thousands and thousands could live. To me,
that's glory." Lake nodded.  Still, the deaths in Somalia affected him so deeply
that he had offered to resign. And the deaths clearly played into his
reluctance, seven months later, to send even foreign peace-keepers into Rwanda.

The public mood is one influence on foreign policy, but it can be altered by a
second, more important force: Presidential leadership. While Lake often brings
two minds to an issue -- that of the idealist and of the realist -- he serves a
President notorious for often having many more minds than that. The
Administration's foreign policy is derided almost everywhere for being ad hoc,
episodic, unsteady, easily reversed. Kissinger says, "Almost everywhere the
Administration gets engaged, it recoils before the consequences." Leslie Gelb,
president of the Council on Foreign Relations, says Clinton "does not have
strong convictions about foreign policy and doesn't spend much time on these
issues." Robert Zoellick, an Under Secretary of State in the Bush
Administration, says, "The attitude around the world about the constancy,
credibility and commitment of our policies has slipped farther than at any time
I can remember."

That is the bumper-sticker indictment, but as with most labels about Clinton, it
captures only a partial truth. The most obvious exception, of course, is Haiti,
where Clinton ousted the dictators in a risky move with what was at best thin
public support. (Some Democratic allies in Congress went as far as warning him
he could face impeachment if U.S. troops took high casualties.) "After you've
been through Haiti with Clinton, it's very difficult to understand how people
can say every day that he has no principles or convictions and proceeds by
putting his finger in the air," says the author Taylor Branch, a Clinton friend
who also served as an informal adviser to Haiti's exiled President,
Jean-Bertrand Aristide.

And beyond Haiti there are at least two other areas of foreign policy success,
where Clinton has set a course and clung to it. One involves international
economics, where the President has repeatedly shown steady leadership despite
political risks. Nafta, GATT, the planned free trade zones in Latin America and
Asia -- these are subjects little understood by the public but ones to which
Clinton brings his own orienting beliefs, his commitment to free trade.

The President has enjoyed a second, eclectic set of successes in areas as
disparate as the Middle East peace process and the de-nuclearization of the
former Soviet Union. What these seemingly disconnected matters have in common is
that they flow from some previously established set of rules -- either specific
negotiating tracks (as in the Middle East) or an obvious American interest (as
in getting nuclear arms out of Ukraine). When the rules are more tightly
defined, as they are here, Clinton's gifts of intelligence, energy and eloquence
work on his behalf. But in areas with sharply colliding interests, Clinton's
vast capacity to absorb information may actually work against him. Absorbing all
points of view, he can be loath to settle on one.

Such was the case with Clinton's decision to extend China's most-favored-nation
trade status, after lambasting Bush for doing the same. ("There is no more
striking example of Mr. Bush's indifference toward democracy," Clinton said
during the campaign.) Once in office, Clinton found himself caught between his
conflicting pursuits of human rights and expanded trade. He needed to make a
decision, but in effect he made two. In May 1993, he reiterated his threat to
punish the Chinese, and subordinates pushed the rights agenda hard in subsequent
months; then Clinton dropped his threats when the deadline arrived. Lacking even
a fig leaf to cover his retreat, Clinton conceded that "serious human rights
abuses continue." Even those who supported his final position, like Kenneth
Lieberthal of the University of Michigan, found that he got there having
inflicted the maximum collateral damage on himself. "If I was in Beijing, I'd
love to be the person to make the case that you don't have to worry about what
this President says because he'll cave in the end," he says.

Among those who quickly came to a similar conclusion were the Bosnian Serbs.

THE SLEEPING POWDER WORE off in the middle of the night, somewhere over the
North Atlantic. Lake massaged his rubbery face and paced Air Force One in
stocking feet, wishing that he had taken a larger dose. "I keep waking up," he
said. It was May 8, and across the dimmed, quiet 747, Presidential aides were
dozing in thick padded chairs. They were en route to the Moscow summit. But as
he stretched and sipped a carton of milk, Lake had Sarajevo on his mind.

For months, Lake had joined those predicting that the spring thaw would renew
the Bosnian war, and in recent days the expected had come true. The Bosnian
Serbs had resumed their worst shelling in more than a year, in daily contempt
for the ultimatums meant to protect the city. Lake was urging the United Nations
to respond with air strikes but was meeting strong resistance from allies
worried about the taking of hostages. "In our view, there's greater safety if
the Serbs think we're serious," he said. "But in the French and the British
view, that's easy for us to say, since we don't have troops on the ground." Lake
would subsequently win the air strikes, only to join in abandoning them quickly
when the Serbs took the U.N. hostages. And once again American policy in Bosnia
seemed weak and conflicted.

Nothing casts a greater pall over the entire Clinton foreign policy.  Bosnia is
hard for everyone, not just for Lake. (Bush, touted for his foreign policy
acumen, fared no better than Clinton.) But Bosnia policy is also hard along the
very fault line that Lake has straddled throughout his life, forcing him, as he
says, to weigh "ideals against the cost of intervention." He had hoped for a
world in which "the hard" and "the soft," the interest-driven and the idealistic
aspects of his mentality, might fuse into a united fight against evil. Instead,
he finds himself each day straddling a painful divide. "It's an excruciating
problem," he says.

Odd as it may now seem, Bosnia once gave the Clinton campaign a boost. As
reports of concentration camps began to filter out in July 1992, Clinton
condemned Bush's inaction and called for air strikes to aid the humanitarian
effort. Marlin Fitzwater, the White House press secretary, leaped on Clinton for
"reckless" statements, only to discover the Administration's Defense Secretary,
Dick Cheney, was saying the same thing. "It was an important moment," Lake says,
since it left Clinton looking more forceful, more competent and more humane.

But the event also signaled Lake's own ambivalence. He insisted on inserting a
qualification into the Clinton statement, writing that American efforts "may not
succeed at this stage, but at least we must do what we reasonably can." It is a
striking hedge. And it sufficiently encompasses a quality about Lake (prudence
or weakness, depending on one's point of view) that it has become an
inner-office joke. Nancy Soderberg, one of his deputies, sometimes responds to
assignments by joking, "I'll do what I reasonably can."

But what, on Bosnia, is that? If Lake was caught between conflicting impulses,
Clinton raised indecision to an art form. By the time Clinton reached office, he
was certainly no longer talking about helping the United Nations shoot its way
into Sarajevo, as he had the previous June. But he continued to call himself
"saddened," "sickened," "appalled" and "outraged" at the Serbian attacks,
creating expectations that made his ultimate inaction seem all the more
weak-kneed. "The U.S. should always seek an opportunity to stand up against --
at least speak out against -- inhumanity," he said at a photo session on April
20, 1993. As Elizabeth Drew noted in her book "On the Edge," this was exactly
the elemental question: which would it be?

It is hard to imagine a clearer affront to the values Lake champions in his
speeches -- to the "face of the tolerant society" -- than the rape, torture,
execution, indiscriminate shelling and ethnic cleansing sanctioned by Bosnian
Serb leaders who have been branded war criminals. The Western retreat does not
equate with Munich; the Serbs, unlike the Nazis, are no threat to London or
Paris. But the unpunished Serb advances do invite future problems, encouraging
others to practice similar aggression. So the United States has not only ideals
but interests at stake.

Nonetheless, Lake has insisted on "a clear red line against any American ground
troops there," noting that "Bosnia's a much tougher neighborhood" than Haiti.
Vietnam remains on his mind. "There are a lot of very practical lessons that
come out of Vietnam," he said. "Think ahead. Don't make commitments that you
can't meet. And just don't wander into something." Even if he wanted to dispatch
American ground forces -- which he does not -- Lake said the move "would never
be supported by the American people and the Congress in any case." The public
wariness is real, but neither Lake nor Clinton has made a serious attempt to
build public support, for ground troops or for any forceful use of American
power in the Balkans. If the worst European crisis in 50 years does not move
them to make the case, there are increasingly few places that do.

The refusal to consider ground forces gives the United States only so much
leverage, and it has used that only weakly and sporadically. The failed attempt
in May 1993 to sell the allies on the policy of "lift and strike" is but one
case in point. After months of early debate, Clinton finally decided to promote
a policy of lifting the United Nations arms embargo and threatening the Bosnian
Serbs with air strikes if they tried to overrun the country while the Government
was arming itself. But the allies were opposed. With their troops a part of the
U.N. peace-keeping force, they feared the move would increase the violence and
even spread the war.

Christopher's attempt to convince them otherwise proved famously ineffective.
Christopher took a deferential approach, asking rather than insisting. And as
Elizabeth Drew recounts, no sooner had he left for Europe than Clinton himself
again seemed to be rethinking the whole idea. The President told Les Aspin, then
the Secretary of Defense, that after reading Robert Kaplan's book "Balkan
Ghosts," he was struck by the conflict's deep historical roots. Convinced that
Clinton was already abandoning his own policy, Aspin called Lake and others to
warn them that "he's not on board." The policy would have been hard to sell
under the best conditions, but with such flagging conviction it was impossible.

In the two years since, Clinton has seemed to concentrate mainly on personal
damage control, trying to keep his distance from a Bosnian quagmire that if
sufficiently misplayed could imperil his Presidency. But a series of unhappy
compromises now threatens to leave him with the the worst of both worlds -- a
record of capitulation and the commitment of American troops.  The weak United
Nations mission is now on the verge of collapse. If it does withdraw, the United
States, as the lead partner in NATO, is pledged to protect the U.N. forces on
the way out.  The extraction could last four months, cost $1 billion and involve
as many as 25,000 American troops; they would be caught in the conflict just as
Clinton cranks up his re-election campaign. To avoid this scenario, Lake and
Clinton embarked on a last-ditch effort to save the U.N. mission, wringing an
allied pledge to punish future Serbian attacks with widespread, unyielding air
strikes -- even in the face of hostage-taking. "I'm telling you, this is
different. This is very serious," Lake said, in the kind of I-mean-it tone
national security advisers hope never to find themselves using.

Meanwhile Congress has repudiated Clinton and voted to lift the arms embargo
without the allies' consent. If Clinton fails to sustain his veto, the move will
be sure to spell the end of the peace-keeping force and the consequent entry of
United States troops.

However this latest impasse turns out, Lake's words a year ago, at the Council
on Foreign Relations, seem ever more ironic. "Rather than throw our hands up in
despair at the complexities of the post-cold-war era . . ." he said, "we are
helping to create a world where tolerance, freedom and democracy prevail."

THE CHILDHOOD HOME WHERE Lake's views took shape was a prosperous,
self-consciously intellectual place, proud of its mild peculiarity. As a young
man, Lake's father had dropped out of Harvard to work in a textile mill; he
later rose to become head of research and development for Burlington Industries.
Lake's mother edited books for Reader's Digest. The home was such that the Lake
children did not think it unusual to find an aunt in the parlor explaining how
Virgil used meter to reinforce meaning.

A crumbling family photo from the early 1950's captures the surface whimsy: his
mother smilingly lofts a spyglass, his sister a flute and his father crosses a
plunger and a tennis Continued on page 46
racket into a makeshift coat of arms. It is no surprise that the stiff, grinning
teen-ager holding a model sailboat would become the kind of national security
adviser who a) slipped away from a Presidential entourage to ride a motorbike
around Corregidor, b) checked his rotisserie baseball standings from the palace
in Kiev and c) roused his aides at 6:30 in the morning to skate on a frozen
Ottawa canal. "I was always within the bounds of the conventional trying to be
eccentric," he said.

Trying -- but the family still very much believed in conventional success. Lake
left for prep school at Middlesex in Concord, Mass., in the ninth grade, and his
idea of teen-age rebellion was to announce an interest in attending Stanford.
"My father said it was a good idea, but he didn't know who was going to pay for
it," he says. "I was always going to go to Harvard." Phrased another way, if
Lake's early life instructed him to do good in the world, it also told him to do
well. The two messages might be considered the internal analogues of Lake's
politics, of his swings between idealism and Realpolitik. Though Lake pretends
to have little personal ambition -- he joked in 1992 he was joining the Clinton
Administration because "the price of beef is down" -- everyone describes him as
an intensely competitive man. Strobe Talbott, the Deputy Secretary of State,
sees Lake's love of squash as a metaphor for his mix of courtliness and a fierce
desire to win. "Squash is the ultimate Tony Lake sport," he says. "There's a lot
of disciplined violence."

Lake's professional drive brought early strains to his marriage. "Your work
seemed consistently to have precedence over personal and family matters," his
wife wrote in their 1975 Times Magazine article. Lake pleaded guilty: "I find it
difficult to recall how readily I, too, assumed that my professsional career was
more important." But the two stayed together for another 20 years before
agreeing last January to separate. Lake will not discuss his marriage other than
to say there are no plans for a divorce. But friends say the work may have
played a role: he originally told his wife he would serve as security adviser
for only two years. Then he decided to stay on.

For a top White House official, Lake does little socializing and ties to some of
his old friends have grown strained as well. Neither Peter Tarnoff nor Richard
Holbrooke, both senior State Department officials, would discuss Lake, though
the three had been close friends since their time together in Vietnam. Holbrooke
is a godfather of one of Lake's daughters. But he told intermediaries he would
not be interviewed about Lake; he feared his remarks would take a negative turn.

In a professional sense, one relationship matters most -- the one with Bill
Clinton -- and it's a source of constant speculation. Colleagues are often
struck by the body language between the large, volcanic Clinton and Lake, whose
diffident manner makes him seem smaller than he is. "Tony always gives you the
impression that he's not that sure of his relationship with Bill Clinton," said
a top official. "I can see it in meetings; he's nervous of it." But the official
also added: "Because the President is not involved in foreign policy as much as
other Presidents have been, Tony is in a unique position. He's the only one who
sees the President every day. That puts him in a very strong position to be the
interpreter."

I asked Clinton about his relationship with Lake in a hallway of Air Force One,
as the President returned from the Moscow summit in May. "Let me tell you two
things that I think are important," said Clinton, who quickly praised Lake's
role as a broker who kept him informed of views from across the Government. "He
gives me consistently good advice and he gives me advice that's different from
his on the big questions. But secondly, he also manages to organize a system at
the N.S.C. that has kept up the workload on the hundreds ofother things we have
to deal with and doesn't let a lot fall through the cracks." Clinton's point was
that in the post-cold-war world, he can never be sure where the next Chechnya or
Rwanda will arise. "What's not important today may become very important
tomorrow, so you have to manage the entire workload." By doing so, the President
said, Lake had "served our country very well."

Then another thought hit Clinton, perhaps because Lake always seems to be
beating back some medium-size ailment. He was carted from a Congressional
breakfast in 1993 after collapsing from dehydration. He missed the G-7 summit
this year while recovering from hernia surgery. He's had continued battles with
bronchitis and even his tooth gave out on the day of the showdown with the
Haitian dictators, forcing him to undergo emergency repairs at the White House.
"I've worried about him several times because I think he works too hard,
frankly," Clinton said. "And I've tried to run him off a few times. Not run him
off from his job, but just literally get him to go home and get some sleep for
the weekend."

CLINTON WAS NOT calling Lake soft, but Lake understands that his reputation for
idealism is not an unalloyed blessing. Fairly or not, questions of toughness
have often trailed him. As a schoolboy, Lake was younger and smaller than most
of his classmates; then he sprouted and captained the squash team at Harvard and
rode a motorcyle to the Nixon White House. Still, Kissinger once taunted him to
make a memo more "manly" and colleagues found Lake in the White House basement,
smashing his fist into a Coke machine in frustration. During our intermittent
travels over six months, Lake repeatedly tried to temper his idealistic image
with references to his more manipulative side, insisting with obvious sarcasm,
for instance, that he would never tell a lie. Riding in the Presidential
motorcade through Kiev, Lake suddenly and sourly recalled a 1976 article in The
Washington Monthly, portraying him and Holbrooke as two young stars. "Dick
Holbrooke was going to be the national security adviser and I was this squishy
softy who was going to run the Peace Corps," he said. "It was awful."

But people who know him well have no doubts about Lake's gift for crafty
maneuvering. Brainerd Taylor, one of Lake's Harvard roommates, still resents
Lake's strategy for obtaining the suite's private bedroom, which they had shared
during alternating terms. During his turn, Lake had the room painted "an
absolutely bilious yellow," said Taylor, who as a future major in architecture
was appalled. "He knew I would be absolutely unwilling to sleep in it. That was
Tony to a T."

Lake claims no memory of that but he offers a story just like it -- about, of
all things, how he outmaneuvered his draft board. Lake received his draft notice
in mid-1962, as he was training to become a Foreign Service officer. "At the
time, they were not sending draftees to Vietnam, so my choice was to go to
Vietnam with the State Department or go to Fort Dix or somewhere with the Army,"
he said. Wanting to go to Vietnam, he asked the State Department to send a
letter, telling the draft board that he had already been assigned to language
training. But the board insisted on seeing him in person, and at the subsequent
hearing in Torrington, Conn., one of the members asked him to speak Vietnamese.
Rather than remind the panel that the course had not yet begun, Lake began
counting to 10 in the Asian language he knew, Chinese. "And they said, 'O.K.,
you can go to Vietnam.' " It wasn't a direct lie, he observes now. "But I did
mislead them in speaking Chinese. That's the only time in my life, ever" that
he's done that, he said, "and if you believe that, I've got this property in
Florida."

The moment was lighthearted and the story was funny. It was only later that an
uneasiness set in: Bill Clinton's national security adviser was joking about
manipulating his draft board. As if this President didn't have enough problems
for having misled his. Unlike Clinton, of course, Lake did go to Vietnam and he
did display physical courage under fire -- "Tough Tony" Lake. In his case, the
urge to reveal the deception is as interesting as the episode itself. He was so
eager to convey his craftiness, Lake forgot how the story might sound to some of
the less-privileged soldiers he and Clinton may soon be dispatching to Bosnia.

Shalikashvili, for one, suspects that the lack of military experience must
complicate Lake's decisions about the use of force. "My feeling is that he must
always be conscious when it comes to making decisions on the use of military
power -- that the President has not served and that he had not served," he said.
The general went out of his way to say that "he deals with it very well" and
that military experience would not necessarily push Lake's decisions in a
particular direction. But he did say, "the decisions would probably be easier
because he would then have been a member of the 'club,' if you will."

At times, Lake still seems as though he wants to join. On a trip to
Massachusetts this spring, Lake gunned his rental car and playfully began
dodging imaginary orange cones. He had just completed a Secret Service course in
evasive driving. Roaring down I-91 toward Amherst, he recalled another recent
adventure: tagging along on a simulated dogfight in an F-15. His plane was in
the lead when the pilot pulled a supersonic about-face, stalling the fighter
upside down. "It was the most ecstatic moment you could imagine," he said. "Then
he gunned it, brought it around and blew the other guy away." Lake concluded the
story by laughing at his own enthusiasms. "It was something every 14-year-old
should do," he said.

The danger Lake did face as a 14-year-old was more terrestrial: his father's
explosive temper. "He could really get going sometimes," Lake says. Gerard Lake
was an ardent New Dealer, more passionate about politics than business, and he
would become particularly vexed when arguing with his Republican wife. The
prevailing family interpretation is that the clashes between his parents bred in
Lake the skills of the future diplomat. He would shuttle between the two,
defusing the moment with his diffidence and wit. But Lake sees an additional
legacy in his own conflicts about anger. "It taught me to hold my temper," he
says. "Especially when I was younger, I would become very polite, very icy and
very nasty when I was angry."

A number of his colleagues have glimpsed the cold rage behind a trembling lip,
but a more visible eruption occurred in Jakarta, after a prep session for a
Clinton news conference. Lake was in the President's suite, briefing him on a
list of matters that included esoteric developments on the island of Quemoy.
Clinton, still in an unflattering batik shirt, was running late. Finally John
Podesta, then Clinton's staff secretary, called the session to a close: there
would be no time for Quemoy if the President was going to change into his suit.
The meeting broke up in confusion and a furious Lake followed Podesta into the
hall, warning him never again to show him such disrespect in front of Clinton.
The argument continued down the hallway, where the quick-tempered Podesta called
Lake a perfectionist who was wasting the President's time. Then Lake really
exploded, grabbed Podesta and tried to shove him into the wall. ("Are you going
to put in there that we then went off and had a nice lunch?" Lake asked.)

Another eruption involved the delicate subject of relations with the State
Department. As senior policy makers in the Carter years, both Lake and
Christopher had witnessed the brutal interagency battles between Brzezinski and
Secretary of State Cyrus Vance. Lake and Christopher came into their current
roles vowing to operate more cooperatively, and by historical standards they
have. But tensions were on the rise last fall, fueled by press speculation that
Clinton might replace Lake, Christopher or both. The suspicion boiled over in a
suite at the Waldorf-Astoria, where the foreign policy team had gone to prepare
for a meeting at the United Nations.

Lake summoned two of Christopher's top assistants, Tom Donilon, his chief of
staff, and Michael McCurry, now the White House press secretary. Shaking with
anger, he accused them of planting stories designed to make him look bad;
incredulous, the two men accused Lake and his staff of doing the same to
Christopher. The three exploded and spent 10 minutes denouncing each other in
language that could have made the wallpaper peel. Acknowledging that further
warfare could sink them all, they agreed to a truce.  When talking on unsecured
phones, McCurry and Donilon still sometimes refer to Lake as "our Waldorf
friend." After learning that the story had spread, Lake raised the issue in
mumbling embarrassment. "It did clear the air," he said.

As Bosnia policy fell apart at the end of May, the Waldorf peace was put to the
test. A new round of finger pointing broke out after the failed air strikes and
hostage incidents. Lake called Donilon in alarm, and the two went on a press
offensive, ordering subordinates to eliminate any talk of discord. At a meeting
the following day, Lake cleared the room of lower-ranking aides and apologized
to Christopher and several other senior officials for excluding them from a
military briefing in the Oval Office, the move that had especially incensed the
State Department. "It was very forthright for him to say that perhaps he'd
missed a call," Christopher says.

But whatever cease-fires were signed in Washington, the fighting in Bosnia was
growing ever more horrific. My last extended conversation with Lake on Bosnia
came in mid-June, about three weeks after air strikes. Though the violence was
increasing in every direction, Lake was caught in what only can be described as
wishful thinking. "One thing we can hope is that whole event will have led all
the parties to take a look at what going over the edge could mean," he said. A
few weeks later, the Serbs overran the so-called "safe areas" of Srebrenica and
Zepa, sending tens of thousands of refugees pouring across the country and
producing reports of mass executions; a few weeks after that, the Croats
re-entered the spreading war.

IT WAS A SUNDAY IN JUNE. LAKE HAD BEEN under great stress and his hernia
operation had not helped. A few days earlier, he had recalled the famous David
Levine cartoon of Lyndon Johnson lifting his shirt to display a scar in the
shape of Vietnam. His scar, Lake joked, would look like Bosnia. Now it was noon;
he had been at his desk since 8:30 that morning, trying to use the quiet hours
to puzzle out a new approach. At one point, his pain grew so strong he had to
close his eyes and put the discussion on hold. "I'm not hearing you," he said.
Like many others, I pointed out that the NATO bombings had not just failed but
had done so in a completely predictable way. Hadn't Lake himself stood in the
Oval Office talking of hostages? His temper momentarily flared. "Gee, you mean
something that was done in Bosnia didn't achieve perfect success?" he said
sarcastically. "If that's your criterion, then you stop trying anything."

It's true that Bosnia presents a menu of rotten choices and Lake is the one who
has to choose. "Do you judge foreign policy makers on the basis of their
intentions or on the consequences of their actions?" Lake said, framing the
question himself. "In Vietnam, especially, the refuge was always taken in
intentions: 'We are fighting for democracy; we are fighting for this; we are
fighting for that -- therefore, don't blame us.' And that's much too low a
standard. On the other hand, to hold foreign policy makers completely
accountable is probably also unfair, because the consequences are so often
uncertain. What we can ask -- absolutely -- is that they think about those
consequences as hard as they can. And, secondly, that they do so in real terms,
which is to say the impact on human lives. That we can ask."

With a little literary license, the Bosnian translation might go something like
this: Don't credit him simply for meaning well or blame him for everything that
goes wrong. Ask whether at a given moment, in a complicated world, his decisions
had a reasonable chance of bridging American interests and ideals. Lake would
not say whether he was meeting his own standards, but he did have a kind of
tacit response. "I'm really worried that Bosnia will again come to be the
definition of American foreign policy and obscure all the other things we've
done much better."

NAME: Anthony Lake

LOAD-DATE: August 20, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Wherever Lake travels and for whatever announced purpose, it is
the Bosnian quagmire that preoccupies him. At right, the national security
adviser in his Moscow hotel room during a May summit on Russia's nuclear accord
with Iran. (GUEORGUI PINKHASSOV/MAGNUM, FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES); Below, another
haunting image from Bosnia. (LUC DELAHAYE/MAGNUM)(pg. 34); Vietnam consumed Lake
for many years, an odyssey he recounted with his wife, Antonia, for this
magazine in 1975. (GEORGE TAMES/THE NEW YORK TIMES); At right, the Lakes at
their home in Washington in 1975. Below, Lake and Ambassador Henry Cabot Lodge
in Vietnam in 1964. (LAKE FAMILY ALBUM); The aftermath of a jungle ambush at Khe
Sanh, Vietnam, in 1968. (ROBERT ELLISON/BLACK STAR)(pg. 36); The national
security adviser having lunch last month with Secretary of State Warren
Christopher, and Secretary of Defense William Perry. (PHOTOGRAPH BY STEPHEN
CROWLEY/THE NEW YORK TIMES)(pg. 38); Lake on his way back to Washington after an
overnight trip to Port-au-Prince to monitor progress in Haitian democracy.
(PHOTOGRAPH BY ALISTAIR MORRISON/SYGMA, FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)(pg. 46)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              192 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 20, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Crime

BYLINE: By Marilyn Stasio

SECTION: Section 7;  Page 21;  Column 1;  Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1146 words


Some writers, you worry they won't be able to top themselves. Not James Lee
Burke. In BURNING ANGEL (Hyperion, $22.95), the ninth adventure for Dave
Robicheaux, his broody cop from the Louisiana bayou, Mr. Burke trots out a whole
chorus line of singular characters and bizarre situations -- not one of them a
retread.

It takes great elan to write a scene like the one in which a pimp named Sweet
Pea Chaisson digs up his mother's coffin and hauls it off in the trunk of his
Cadillac, or to create a character as flamboyant as Sonny Boy Marsallus, a
finger-popping killer with the spooky reputation of being a ghost. According to
one witness, "Sonny seemed painted with magic."

The plot is one of those convoluted jobs that twist around in time and touch on
the surreal. One story line goes back more than a hundred years, to a land grant
given to sharecroppers and their families. Another thread leads to a ragged band
of roving political mercenaries who got their haunted eyes in Vietnam and their
more recent scars in places like Guatemala and El Salvador. The local Mafia is
also involved, because the author just can't get enough of these guys.

When the sharecroppers' descendants are thrown off their land and the
mercenaries start crawling out of the swamp, everybody starts killing everybody
else until the violence takes on the ritualistic movement of a ballet. Readers
should be assured that this is some dance, and Mr. Burke knows all the steps.

Some people think that the wheels of the mighty Chicago party machine stopped
turning after the 1968 Democratic National Convention. Those people should meet
Jimmy Flannery, sewer inspector, precinct captain and committeeman of the 27th
Ward, and the big-hearted hero of SAUCE FOR THE GOOSE (Mysterious Press/Warner,
$18.95), the latest in Robert Campbell's feel-good series about grass-roots
politics. "It ain't really the same as when I used to walk around my precinct,
put my foot up on the steps to the porch or sit on the stoop and chew the fat,"
Jimmy admits, but it's still a nice power base for wheeling and dealing.

Nothing gets past this charming ward heeler. He knows something's up with the
dumb bone crusher who keeps falling asleep in their night school class in
political science. And he has his suspicions about the teacher, a high-powered
lawyer with city government connections who drives to school in a silver-gray
Jaguar XJ6. Sure enough, it comes out that the politicians are climbing into bed
with the Mafia over some construction contracts.

The question is, what can Jimmy do about it? "I can be a little tricky when I
got to," he says, but he's not a violent man. After exhausting his legitimate
sources, he finally turns to the Mafia godfather, an eminence grise who shares
Jimmy's unorthodox methods of justice and his touching faith in the power of a
favor.

New York cops don't believe in miracles, so in Ed Dee's bruising police
procedural BRONX ANGEL (Warner, $21.95), detectives Anthony Ryan and Joe Gregory
hurry past the crowd praying to the Madonna carved in ice by the floodwaters of
a freakish spring snowstorm. The partners are on their way to view the Devil's
work -- the body of an off-duty police officer, his pants down, his throat
slashed.

The scene looks contrived to Gregory, the flashy, insightful one. But the brass
call it a hooker homicide and assign the two detectives, who made a powerful
impression in Mr. Dee's first novel, "14 Peck Slip," to cover the strolls and
hangouts of prostitutes and transvestites. Two weeks of this depressing night
duty leaves them glassy-eyed, but convinced that the cop killing is tied to
something bigger and uglier. "Cops learn to see things that other people don't,
and it wears us down," Ryan says.

Mr. Dee takes us on a grand tour of the city the way it looks through Ryan's
eyes -- dirty, dangerous and so sad you wish you could look away. But you can't,
because you might miss something beautiful, or funny, or just plain nuts. Mr.
Dee, a 20-year veteran of the N.Y.P.D.'s organized crime unit, has surely made
up the weird characters and grotesque scenes he shows us. But I want to believe
that a cop like Ryan once found a dead cat propped up against a public phone,
holding the receiver between its paws.

Nina Fischman may be neurotic, but she has her standards. The intelligent,
unattached, eternally kvetching heroine of Marissa Piesman's droll urban
mysteries will only date "men who rooted for the Red Sox and other tortured
teams," and she will not move from the Upper West Side of Manhattan. ALTERNATE
SIDES (Delacorte, $19.95) finds this die-hard Jewish liberal in a crisis of
indecision because her new boyfriend, a Chicago Cubs fan named Jonathan, has
asked her to move in with him -- in an architecturally insipid high-rise on the
WASP-infested East Side.

It's bad enough that the tenants of this "low-I.Q. building" wear toupees and
live to play tennis; but the mailman is running a prostitution ring and somebody
just killed the doorman. Is this the proper environment for a savvy, socially
conscious West Sider like Nina?

Nina's mother, a shrewd old party who sprints around town in New Balance running
shoes, could solve this murder mystery while she was waiting for the crosstown
bus. But then we would miss Nina's quirky conversation with a call girl, her odd
job interview with a muddled politician, and all the other clever situations
that Ms. Piesman invents to keep Nina mouthing off in that distinctive voice of
hers -- whiny, querulous, aggrieved and quintessentially New York-smart.

"Was it gang related?" That's the first thing people ask when there's a homicide
in Denver, whether the victim is a policeman, a drug dealer or a 13-year-old boy
on a bicycle. Gabe Wager, the Latino cop who covers the Rocky Mountain territory
in a rugged series by Rex Burns, has to ask himself the same question in BLOOD
LINE (Walker, $19.95) when his teen-age cousin is murdered.

Mr. Burns steps on the emotional pedals when he sends Wager into the bleak homes
and dangerous streets of the barrio to tell anxious mothers that their kids are
dead. Wager grew up in this soulless place, and his mother makes him feel guilty
for cutting off his family roots. But he has heard often enough that "each
family has its whore and its thief," and he knows that his people are even less
tolerant of a lawman.

Besides inking in this dark portrait of the ethnic cop as alienated hero, Mr.
Burns presents a frightening scenario for the spread of gang culture ("like a
virus") across America. The Denver cops even have a word -- "Californication" --
for the influx of teen-age criminals who set up sophisticated satellite
organizations on local turf and recruit kids as young as 8 and 9 to run the drug
operations. Mr. Burns tells his lean, hard story in a laconic style that somehow
makes it even scarier.

LOAD-DATE: August 20, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              193 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 20, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

BEST SELLERS: August 20, 1995

SECTION: Section 7; Page 22; Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1498 words



          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Fiction

 1      2   4   MEMNOCH THE DEVIL, by Anne Rice. (Knopf, $25.) The vampire
                Lestat is snatched from the world by a mysterious adversary who
                claims to be the Devil.

 2      1   6   BEACH MUSIC, by Pat Conroy. (Talese/Doubleday, $27.50.) An
                American living in Rome returns to South Carolina and tries to
                cope with his troubled past.

 3      3   4   LIGHTNING, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $24.95.) The happy
                marriage of a lawyer and her husband is suddenly changed after
                she gets a routine checkup.

 4          1   FROM POTTER'S FIELD, by Patricia Cornwell. (Scribner, $24.) Dr.
                Kay Scarpetta on the trail of a serial killer in New York's
                Central Park.

 5      4  17   THE RAINMAKER, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $25.95.) A young
                man barely out of law school tries to expose a corporation's
                multibillion-dollar scam.

 6      6  77   THE CELESTINE PROPHECY, by James Redfield. (Warner, $17.95.) An
                ancient manuscript, found in Peru, provides insights into
                achieving a fulfilling life.

 7      7   8   ROSE MADDER, by Stephen King. (Viking, $25.95.) Fleeing an
                abusive husband, a woman seeks happiness in a strange city by
                creating her own myth.

 8      5  158  THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner,
                $17.95.) An Iowa romance.

 9      9   4   DANGEROUS TO KNOW, by Barbara Taylor Bradford. (HarperCollins,
                $24.) A journalist investigates the death of her former
                husband, a philanthropist.

 10     8   8   THE WITNESS, by Sandra Brown. (Warner, $21.95.) A public
                defender who seems happy in her work and her marriage is
                plunged into a morass of bigotry and hate.

 11         1   BELGARATH THE SORCERER, by David and Leigh Eddings. (Del
                Rey/Ballantine, $25.95.) A fantasy about the start of a
                7,000-year-long global conflict.

 12    11  61   POLITICALLY CORRECT BEDTIME STORIES, by James Finn Garner.
                (Macmillan, $8.95.) Classic tales respun to avoid offending
                current sensibilities.

 13    10   6   DISNEY'S POCAHONTAS. (Mouse Works, $6.98.) The romance of an
                American Indian princess and an Englishman, told in words and
                pictures.

 14    12  15   LET ME CALL YOU SWEETHEART, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Simon &
                Schuster, $24.) An unusual murder case haunts a prosecutor's
                career and her private life.

 15         1   BURNING ANGEL, by James Lee Burke. (Hyperion, $22.95.) When a
                long-missing, notorious gangster reappears in New Orleans, a
                detective undertakes to bring him to justice.

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Nonfiction

 1      1   6   TO RENEW AMERICA, by Newt Gingrich. (HarperCollins, $24.) The
                Speaker of the House describes his solutions to the country's
                problems. (+)

 2      6   2   BEYOND ALL REASON, by David Smith with Carol Calef.
                (Kensington, $18.95.) The former husband of Susan Smith, the
                woman convicted of killing their two sons, tells of their life
                together.

 3      2   9   NEW PASSAGES, by Gail Sheehy. (Random House, $25.) How changing
                social conditions and longer life expectancies are affecting
                our lives.

 4      3  76   MIDNIGHT IN THE GARDEN OF GOOD AND EVIL, by John Berendt.
                (Random House, $23.) The mysterious death of a young man in
                Savannah, Ga.

 5      7   4   SLEEPERS, by Lorenzo Carcaterra. (Ballantine, $23.) The true
                story, the narrator claims, of four boys in a reformatory and
                the revenge they later take.

 6      4   9   A GOOD WALK SPOILED, by John Feinstein. (Little, Brown,
                $23.95.) A sportswriter reports on the P.G.A. Tour in 1993 and
                1994. (+)

 7      5  12   SPONTANEOUS HEALING, by Andrew Weil. (Knopf, $23.) Ways in
                which the body heals itself. (+)

 8      8  34   SISTERS. Essays by Carol Saline. Photographs by Sharon J.
                Wohlmuth. (Running Press, $27.50.) The relationships of 36 sets
                of sisters.

 9     10  27   THE DEATH OF COMMON SENSE, by Philip K. Howard. (Random House,
                $18.) How governmental rules and regulations are fettering the
                lives of all Americans.

 10     9  12   DAVE BARRY'S COMPLETE GUIDE TO GUYS, by Dave Barry. (Random
                House, $21.) Humor.

 11    15   2   MY OLD MAN AND THE SEA, by David Hays and Daniel Hays.
                (Algonquin, $19.95.) A sailing yarn about a father-and-son
                voyage from Connecticut around Cape Horn.

 12    11   6   WHEN ELEPHANTS WEEP, by Jeffrey Moussaieff Masson and Susan
                McCarthy. (Delacorte, $23.95.) The emotional lives of animals.

 13    12   4   THE EAGLE AND THE ROSE, by Rosemary Altea. (Warner, $19.95.) An
                English psychic's story.

 14         9   SLEEPING AT THE STARLITE MOTEL, by Bailey White.
                (Addison-Wesley, $20.) A schoolteacher's adventures.

 15    13  87   THE BOOK OF VIRTUES, by William J. Bennett. (Simon & Schuster,
                $30.) Moral stories.

 16*        2   THE LIARS' CLUB, by Mary Karr. (Viking, $22.95.) A poet recalls
                her childhood as a member of a troubled family in East Texas
                during the early 1960's.

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous

 1      1  117  MEN ARE FROM MARS, WOMEN ARE FROM VENUS, by John Gray.
                (HarperCollins, $23.) Relationships. (+)

 2      2  22   THE SEVEN SPIRITUAL LAWS OF SUCCESS, by Deepak Chopra.
                (Amber-Allen/New World Library, $14.) How to "generate wealth
                in all its forms." (+)

 3      4  14   HOW TO ARGUE AND WIN EVERY TIME, by Gerry Spence. (St.
                Martin's, $22.95.) A lawyer describes ways to win arguments at
                home and at work. (+)

 4      3   2   STOP AGING NOW! by Jean Carper. (HarperCollins, $24.) Ways to
                combat aging and resist disease. (+)


Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Aug. 5, at 3,050 bookstores
plus wholesalers serving 28,000 other retailers (gift shops, department stores,
newsstands, supermarkets), statistically weighted to represent sales in all such
outlets nationwide. An asterisk (*) indicates that a book's sales are barely
distinguishable from those of the book above. A dagger (+) indicates that some
bookstores report receiving bulk orders for a book.

And Bear in Mind
(Editor's Choices of other recent books of particular interest)

BEHIND THE WHEEL AT CHRYSLER: The Iacocca Legacy, by Doron P. Levin. (Harcourt
Brace, $25.) A Detroit reporter interprets Chrysler under Lee Iacocca's
management as a company far better at making sales and deals than cars.

DARK SUN: The Making of the Hydrogen Bomb, by Richard Rhodes. (Simon & Schuster,
$32.50.) Mr. Rhodes's lucid exposition of technical issues combines fruitfully
with his sharp eye for character, anecdote and political context.

GALATEA 2.2, by Richard Powers. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $23.) Ingenious,
ambitious and cerebral, this novel concerns a novelist (same name as the
author's) who works to perfect a machine intelligence that can learn literature
and sustain belief in purpose and meaning.

HANGING UP, by Delia Ephron. (Putnam, $23.95.) A compassionate, funny,
satisfying first novel whose heroine and narrator can cope with anything but her
awful father, who's an alcoholic, a manic-depressive and not very nice besides.

AN ITALIAN EDUCATION: The Further Adventures of an Expatriate in Verona, by Tim
Parks. (Grove, $22.) By sending his children to school in Italy and thoughtfully
watching them become Italians, Mr. Parks studies the rules that govern a society
other than his native England.

LOST IN PLACE: Growing Up Absurd in Suburbia, by Mark Salzman. (Random House,
$22.) A refreshing memoir of a teen-ager's search for happiness through kung fu
in the 1970's; the jokes are mostly on the author, who is remarkably free from
the customarily licensed resentments.

MOVING VIOLATIONS: War Zones, Wheelchairs, and Declarations of Independence, by
John Hockenberry. (Hyperion, $24.95.) Swaggering in a wheelchair isn't easy, but
this candidly aggressive radio and television correspondent is up to the job (or
any other).

THE NIGHTINGALE'S SONG, by Robert Timberg. (Simon & Schuster, $27.50.) Mr.
Timberg, a graduate of the United States Naval Academy, examines some of his
fellow alumni in government service (overrepresented in the Iran-contra affair)
and finds that their conduct was influenced by fear of a second Vietnam.

THE RICHER, THE POORER: Stories, Sketches and Reminiscences, by Dorothy West.
(Doubleday, $22.) Unsentimental, clear, crisp pieces about black middle-class
life by a unique writer, at 87 the last survivor of the Harlem Renaissance.

RL'S DREAM, by Walter Mosley. (Norton, $22.) This emphatic modern-day fable of
nurturance and dying is a Deep South tale set in New York, inhabited by a black
musician, his white lover and the ghost of a mythic blues singer.

TRUST: The Social Virtues and the Creation of Prosperity, by Francis Fukuyama.
(Free Press, $25.) A fascinating argument -- that institutions between the
family and the state (like Rotary or the Boy Scouts) are good for civility and
good for capitalism too -- and dazzling case studies of industrial nations that
have such groups or don't.

LOAD-DATE: August 20, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              194 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 20, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

WAR WITHOUT END

SECTION: Section 6;   Page 13;   Column 2;   Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 48 words


Over the past year, I noticed that you have returned documentary photography to
the pages of the Magazine. The most recent -- Sebastiao Salgado's "War Without
End" (July 30) -- is beautifully done and conveys more than even a well-written
story could.

BRIAN QUINBY
Aurora, Ill.

LOAD-DATE: August 20, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              195 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 20, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Fat Biographies

SECTION: Section 7;  Page 27;  Column 1;  Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 308 words


To the Editor:

I was enjoying Terry Teachout's lighthearted summer essay on overlong
biographies (July 30) until -- leafing through "novel substitutes" at his
neighborhood bookstore -- he got around to noticing my new book, "The American
Journey of Eric Sevareid."

I had been feeling a little complacent, since my tome was well under his
500-page limit (428 pages of text and 34 of documentation) and the reviews -- in
The Washington Post, Newsday, Columbia Journalism Review, The Los Angeles Daily
News -- seemed to agree that Sevareid's life was a great story well told. But
there was Mr. Teachout's judgment that a man he remembers for two-minute
television commentaries couldn't be worth 462 pages!

Clearly Mr. Teachout knows very little about either Sevareid or my book.

Eric Sevareid's life was one of the great American lives of the 20th century.
Born on the North Dakota plains, at 17 he survived a 2,000-mile canoe trip from
Minneapolis to Hudson Bay. During World War II he covered the fall of France,
the London blitz, the Italian campaign, the invasion of southern France and the
crossing of the Rhine. When his plane crashed in the Burma jungle he lived for
weeks among headhunters. His 1945 memoir, "Not So Wild a Dream" (552 pages),
written when he was 33, is one of the classic statements on the meaning of
America. With his friend Edward R. Murrow he helped make CBS News the most
respected force in broadcasting. He opposed Senator Joe McCarthy from the start,
and in those "two-minute commentaries" -- which he spent all day writing -- he
helped America come to terms with the great upheavals of the 1960's and 1970's:
assassinations, Vietnam and Watergate. All this while his personal life was
often in a shambles.

Surely 462 pages doesn't seem too much for all that.

RAYMOND A. SCHROTH, S.J.
New Orleans

LOAD-DATE: August 20, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              196 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 20, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Ideas & Trends;
For Cops, Untruths And Consequences

BYLINE: By KENNETH B. NOBLE

SECTION: Section 4;   Page 6;   Column 1;   Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 837 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES


SHOCK and dismay were among the distressing sensations many Angelenos said they
felt last week upon hearing about a series of taped interviews that former
Detective Mark Fuhrman granted to an aspiring screenwriter. But signs of racism
and brutality in the Los Angeles Police Department were not news to just about
anyone who had seen the videotape of Rodney G. King being thrashed by four
police officers. .

And that, unfortunately for prosecutors who rely on the testimony of police
officers, was just about everyone in Los Angeles.

If the tapes of Mr. Fuhrman capture him boasting about how he and other officers
routinely planted and fabricated evidence to build cases against people, as has
been reported, then the department is more corrupt than even most of its critics
ever imagined. More to the point, they would lend credence to claims by defense
lawyers in the O.J. Simpson murder trial that Mr. Fuhrman sought to frame the
former football star.

Where the credibility of the police is at issue, big-city juries, and especially
their black and Hispanic members, have grown notably tougher in recent years. A
striking example was a Bronx jury's 1988 acquittal of Larry Davis, who had shot
six policemen, on the defense theory that he was defending himself against
corrupt officers on a mission to assassinate him.

In any event, Los Angeles has long had a reputation as a city where law and
order are sometimes taken to extremes. "I don't know why people keep getting
surprised when they hear stories about brutal L.A.P.D. officers. It's not
anything new," said Constance L. Rice, the western regional director for the
NAACP Legal Defense and Education Fund Inc. "Blacks, Latinos, poor whites and
poor Asians have known about this sort of behavior for years."




Cleaning Up

Oddly, legal scholars say police corruption and mayhem, as measured by official
complaints, have actually declined. "There's no doubt that there's much less
police brutality than there used to be," said Norval Morris, a professor of law
and criminology at the University of Chicago Law School.

Indeed, a generation ago, Americans were far more tolerant of rogue police
behavior. A blind eye was customarily turned toward, say, a cop who officer
delivered a few well-chosen cracks across the brow in order to elicit a
confession. And as Ms. Rice said, white America tolerated police corruption and
cruelty with the metaphor of the "thin blue line," which was a way of saying,
"Just keep the urban underclass away from us; we don't care what you do."

But law enforcement officials' perquisites of power and respect began to
evaporate with the Vietnam War, the upheavals of the 1960's and the Watergate
scandal. In New York, the result was dramatic: the Knapp Commission, which
investigated police corruption, revealed in 1972 how plainclothes officers and
their supervisors collected monthly payoffs from gambling dens. In turn,
district attorneys who once routinely conspired to squelch accusations of police
misconduct began to find it politically shrewd to prosecute.




Military Style

As ever, the L.A.P.D. went its own way. Undermanned and contending with
well-armed street gangs, it has increasingly used quasi-military intimidation as
its modus operandi. When the press got any whiff of scandal, former police chief
Daryl Gates often portrayed the offending officers' conduct as aberrant.

But as an independent commission appointed to investigate the King beating made
clear, it was predictable: "Too many L.A.P.D. patrol officers view citizens with
resentment and hostility; too many treat the public with rudeness and
disrespect."

Since the King case, there have been several well-publicized campaigns to reform
the department. Nonetheless, the force still employs 33 of the 44 officers cited
in the independent commission's report for having a propensity to use excessive
force.

Meanwhile, the department has been riven by an increasingly bitter dispute over
its chief, Willie Williams. The chief has been harshly criticized by leaders of
the Police Protection League, the main bargaining union of the city's officers,
who describe him as incompetent and corrupt. Supporters of the black police
chief, including much of the black and Hispanic community, say the attacks are
racially motivated.

By all accounts, there are many officers who genuinely -- some say valiantly --
believe that reform is possible and inevitable. But they seem to be outnumbered,
at least in the public's mind, by rogue cops like Mr. Fuhrman. And many experts
wonder whether the department can recover its credibility.

"The L.A.P.D. is like a toxic waste dump whose debris seeps into the community,
but which nobody knows how to contain it. There really needs to be a sort of
Superfund to provide resources to come in and clean up an out-of-control police
department," said Stephen Yagman, a civil rights lawyer specializing in police
misconduct cases. "But I don't believe it will ever happen."

LOAD-DATE: August 20, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Mark Fuhrman, detective and witness in the O.J. Simpson trial.
(Associated Press)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              197 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 20, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Citadel Marches On, Without Female Cadet

BYLINE: By The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 24;  Column 4;  National Desk

LENGTH: 782 words

DATELINE: CHARLESTON, S.C., Aug. 19


Recruits to The Citadel's Regimental Band drilled today without a flute player,
a position that would have been filled by Shannon Faulkner, the 20-year-old
woman who quit the all-male state military college a week after winning a
two-and-a-half-year court battle for the right to enroll.

Unlike many of the men who would have been Ms. Faulkner's fellow cadets, Maj.
Herbert Day, the band director, took no pleasure in her abrupt departure on
Friday.

"Emotions can play a big, big part in your life," Major Day said as he watched
the first-year, or knob, musicians drill on the parade field under a threatening
gray sky this morning. "I worry, seriously, about her."

The band director added: "You can't question her fortitude. She's a very bright,
articulate young lady. She has a lot to be proud of."

Major Day, a former marine and Vietnam War veteran, was the one authority figure
at the 153-year-old military college to whom Ms. Faulkner's lawyers and family
had looked for support.

In the end, she never made it into the ranks of Band Company. Ms. Faulkner left
after spending five days in the campus infirmary, defeated by the emotional
stress of her legal battle with the state of South Carolina and the insults of
many who saw her as a threat to tradition and social order.

Major Day defended the institutions's all-male tradition, but having accepted
Ms. Faulkner into his band, he also fiercely defended her against the attacks.

"Why are people coming down on her?" he asked. "She believed in a cause and
tried to see it through. All of us have a breaking point."

Cadets at the Moorish-style campus celebrated on Friday afternoon, ignoring the
rain to dance and shout over Ms. Faulkner's failure.

But by Friday night military routine was reasserting itself, except for a car
cruising the campus with "BYE SHANNON" taped across the rear window in
10-inch-high letters.

This morning, knob cadets drilled with newly issued rifles, or stood with locked
knees at the campus bookstore, moving only when ordered by cadet officers.

Parents wandered about campus, dropping off upperclassmen or killing time until
a football scrimmage at day's end.

Jane Chidsey of Strongsville, Ohio, who was dropping off her son Michael for his
senior year, said that Ms. Faulkner "did the right thing by leaving."

"I feel sad for her, actually," Mrs. Chidsey said. "You'd have to be as hard as
a rock not to feel something for her."

But she added a sentiment shared by many here on both sides of the debate over
Ms. Faulkner: "She came unprepared."

Michael Chidsey said he was attracted by the military life style, "hoping it
would change my life, and it has."

He echoed the overwhelming sentiment throughout the institution, which has spent
millions of dollars in a legal battle to keep women out.

"I'm glad she got in and then failed, rather than not having the opportunity at
all," he said.

Steve Armaly, a cadet first lieutenant from Greenville, S.C., said he was
relieved that the closeness and rigor of the corps of cadets would not be
compromised by a woman's presence.

"I'd be lying if I said I wasn't glad we are all-male again," Mr. Armaly said.
"It matters to me because I feel like in a military setting it allows us to
train harder and bond with our classmates. You can't have the intensity if you
don't have single-gender education. Women should have the same opportunity -- at
another place."

Mr. Armaly sees a degree from the college as a stepping stone to a career in a
state where Citadel men rise in disproportionate numbers to become captains of
industry. He expressed a view held by many faculty members and students: that
Ms. Faulkner was the pawn of outside forces that wanted to destroy The Citadel.

"She was taken advantage of," he said. "Her feelings and her desires were not an
issue. The A.C.L.U. and others took advantage of her for their own interests."

Bryant Butler, a cadet first lieutenant from Goose Creek, S.C., described life
as a Citadel knob as a sort of nine-month survival course, adding that Ms.
Faulkner never seemed to have her heart in it.

"If she had wanted to be here, we would have helped her succeed," Mr. Butler
said. "We're tough, but we're not heartless."

He added, "People think we are just an elite boys club, but we are not."

The cadets said that the elaborate security system set up for Ms. Faulkner,
including 24-hour-a-day video surveillance outside her barracks room and
omnipresent Federal marshals, was an affront to their honor code.

"I felt like she wasn't being protected from me; I was being protected from
her," Mr. Butler said. "I might have said something to her and I'd get kicked
out of school."


LOAD-DATE: August 20, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Surrounded by moving boxes, Shannon Faulkner, who quit The
Citadel on Friday, greeted her cat, T. C., yesterday at her home in
Powdersville, S. C. Ms. Faulkner said she had not made any plans for her future.
(Associated Press)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              198 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 20, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Flood Puts Damper on Vietnamese Celebration

SECTION: Section 1;   Page 16;   Column 4;   Foreign Desk

LOAD-DATE: August 20, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: With flags flying to celebrate 50 years of the country's
independence, a man floated down the main street of Tuyen Quang in northern
Vietnam, which has been hit by the worst flooding in the region since 1971.
(Associated Press)

TYPE: Caption

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              199 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 20, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Asia Can't Be Grasped Between Chopsticks

SECTION: Section 4;  Page 12;  Column 3;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 194 words


To the Editor:

"Fortune Cookie: Your Ignorance Clouds Asian Joy" (Week in Review, Aug. 13) is a
worthy reminder of common misperceptions. For that reason it is disappointing to
see you refer to "the chopstick belt."

Chopsticks are not used in Southeast Asia except in Vietnam and in cultural
pockets within other countries where Chinese traditions are strong. American
Thai, Indonesian and Burmese restaurants may supply their clients with
chopsticks, but a soup spoon and fork, used similarly to our fork and knife, is
their contemporary national standard.

Using one's fingers to compress and pop food into the mouth neatly would be more
traditional and, according to native eaters, more delicious, but this would
require unraveling some essential rites of Western adulthood. (So far, Ethiopian
restaurants are going that route alone!)

Chopsticks are fun for us (different and challenging) -- and they work well with
many Southeast Asian presliced foods. But they are a misplaced moniker for this
diverse region.

LAURIE ROTHSTEIN
JACQUELINE BAUM
Boston, Aug. 13, 1995
The writers are caterers specializing in international cuisines.

LOAD-DATE: August 20, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              200 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 21, 1995, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Publishers Change a Summer Tactic

BYLINE: By MARY B. W. TABOR

SECTION: Section D;  Page 8;  Column 4;  Business/Financial Desk

LENGTH: 877 words


Summer has traditionally been the sleepy season for book publishing. Authors
tour less, and many New York publishing houses shut down on Friday afternoons,
with editors and executives wafting between holidays and the Hamptons. While
books sell steadily, most bookstore owners and customers still look forward to
the publishers' fall lists for the freshest, strongest titles of the year.

This summer has been something of an exception, especially for fiction. Instead
of waiting for the fall, trade-book publishers released a number of new novels
by best-selling authors between June and August, including "Beach Music"
(Talese/ Doubleday) by Pat Conroy; "Memnoch the Devil" (Alfred A. Knopf) by Anne
Rice, and "Rose Madder" (Viking) by Stephen King.

The publishers were hoping to get a head start on the fall competition. They
were also copying the strategy of mass-market publishers, whose smaller,
less-expensive paperbacks (the kind found in supermarkets and airports) enjoy
wide distribution in summer, the peak beach-reading season.

Consequently, this fall's hardcover roster is dominated by nonfiction --
biographies and memoirs being the largest category.

Though the balance of fiction and nonfiction books varied among publishers, many
houses have especially large nonfiction lists this fall, with fiction titles
making up just a third of the releases from some publishers who normally split
their lists evenly.

Bookstores have been carrying more books from university presses, which tend
toward more scholarly histories and biographies.

That publishers experimented by moving fiction rather than nonfiction titles to
the summer lists is not surprising.

When it comes to summer sales, nonfiction is not nearly as popular as the
romances and thrillers that are typical of mass-market lists.

"People just don't want to get themselves all worked up in the summer," said
Carolyn K. Reidy, president and publisher of Simon & Schuster's adult trade
division. "They'd rather relax. That's why summer has always been a big season
for mass-market fiction."

Nonfiction books have generally been considered to be more reliable Christmas
gifts than fiction titles, so nonfiction sales are particularly strong in the
fall. And since nonfiction authors do not generally give public readings,
publishers look to television talk and news shows, which often suspend
production in the summer, for their best publicity.

But book publishing is not scientific, and with every rule comes exceptions and
counterexceptions. There are many strong novels and books of poetry coming out
this fall, for example.

An informal poll of more than 30 publishing houses offered a picture of general
trends for this fall.

Leading the lists were autobiographies, biographies and memoirs, which will be
competing for shelf space with books on religion, values and spiritual journeys,
as well as on self-help and business. And with an election year around the
corner, publishers are also focusing on politics.

On the fiction front, readers will find books by commercial authors, like
Michael Crichton, as well as by so-called literary novelists, like Kazuo
Ishiguro.

But the big heave this fall is in nonfiction, where doorstop volumes will carry
list prices as high as $50.

Among the most anticipated memoirs are "All Rivers Run to the Sea: Memoirs" by
Elie Wiesel (Alfred A. Knopf) and "My American Journey" by Colin Powell (Random
House).

Biographers, for their part, will chronicle the ups and downs of actors
(Humphrey Bogart, Tom Cruise, James Dean, Betty Grable, Burt Lancaster, Barbra
Streisand, John Wayne), musicians and composers (Noel Coward, Cole Porter, Buddy
Holly, Alan Jay Lerner, Frank Sinatra, Kurt Weill), writers (Tennessee Williams,
James Thurber) and politicians and celebrities. Senator Bob Dole is the subject
of three books being published or republished.

The fall lists also include big books about public policy, AIDS, terrorism and
race.

Among the most anticipated of these titles are "It Takes a Village" (Simon &
Schuster), in which Hillary Rodham Clinton reflects on children's needs, and
releases by Lamar Alexander and Mario Cuomo, who offer new visions of government
with "We Know What to Do" (William Morrow) and "Common Sense" (Simon &
Schuster), respectively.

On race issues, Dinesh D'Souza's "The End of Racism" (Free Press) contends that
racism is not the main obstacle for blacks today, and "Facing Up to the American
Dream" (Princeton University Press) by Jennifer L. Hochschild, compares the
successes of blacks and whites.

There are also histories of the Vietnam War, immigration, the Romanov family and
the dropping of the atomic bomb on Hiroshima.

On the fiction front, though some best-sellers defected to the summer list,
readers can expect new books from Ann Beattie, Ken Follett, Carlos Fuentes,
James Michener, Phillip Roth, Danielle Steel and Amy Tan, to name a few.

First novels and books by lesser-known literary writers will get extra shelf
space this fall, some of it left by the summer defectors.

Random House, for instance, is hoping to do well with "Range of Motion" by
Elizabeth Berg. And Delacorte is banking on "The Horse Whisperer" by Nicholas
Evans, for which it paid $3 million.

LOAD-DATE: August 22, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              201 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 21, 1995, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Oklahoma Blast: A Tale in 2 Books?

BYLINE: By JOHN KIFNER

SECTION: Section A;  Page 12;  Column 4;  National Desk

LENGTH: 1463 words

DATELINE: OKLAHOMA CITY, Aug. 20


Evidence in the case against Timothy J. McVeigh indicates that he modeled the
plot to bomb the Federal Building here not only on his favorite book, "The
Turner Diaries," but also on a far-right terrorist band of a decade ago, which
itself consciously used the venomous novel about a bloody race war as a
textbook.

And, the evidence further suggests, when Mr. McVeigh sensed that his guerrilla
dream was slipping away as his key confederate, Terry L. Nichols, apparently
lost his ardor, he used another book about the earlier far-right band to
reinspire faith in the plot.

The earlier role model for Mr. McVeigh, the evidence suggests, was The Order,
which staged armored car robberies in 1984 that netted more than $4 million, ran
a counterfeiting ring and gunned down a Jewish talk show host, Alan Berg, in
Denver. The group's leader, Robert Jay Matthews, died that December as his Puget
Sound hideout burned in a shootout with the F.B.I.; other known members were
captured and jailed.

Federal investigators have long known of Mr. McVeigh's fondness for "The Turner
Diaries," a novel by William L. Pierce, writing under the pseudonym Andrew
McDonald (National Vanguard Books, 1978). It tells the story of an armed
overthrow of the United States Government by a covert group of white
supremacists. Mr. McVeigh apparently kept a copy with him at all times and
hawked the book at gun shows.

An evidence log shows that another book, "Armed and Dangerous: The Rise of the
Survivalist Right" (Hill and Wang, 1987), was found in Mr. Nichols's living
room. The book, a nonfiction work by James Coates, a respected reporter for The
Chicago Tribune, had been checked out of the Mohave County Library in Kingman,
Ariz., by Mr. McVeigh. A librarian said the book was overdue for so long that
the library's computer system had no record of it.

A person closely involved in the case said that Mr. McVeigh had cited Chapter 2
of "Armed and Dangerous," which describes how The Order grew from a small
collection of bumblers into a heavily armed, well-financed terrorist cadre that
used the proceeds of crimes to funnel hundreds of thousands of dollars to other
far-right groups and buy land, guns, vehicles and guard dogs.

The accumulating evidence provides a further glimpse into the greatest mystery
of the bombing -- the mindset and motivation that might have caused Mr. McVeigh
to drive a rented truck packed with two tons of homemade explosives up to the
Alfred P. Murrah Building and kill at least 167 people, including 15 children in
a day-care center.

Since Mr. Pierce, a neo-Nazi former physics professor, wrote "The Turner
Diaries" 17 years ago, it has become an underground classic among white
supremacists and Christian identity survivalist cults. One person involved in
the case, who asked not to be identified, recently called the book Mr. McVeigh's
"bible."

The Order not only made "The Turner Diaries" required reading for recruits, but
also based its campaign of robbery, counterfeiting and murder on the exploits of
the novel's white revolutionaries. In fact, the group took its name from "The
Turner Diaries," in which the top-secret group of supreme commanders is called
The Order. In the novel, members of The Order wear hooded monks' robes. The
real-life Order held rituals that included prayers to the sanctity and future of
the white race before they set off on their criminal forays.

The Oklahoma City bombing bears an uncanny resemblance to the first big attack
by the novel's Aryan revolutionaries, in which a truck with a homemade bomb made
of fertilizer and oil is pulled up to the Federal Bureau of Investigation
headquarters early one morning, wreaking destruction, death and havoc. The book
calls it "propaganda of the deed," an exemplary act meant to inspire others to
strike their own blows.

The Federal indictments accuse Mr. McVeigh and Mr. Nichols of preparing for the
bombing by robbing an Arkansas gun dealer last November and by stealing blasting
caps and explosives from a Kansas quarry. A number of the 33 weapons found in a
search of Mr. Nichols's house came from the robbery, Federal officials say.
There was $5,228 in cash in a white plastic bag stuffed inside a gray bag in the
bedroom closet, according to the evidence recovery log. Also mentioned in the
indictments was a prepaid telephone calling card issued through The Spotlight,
the newspaper of the far-right Liberty Lobby, under the false name Bridges, that
is expected to be a critical piece of Government evidence tracing the suspects'
contacts.

And the indictments sketch a flurry of activity during a period of about eight
weeks in the fall of 1994, in which the two men are accused of renting four
storage lockers under various false names, stealing the explosives, planning the
Arkansas robbery and made two separate purchases of 40, 50-pound bags of
fertilizer that could be turned into explosives by adding fuel oil.

Mr. Nichols's lawyer, Michael Tigar, has argued in court papers that Mr. Nichols
had a falling out with Mr. McVeigh and was trying to distance himself and
establish a normal family life. The lawyer cited his purchase of a home,
printing new business cards and such mundane details as registering his truck
and renting videotapes in the days before the bombing.

And Mr. Nichols's first wife, Lana Padilla, said in an interview that her former
husband had told her, "Tim and I are going to go our separate ways, and I am
going to do the shows myself."

"That surprised me," she said. "They were going to go their own ways, and it was
because Terry was going to buy his own house and have his wife and baby come
out. I don't think Tim could stand that."

A Federal investigator confirmed that around early April, investigators believe,
Mr. McVeigh was of the opinion that Mr. Nichols might not go along with the bomb
plot.

In early spring, Mr. McVeigh was growing increasingly upset and angry, a person
familiar with the case said, because after all the months of planning and
preparations, "Terry had bailed out on him."

It was at about that time, he said, that Mr. McVeigh took to showing a copy of
"Armed and Dangerous" to close associates, directing them to the chapter about
The Order.

Mr. Coates wrote "Armed and Dangerous" to sound an alarm over the growth of
violent far-right fringe groups. But Mr. McVeigh apparently reveled in the
details of how The Order acquired its arsenal and carried out its crimes,
including the ambush in which Mr. Berg, the talk-show host, was shot a dozen
times with a silenced Mac-10 automatic rifle.

Like fictional inspiration, "The Turner Diaries," The Order was viciously racist
and anti-Semitic and cloaked itself in the Christian Identity movement -- a
common thread in the far right -- which holds that northern Europeans are the
true "chosen people" of the Bible, that Jews are the spawn of Satan and that
blacks and other nonwhite races are "mud people."

The Order began in the Aryan Nations compound near Hayden Lake, Idaho, run by
the Rev. Robert G. Butler, who holds an annual gathering of neo-Nazis, Klansmen
and other white supremacists. The F.B.I. says that The Order earmarked some of
its take for the Aryan Nations, for Mr. Pierce and for other far-right groups.

In "The Turner Diaries," the protagonist, Earl Turner, is inducted into the The
Order after he distinguishes himself by blowing up the F.B.I. building and
masterminding a mortar attack on Congress in the early days of the uprising. As
part of his induction, he is shown The Book, a suppressed secret history of the
white race and its place in the cosmos, and given a gold pendant with a poison
pill he was supposed to use if captured. Finally, dressed in his gray monks
robe, he swears "a mighty Oath, a moving Oath that shook me to my bones and
raised the hair on the back of my neck."

In his sweeping study of the post-Vietnam paramilitary culture, "Warrior Dreams"
(Hill and Wang, 1994), James William Gibson notes the life-imitates-art aspect
of The Order as it moved from a nearly botched holdup of an adult bookstore to
the robbery of an armored car and other mayhem to the assassination of Mr. Berg.
The assassination was a smaller imitation of the "The Day of the Rope," a
wholesale lynching of Jews and "race traitors" described in "The Turner
Diaries."

"Anyone who hadn't read 'The Turner Diaries' was given a copy by Matthews before
his initiation," Mr. Gibson wrote. "Each initiate also received a silver
medallion inscribed with a shield, a Roman cross, the words Bruder Schweigen
(Silent Brotherhood) and 'ye be my battle axe and my weapon of war' written in
Gaelic. As the money poured in from the counterfeiting and robberies, The Order
moved on to another phase of 'The Diaries,' the Day of the Rope."

LOAD-DATE: August 22, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Timothy J. McVeigh cited this book on extremist groups, a person
closely involved in the Oklahoma bombing case says.


                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              202 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 21, 1995, Monday, Late Edition - Final

A Private Investigator's Pursuit of a Police Detective Pays Off for Simpson

BYLINE: By DAVID MARGOLICK

SECTION: Section A;  Page 8;  Column 1;  National Desk

LENGTH: 1307 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES, Aug. 20


It was a phone call that turned the case on its head, but to a private
investigator named Patrick McKenna, it began like hundreds of other calls he had
gotten since O. J. Simpson hired him. The voice at the other end was anonymous,
cryptic and hurried.

"I have a client who knows this woman named Laura, who has tapes of Mark
Fuhrman," the caller said. "You should listen to them. They'd be very relevant
to your case."

Mr. McKenna, who is the lead investigator for Mr. Simpson's defense team, could
not extract more details, but he got something more important: a phone number
for "Laura." Six weeks, a subpoena and two North Carolina courts later, the
defense obtained the recordings from a woman named Laura Hart McKinny. Mr.
McKenna has yet to hear any of his handiwork. But already, it has transformed
the Simpson case.

Mark Fuhrman is someone Mr. McKenna has spent much of the past year trying to
understand -- and unmask. The spines of four of the dozens of black binders by
his desk bear the detective's name. Do those 13 hours of tapes depict a brutal
bigot or an actor playing a part? Do they cut to the heart of the case -- did
Mr. Fuhrman lie about using racial slurs, and so perhaps about finding evidence
against Mr. Simpson? -- or are they a cynical diversion? No matter, they are Mr.
McKenna's proudest accomplishment.

Hired only two days after Nicole Brown Simpson and Ronald L. Goldman died, Mr.
McKenna has sifted through thousands of leads, talked to hundreds of potential
witnesses, held furtive and often futile rendezvous in warehouses, bars and pool
halls, and spent something more than 50 nights pacing around 875 South Bundy
Drive, where the killings occurred.

The sidewalks around Mrs. Simpson's condominium there would have been hopelessly
gridlocked on the night of the killings had all of Mr. McKenna's "eyewitnesses"
turned out to be real. He says a skepticism honed in 20 years of working first
as a parole officer but mostly as a defense investigator, nearly all of that in
South Florida, helps him sort out leads. He has never wanted to be a police
officer. "I wouldn't want to be taking someone's freedom away," he explained.
"Once I came out of the Marines, I said I'm not wearing uniforms anymore."

Also spurring him on is his conviction that Mr. Simpson is innocent. Mr. McKenna
acknowledges that he did not always feel this way. But he changed his mind when
an array of people described to him the oh-so-normal Mr. Simpson they saw in
Chicago only hours after the killings.

Only a "spooky assassin or a great actor" could have pulled that off, Mr.
McKenna said. Mr. Simpson is neither, he said, nor can he defy the clock. "If he
told me he committed those two murders, I wouldn't believe it unless he told me
how," he said. "He didn't have the time."

Mr. McKenna said that whenever he visits Mr. Simpson in jail he places the palms
of his hands on the glass that separates them, flush with Mr. Simpson's hands on
the other side. "I love you, man," he always tells him, "and I'm going to bring
you home to your family."

On any given day, dozens of calls come into Mr. McKenna's windowless, cheerless,
cluttered cubicle, tucked into the Law Offices of Johnnie L. Cochran Jr. on
Wilshire Boulevard. Many of the calls, the product of deranged minds or perverse
wits, can quickly be tossed into the "bizarre" file. Some are long shots that
must be dutifully investigated. Others shout with promise. The call about the
McKinny tapes was one.

"It was an articulate person," Mr. McKenna recalled. "It wasn't a crank or a
kook or anything like that." Within minutes, he was speaking with Ms. McKinny
herself. "I'm begging you, please don't hang up on me," he told her. "I believe
in my heart of hearts that O. J.'s innocent. We really need to hear those
tapes."

Ms. McKinny directed Mr. McKenna to her lawyer, Matthew Schwartz of Los Angeles.
"I hear the name Schwartz, I figure I play the Jewish card," he said. That meant
stressing Mr. Fuhrman's purported admiration for Hitler more than his use of
racial epithets. It worked, though it left a shaken Mr. Schwartz thinking he
should buy a gun.

"I said to him, 'If you get those tapes to me, I'll make sure you're protected,'
" recalled Mr. McKenna, 46, the oldest of 10 children of an Irish-American union
organizer and his wife. "I told him, 'I served with the Ninth Marines in
Vietnam. I'm a crazy mick from Chicago, and I'm not afraid of nothing.' "

The episode reflects a good private eye's stock in trade: persistence,
intuition, street smarts and chutzpah. Mr. McKenna is funny and blunt. He is
also so incorrigibly profane that he is hard to quote.

In the past year, promising sources have stood Mr. McKenna up or sold out to the
tabloids. Some witnesses are too scared to come forward. Others, like the
now-discredited Mary Ann Gerchas, who claimed to have seen four men fleeing the
crime scene, were all-too eager. The background check Mr. McKenna concedes he
failed to do would have revealed her history of bad debts. And the stack of
National Enquirers in her home, he added, should have given her away.

He has been accused -- wrongly, he asserts -- of feeding information to the
press. And though he will not say so, he now knows what it is like to have
lawyers in the Trial of the Century quickly spill whatever beans he manages to
find.

"It's the leakiest boat I've ever sailed on," is all he will say. Mr. McKenna
said he had yet to listen to any of the tapes; that way, he figures, no one can
blame him for whatever seeps out. Those same survival instincts have helped him
in the hornets' nest of rivalries on the defense team. Unlike two other private
detectives, now largely marginalized, he has steered clear of the crossfire
among the lead lawyers.

Perhaps the greatest indignity came when Gil Garcetti, the District Attorney,
took credit for finding Ms. McKinny. "They got dimed," he said of the
prosecution. That's detective talk for saying Mr. Garcetti got a call about the
tapes, probably from the defense itself.

Like so many players in the Simpson saga, Mr. McKenna's bald spot has grown in
direct proportion to his fame. So has his waistline; he has gained 35 pounds,
most of that from restaurant food and drink. He looks pallid in a way he has not
looked since he left Chicago 20 years ago. Mr. McKenna, who is divorced, has not
seen his two adolescent children since Christmas.

And like many private eyes, Mr. McKenna has had more lean years than fat ones.
His work in the rape trial of William Kennedy Smith, where he made the
connections that eventually brought him here, spared his home from foreclosure.
It is the Simpson case, however, that may turn him into a star.

Nowadays, the calls from the press are unrelenting. But so, too, are the
tipsters, their would-be bombshells reduced to white message slips dropped on
his desk.

Today's catch includes a man with "vital information proving that O. J. was
framed." Another says he can prove that Deputy District Attorney Marcia Clark
stage-managed the Goldman family's recent news conference. "Tony" knows
something about the murders. An anonymous woman knows more. "Her son is having
recurring nightmares," a secretary has written. "Finally admits he and Jason did
it. Doesn't want to come forward at this time."

"Dolores" and "Norma" have dirt on Mr. Fuhrman. So does "John." "Seven years
ago, stopped by Mark Fuhrman, put a shotgun to his head," his message reads. Mr.
McKenna resolves to call him.

Even some of Mr. Simpson's lawyers, he said, have sometimes been "card tables,"
ready to fold up when things have gotten discouraging. But he has never wavered,
he said. And what he hopes is his proudest accomplishment has yet to come.

"What would make me the most proud -- it sounds corny," he said, "would be to
locate who really did it."

LOAD-DATE: August 22, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Patrick McKenna, an investigator for O. J. Simpson, has provided
Mr. Simpson's lawyers with crucial information to challenge the veracity of a
white police detective who is an important prosecution witness. (Marissa Roth
for The New York Times)


                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              203 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 23, 1995, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Bush Going to China Next Month

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A;  Page 12;  Column 1;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 249 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 22


Former President George Bush plans to travel to China next month to address a
conference on food production, even though some fellow Republicans oppose a
possible visit there by Hillary Rodham Clinton.

His visit will coincide with the United Nations conference on women there, but
he has no plans to take part in those activities, said a spokesman, Jim McGrath.

On Sunday, Senators Bob Dole and Richard Lugar, who are both seeking the
Republican presidential nomination, said it would be a mistake for Mrs. Clinton
to attend the conference so long as China continues to detain Harry Wu, a
dissident and naturalized American citizen who has been in custody since June.

Mrs. Clinton, who is honorary chairwoman of the official American delegation to
the women's conference, has not said whether she will attend.

Mr. McGrath defended Mr. Bush's plans to visit China, pointing out that the
former President is "a private citizen going to attend a private-sector
conference in Beijing."

"She is the sitting First Lady of the United States," he added. "There is a big
difference."

But, Mr. McGrath added, Mr. Bush wants to stay out of the debate on whether Mrs.
Clinton should go to Beijing.

The main purpose of Mr. Bush's Asia trip is to visit Vietnam, where he will
attend a conference sponsored by Citibank. It will be the sixth such conference
in Asia for Mr. Bush, who was the chief American official in China two decades
ago, before full diplomatic relations were established.

LOAD-DATE: August 23, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              204 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 23, 1995, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Foreign Affairs;
The No-Dead War

BYLINE: By THOMAS L. FRIEDMAN;   Frank Rich is on vacation.

SECTION: Section A;  Page 21;  Column 1;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 733 words


During a visit to Paris a few weeks ago I was fascinated to watch how the French
dealt with two major news events that happened to coincide on a balmy summer
weekend. The 82d Tour de France bicycle race was concluded on the
Champs-Elysees, and two French peacekeeping soldiers in Bosnia were killed in
Sarajevo. The French news coverage of the two events wasn't even close. The Tour
de France won by a mile.

When an Italian cyclist, Fabio Casartelli, was killed in a crash during the Tour
de France earlier in the week, his picture was plastered on the front page of
every Paris newspaper and he was mourned from Calais to Cannes. But not a single
French newspaper printed the names of the two French soldiers killed in
Sarajevo, let alone their pictures.

They should have been on bicycles.

Contrast this matter-of-fact French attitude toward war casualties with America,
where Capt. Scott O'Grady, the Air Force pilot shot down over Bosnia in June,
made the cover of all the news magazines. Eighteen U.S. casualties in one day
and America was out of Somalia. The French have had 49 men killed in Bosnia,
about 300 wounded, yet so far there is no public outcry for their removal. When
I asked about the difference, a senior French Defense Ministry official
shrugged: "We do not believe in the no-dead war."

Why not? One reason is technical. France has a long tradition of professional
soldiers, going back to the Crusades. While to this day France has a draft,
draftees cannot be sent abroad, only professionals, like the Foreign Legion, who
are paid to fight and die. Americans often forget that the French preceded them
in Vietnam, where they lost some 42,000 men, before the U.S. lost 58,000. But
there was one big difference: All of the French dead were volunteer
professionals doing a job. So France's Vietnam did not leave the same paralyzing
psychological scar as America's, where many sons were dragged off to fight and
die against their will.

But the U.S. today also has a professional, volunteer army, and yet it still
believes in the no-dead war. Why the continuing difference with France? The
explanation is that in France, much more than the U.S., the state, and the
President, tend to be all-powerful, and the rights of the citizens are granted
by the state. In France, the fate of the state takes precedence over the fate of
the individual. President Jacques Chirac threatened to withdraw French troops
from Bosnia not because they were being killed, but, he said, because they were
being "humiliated." States are humiliated, individuals are killed.

In America, by contrast, the individual citizen is all-powerful and the rights
of the state are granted by the citizens. Where the French celebrate the state,
we celebrate the individual. Where we obsess about each casualty, they obsess
about humiliation.

I believe that America's comparatively low tolerance for war casualties is going
to become increasingly problematic in coming years. America has always been able
to overcome its innate isolationism and aversion to individual casualties when
Presidents roused the nation to war by presenting compelling national interests
or a moral crusade -- such as World War II or the cold war. But as we move into
an era in which global stability, and alliance cohesion, are going to require
dealing with nasty internecine wars in places like Somalia, Bosnia, Haiti and
Rwanda, the U.S. aversion to casualties is increasingly going to put it at odds
with its allies in NATO.

We can't lead if we don't put our own people at risk, but few of these
postmodern crises offer the sort of compelling moral or strategic appeal that
Presidents traditionally use to justify putting American soldiers in harm's way.
Nor do these crises offer the hope of quick, bloodless, video-arcade solutions,
a la the gulf war. This is a key reason the Western alliance seems so leaderless
in facing the new crises of today. As the Johns Hopkins University
foreign-policy expert Michael Mandelbaum puts it: "The French have the instincts
of a traditional great power, but they don't have the means. The U.S. has the
means, but it doesn't have the instincts."

America has been willing to play superpower, and leader, in a big-war world. But
without strong political and military leadership at home, it is going to be a
very reluctant superpower, and an ambivalent leader, in this small-war world.

LOAD-DATE: August 23, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              205 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 23, 1995, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Blast Suspect's Lawyers Seek Removal of Judge

BYLINE: By The New York Times

SECTION: Section A;  Page 18;  Column 1;  National Desk

LENGTH: 312 words

DATELINE: OKLAHOMA CITY, Aug. 22


Lawyers for Timothy J. McVeigh, charged in the April 19 bombing of the Federal
Building here, today asked the trial judge to withdraw from the case, contending
that he could not be impartial.

Mr. McVeigh's lead lawyer, Stephen Jones, observed in the motion filed today
that the courtroom of Judge Wayne E. Alley of Federal District Court was on the
third floor of the Federal Building directly across the street from the blast.
The courtroom was severely damaged in the explosion. The motion also said that a
member of Judge Alley's staff had suffered cuts and bruises.

"The motion to recuse Judge Alley is not a personal reflection on him," Mr.
Jones said in a statement this afternoon. "A similar motion would be filed for
any judge sitting in the Western District."

Judge Alley, a retired Army brigadier general, was appointed to the Federal
bench in the Western District of Oklahoma in 1985. From 1981 to 1985, he was
dean and a professor of law at the University of Oklahoma College of Law and
director of the University of Oklahoma Law Center.

During his 29-year career in the Army, he served as the Judge Advocate for the
United States Army in Europe and as the chief of the Criminal Law Division in
the Judge Advocate General's office in Washington. In 1973, while a judge on the
United States Army Court of Military Review, he wrote the opinion upholding the
sentence of First Lieut. William L. Calley Jr. in the My Lai massacre of 1968.

"Judge Alley has a distinguished military, professional and judicial career,"
Mr. Jones said. "Anyone who appears before him has the highest respect for him
personally and professionally.

"However, our belief is that a victim of a traumatic incident cannot sit as a
judge in a trial where the person accused of creating the incident is on trial.
No one of us would want to be judged by such an individual."

LOAD-DATE: August 23, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              206 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 25, 1995, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Mexico: Who Was Right?

BYLINE: By Patrick J. Buchanan;   Patrick J. Buchanan is a candidate for the
Republican Presidential nomination.

SECTION: Section A;  Page 27;  Column 1;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 697 words

DATELINE: McLEAN, Va.


During debate on the North America Free Trade Agreement, its celebrants promised
three things: Our trade surplus with Mexico would grow; scores of thousands of
new jobs would be created in the United States; illegal immigration would ease.

Five former Presidents urged its passage, as did the Heritage Foundation, the
Brookings Institution, The New York Times, The Wall Street Journal, the United
States Chamber of Commerce, the Council on Foreign Relations and the Trilateral
Commission.

Ross Perot, Ralph Nader and I were derided as the "Halloween Coalition." When
objections were raised to the American partnership with the corruption-riddled
Government of Carlos Salinas de Gortari, Henry Kissinger rose to its defense.
"I know no government anywhere that is more competent," he said.

Well, the early returns are in, and, as Lord Melbourne observed, "Nothing that
the wise men promised has happened, and everything the damned fools said would
happen has come to pass!"

One year after Nafta, Mexico devalued the peso, wiping out billions in United
States investments. Our trade surplus has vanished. A $17 billion deficit is
expected in 1995. Translation: 340,000 lost American jobs. Our winter tomato
industry is in ruins. Illegal immigration is rising. Mexico has become the port
of entry for America's cocaine.

And, oh yes, Mr. Salinas was asked to leave the country, and is now under
investigation for the cover-up of an assassination, while Mr. Clinton and the
Nafta Republicans put us on the hook for $50 billion in loans to Mexico City.

Newly installed President Ernesto Zedillo said he needed the cash to pay off
bonds held by Citibank and Goldman Sachs, lest the New World Order come crashing
down around the ears of its panicked acolytes. We shall never see the money
again; our grandchildren will pay it off.

Comes now a report from the International Monetary Fund that we were had. The
Mexican crisis was overblown. Mexicans themselves had panicked and pulled down
the peso. The world financial system was never in danger.

As with Vietnam, where the Best and Brightest who marched us in went on to new
careers while the families of the 58,000 dead grieved, so it is with Nafta. For
America's elite there is never accountability.  That is for the rest of us.

But there are winners in the trade agreement scam. American companies are
closing factories here, and from Monterrey to Mexico City, a new Detroit is
rising. Nafta made Mexico an "enterprise zone" of 90 million people where the
minimum wage is 58 cents an hour, American health and safety standards do not
exist, and men will fight one another to live in shacks outside a plant gate to
work 10 hours a day for a fraction of the wage Americans get.

In 1924, the party of Coolidge defended a 40 percent tariff by declaring as its
purpose: "To support the high American economic level of life for the average
family and to prevent a lowering to the level of economic life prevailing in
other lands." From Lincoln on, that was party dogma.

Of another tariff, Daniel Webster wrote, "I am looking not for a law such as
will benefit capitalists -- they can take care of themselves -- but for a law
that shall induce capitalists to invest their capital in such a manner as to
occupy and employ American labor." We, too, seek such laws.

Between the declining real wages of American workers, down 20 percent in 20
years, and treaties like Nafta, the correlation is absolute. Yet those who call
for restoring a trade policy that puts America first are answered with the
epithets of our elites: "Isolationists!" "Protectionists!" "Nativists!"

Toward Mexico's hard-working people, robbed repeatedly by their own governments,
we offer friendship. Toward the one-party kleptocracy that has misruled Mexico
for 60 years, whose proudest boast is that in 1938 it stole American oil wells,
our policy should be cool correctness.

Nafta should be canceled. A contract negotiated in deceit is no contract at all.
And as Mexico defends her southern border, we should defend ours -- with a
security fence. As Ronald Reagan said, "A country that cannot defend its borders
isn't really a country anymore."

LOAD-DATE: August 25, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              207 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 26, 1995, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

MUSIC REVIEW;
A Neat, Brisk Beethoven Offered by Asian Youths

BYLINE: By ALLAN KOZINN

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 12;  Column 5;  Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 533 words


There seems to be a hot market for multinational youth orchestras these days.
Since the end of the cold war, the Russian-American Youth Orchestra has brought
together young musicians from East and West and has undertaken an annual tour.
There have been several European efforts, one of which transformed itself into a
professional ensemble, the Chamber Orchestra of Europe. Now the Asian Youth
Orchestra, which brings together players from China, Taiwan, Hong Kong, Japan,
Korea, Malaysia, the Philippines, Singapore, Thailand and Vietnam is making its
first American tour, as a celebration of the 50th anniversary of the United
Nations. The ensemble stopped at Avery Fisher Hall to play the Beethoven Ninth
Symphony and other works on Wednesday evening.

The orchestra includes 96 players between the ages of 13 and 25, as well as a
chorus. Some 2,000 musicians auditioned for the program this summer, and those
who were selected attend tuition-free, the costs underwritten by donations from
several Asian businesses. The faculty includes representatives of the Boston
Symphony, the Cleveland Orchestra, the Kyoto Symphony, the New Zealand Symphony
and several American universities and conservatories. And Yehudi Menuhin is the
music director, although he did not conduct the tour. Sergiu Comissiona has led
most of the concerts, and he conducted on Wednesday.

Given the ardor with which Asian musicians approach Western music, the tightly
focused, vibrant sound that these players produced was not surprising. In the
Beethoven "Egmont" Overture, which opened the concert, textures were trim,
exposed wind and horn writing was consistently in tune and the players responded
with an admirable unity to Mr. Comissiona's flexibility in both tempo and
dynamics. There were moments in "Egmont," and later in the Ninth Symphony, when
the string tone lacked the silken sheen one would hear from a professional
ensemble. But when they had the spotlight to themselves in the Barber Adagio,
the strings produced a lovely, warm glow.

Mr. Comissiona took moderate to brisk tempos in the Ninth, and he did not let
his charges off easy. There was no compromise in the work's breadth of scope, or
in its sudden shifts from grand, bombastic exclamation to melancholy
introspection and back. As in "Egmont," there were fleeting moments
(particularly at the start of the work and in the thickets of the third
movement) when ensemble textures could have been smoother and more precise. And
there were times when it seemed that the players had concentrated so thoroughly
on the work's daunting mechanics and physicality that they had not come to terms
with -- or found a way to express -- its spirituality.

Still, in the symphony's more outgoing moments the playing was often thrilling,
and there was much to admire in the nimbleness the musicians brought to the
second movement. The chorus, which appeared to have been augmented with American
singers, contributed forcefully to the finale. And the four soloists -- Midori
Minawa, soprano; Helen Yu, mezzo-soprano; Jianyi Zhang, tenor, and Zheng Zhou,
baritone -- were all in excellent voice and projected their texts with power and
clarity.

LOAD-DATE: August 26, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Members of the Asian Youth Orchestra playing at Avery Fisher
Hall on their first American tour. (G. Paul Burnett/The New York Times)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              208 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 27, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Where Have You Gone, Orrin Knox? The Decline of the Washington Novel

BYLINE: By Terry Teachout;  Terry Teachout is the editor of "A Second Mencken
Chrestomathy." He is writing "H. L. Mencken: A Life."

SECTION: Section 7; Page 3; Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1940 words


"ALLEN DRURY has a new book out?" my friend the been-there-wrote-that Washington
journalist said, unable to hide his amazement. "Allen Drury is still alive?"

Well, yes. Thirty-six years after "Advise and Consent" spawned one of the most
successful literary genres in American pop fiction, Mr. Drury has brought out
his 13th novel set in Washington, "A Thing of State" (Scribner). Although Orrin
Knox, Bob Munson and the other characters featured in "Advise and Consent" and
its five increasingly dire sequels took early retirement long ago, Mr. Drury is
still up to his familiar tricks: bad guys in the Middle East, bad guys in the
White House, bad guys in the Washington press corps (the only thing Mr. Drury
hates more than a wimpy politician is a liberal columnist), all simmering gently
in a rich stew of adjectives. Raymond Cass Stanley, the Secretary of State, is
"long, lean, lanky" and possessed of "a flintlike honesty and integrity." Joan
Cohn-Bourassa, the Assistant Secretary for Near Eastern Affairs, is "small,
dark, driving, and intense, intense, intense." And the world, as ever and
always, is in, shall we say, a parlous state: "Nowhere in all the vast expanse
of humanity's desperate strivings is there any really convincing evidence for
hope."

Mr. Drury, in short, is doing business at the same old stand. Unfortunately for
him, the highway has moved. Blockbuster novels about Washington as It Really Is
are as dead as disco, victims of what might be called Grisham's Law: in popular
culture, trash gets trashier over time. We're talking Washington-as-it-really-is
books, mind you, not how-to-get-there books. The campaign book, fictional or
nonfictional, is another thing altogether, and is alive and well at least every
four years; addicts with an eye on 1996 have to look forward, among other
things, to a Clinton '92 roman a clef by an allegedly anonymous author said to
be a big-time political reporter.

Gone, however, are the leisurely stemwinders about life and times in the
capital. "The mystery-thriller genre has taken over completely," laments Terri
Merz, co-owner of Chapters: A Literary Bookstore, located right around the
corner from the White House and frequented by the likes of Irving Kristol and
Gary Hart. "And those books aren't serious, satisfying Washington novels."
Actually, they're more like comic books. A novel like William S. Cohen's
"One-Eyed Kings" (1991), with its jut-jawed investigative reporters and slinky
Mossad assassins, has far more in common with "Goldfinger" than "Advise and
Consent."

Dead though the old-fashioned Washington novel may be, the genre definitely left
its mark on impressionable readers of the period. In a recent appearance on
"Face the Nation," Newt Gingrich informed the world that he thought the United
States should recognize Taiwan; he subsequently confessed that his gambit (which
he didn't really mean) "came out of a scene in 'Advise and Consent.' " And Peggy
Noonan recalled in "What I Saw at the Revolution" (1990) that every baby boomer
in the Reagan White House "had read 'Advise and Consent' and at least one other
of Allen Drury's wonderful old novels about Washington. We had read them in the
60's, when we were young, and they were part of the reason we were here."

Nor was Mr. Drury unique. Back in the 60's and 70's, Washington novels were a
staple item of the book business. "Seven Days in May," "Power Play," "The Man,"
"The President's Plane Is Missing," for example: who now remembers them? And
what killed them off?

Contrary to popular belief, Allen Drury did not invent the Washington novel;
Henry Adams beat him to the punch. But few novelists followed the lead of
"Democracy: An American Novel" (1880), and fewer still of any importance. There
is John Dos Passos' now-forgotten book "The Grand Design" (1949), but the best
novels about American politics, Robert Penn Warren's "All the King's Men"
(1946), and Edwin O'Connor's "All in the Family" (1966) and "The Last Hurrah"
(1956), are, significantly, not about Washington at all.

Unlike his more recent predecessors, Allen Drury was not a novelist de metier:
he started out as a Washington correspondent. And "Advise and Consent," the
story of a confirmation fight that leads to the suicide of a senator, the
resignation of a majority leader and the death of a President, is very much a
reporter's novel, full of the inside skinny. Some of Mr. Drury's senators drink
too much and sleep around; some remain in loveless marriages to further their
political careers; one, a promising young Mormon from Utah, has a homosexual
past. (Tony Kushner, call your office.) Like all clubmen, they mostly like one
another and mostly get along, and not infrequently strike private deals that
have nothing to do with party politics.

If all this sounds old hat, bear in mind that Mr. Drury was writing long before
Politics as Life Style became an obsession of American journalists. When he came
along, nobody was covering Washington politicians as personalities, at least not
with anything remotely approaching candor. C-Span and the Style section of The
Washington Post were far in the future. Yet the appetite for personality
journalism about politicians had already been created by radio and television:
all that remained was to feed it. Mr. Drury did so with a vengeance, and thereby
became rich, famous and the proud owner of the 1960 Pulitzer Prize for fiction.

"Advise and Consent" also sold because, like all big-selling novels, it told its
readers what they wanted to hear. In 1959, Americans were digging fallout
shelters and watching Nikita Khrushchev cavort menacingly on TV. They saw the
Soviet Union as a concrete threat to their continued existence, and wanted
desperately to believe that American politicians, whatever their differences,
were collectively up to the task of keeping the Russians on ice. The containment
of the Soviet Union is the only ideological issue at stake in "Advise and
Consent": every character is defined by whether or not he is soft on Communism.
And though there are villains in Mr. Drury's Washington, never is it suggested
for a moment that every politician is a liar and a thief. In fact, nearly all of
his characters seek earnestly to do the right thing: "Just when things seem at
their most cynical, something comes along that appeals to idealism and fair
play, and the forces of deceit go down before it like tenpins."

THESE sentiments were decidedly in vogue in 1959. Never was public faith in
government's capacity to do good as unswerving as in the ask-not-what era, in
which the man who won World War II was succeeded by Mr. PT-109. If anything, Mr.
Drury's imitators were even more idealistic than their model. Take Fletcher
Knebel, the grandfather of the modern "political thriller." In "Seven Days in
May" (1962), President Jordan Lyman's disarmament deal with the Russians arouses
the ire of Gen. James Mattoon Scott, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, who
contrives a military coup with the assistance of the proto-fascist chairman of
the Senate Armed Services Committee -- but President Lyman saves the day. In
"Night of Camp David" (1965), President Mark Hollenbach succumbs to delusions of
grandeur -- but is gently eased out of office by a junta of Cabinet members and
ranking elected officials before he can lob one into the men's room of the
Kremlin. In "Vanished" (1968), President Paul Roudebush contrives to achieve
worldwide nuclear disarmament and get re-elected, all in 407 pages.

It wasn't just the novels, either. Theodore H. White's "Making of the President"
series, the first of which was published in 1961, and William Manchester's
"Death of a President" (1967), which is as much about the romance of Washington
as the nightmare of Dallas, rode the same high tide of anxiety and optimism as
"Advise and Consent," and were strikingly similar to it in texture and
technique. The John F. Kennedy of "The Making of the President, 1960," a
handsome lad of virtue all compact, is no less a fictional character than
Senator Orrin Knox, the straight-talking, no-nonsense hero of "Advise and
Consent," who saves the West without stooping to a single sordid compromise.

It couldn't last, and it didn't. The decline of the Washington novel came in
three installments. First was the Vietnam War, whose effects on Washingtonians
were chronicled by Ward Just, a Washington and Saigon correspondent who resigned
from the editorial board of The Washington Post in 1969 to write Hemingwayesque
novels of power and disillusion, most of which received respectful reviews and
comparatively few of which sold very well. Small wonder. Aside from the question
of style, Mr. Just was ahead of his time: in the early 70's, readers of popular
fiction were not quite ready to hear that their elected leaders were both
immoral and boring. Then came Watergate, which knocked another prop out from
under the world according to Allen Drury. How could a mere novelist contrive a
plot, or a cast of characters, more bizarre than the one shown on the news each
night?

But it was the collapse of Communism that finally put paid to the traditional
Washington novel. No longer in need of men on horseback to stave off the Evil
Empire, Americans returned with an all but audible sigh of relief to their
longstanding conviction that most politicians are crooks and louts at heart. Six
years after the fall of the Berlin wall, the idea that one might make money
idealizing any politician now seems lunatic at best. Why write 600-page novels
about people like Bill Clinton? Better to let Rush Limbaugh slap them around
between beer commercials.

THE only Washington novel published recently that is at all Druryesque is
Charles McCarry's "Shelley's Heart," and it is surely a sign of the times that
Mr. McCarry's novel is less about personalities than ideology -- a cross, as it
were, between "Advise and Consent" and "Atlas Shrugged." "Shelley's Heart" is a
paranoid fantasy about the Shelley Society, a secret cabal of left-wing Yale
alumni who seek to seize control of the United States Government by judicial
skulduggery. Mr. McCarry pays brief and unconvincing homage to the innate
goodness of elected officials ("Give 'em a chance and they'll behave like the
Founding Fathers always told 'em to"), but his main interest is in chopping up
lefties past and present: "They're in their final days -- a vanguard elite with
a secret agenda who stopped being a popular movement a long time ago and have
survived for half a century by lying to the people."

"Shelley's Heart" has been selling briskly at Chapters, and is popular enough in
Washington to have aroused the ire of Christopher Hitchens, who published a
fulminant attack on Mr. McCarry in The New York Review of Books, in which Allen
Drury and various other practitioners of the Washington novel also got their
lumps. But I suspect few people outside the Beltway will get as worked up over
Mr. McCarry's conservative politics -- much less the idea of a fictive bunch of
pink Yalies who want to take over Washington. Most Americans would doubtless be
glad to let them have it.

For such folk, the essential Washington novel of the post-Reagan era will
probably be William Safire's "Sleeper Spy" (Random House), a tale of derring-do
in which a rumpled print reporter and a TV twinkie work their way through "all
the attitudes in the 'Kama Sutra' of espionage." In "Sleeper Spy," the President
of the United States makes his first entrance on page 163, and his final exit
seven pages later. Talk about the end of an era. Orrin Knox would never have
settled for a walk-on.

LOAD-DATE: August 27, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              209 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 27, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Spies & Thrillers

BYLINE: By Newgate Callendar

SECTION: Section 7;  Page 34;  Column 3;  Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 797 words


The perfect soldier is one who has the ability to obey any order, no matter what
he thinks of it, as well as to command. Maj. Christopher Ritter, in THE PERFECT
SOLDIER, by Ralph Peters (Pocket Books, $23), is indeed that soldier. Wounded on
assignment in a former Soviet republic, he returns to Washington to work for
Charlene Whyte, the Assistant Secretary of Defense for Humanitarian Assistance.
She is interested in American prisoners of war captured by the Soviets during
and after the Korean War. Are any still alive?

The author, who has written five novels, is a major in the United States Army.
His subjects in this new book include the execution of P.O.W.'s, the wars that
sprang up after the demise of Communism, the rise of ambitious strongmen
struggling for absolute power, torture, ethnic cleansing, poverty, disease,
corruption. No wonder the ending is cynical -- or realistic, depending on one's
perspective. (Certainly there has been little in the last 10 years or so to
suggest that mankind has changed much since the days of Vlad the Impaler.) Major
Peters has done his homework, and the words coming from the mouths of Russian
characters who lived through the Stalinist period seem to be based on fact.

Our perfect soldier finds himself involved with a big secret that powerful
forces want to keep hidden. The Russian Mafia has a prominent role. A corrupt
United States senator is in it up to his putrid ears. A misbegotten Russian
idealist plays a significant part in the denouement. There is a down-to-the-wire
fi nale in which an assassin and Major Ritter face off against each other.
Ritter winds up learning a lot about himself. So does Charlene Whyte. "The
Perfect Soldier" is in some ways a political tract, but is no less engrossing
for that.

STRANGERS AT THE GATE, by Leonard Gross (Random House, $23), is about the
anticipated takeover of Hong Kong by China in 1997. Mr. Gross, a journalist who
has written two thrillers with Pierre Salinger, describes a Hong Kong in which
many Chinese are getting out as fast as possible, often going to San Francisco.
Most of them are the usual ingredients in the American melting pot. But some are
dangerous -- members of the Chinese crime families known as the triads.

A television reporter who has done an investigative story on the new Chinese
immigrants in San Francisco gets her face slashed. Capt. Zachary Tobias, head of
the Asian detail of the police department's Gang Task Force, begins snooping
around. Tobias, who speaks Chinese, is Jewish, independently wealthy and from an
influential San Francisco family. Along the way we learn a good deal about the
place of Jews in the city.

But not even Tobias is immune to the forces that control San Francisco politics.
He starts annoying some of the big guns, is taken off the case and, when he
persists on his own, is suspended. There is a lot of boring self analysis and
some unnecessary flashbacks. The book could have been cut by a fifth. Still,
"Strangers at the Gate" will hold your attention, and Mr. Gross wraps everything
up quite neatly.

Gerry Carroll's NO PLACE TO HIDE (Pocket Books, $23) completes his Vietnam
trilogy, which began with "North SAR" and continued with "Ghostrider One." The
author, who died in 1993, was a Navy pilot in Vietnam. This new book examines
the minds, techniques and aspirations of the men who flew the planes and
helicopters, but does not neglect those who fought the ground war.

"No Place to Hide" takes up the story of two pilots, Lieut. Tim Boyle and his
friend Mike Santy. The novel is set at the end of the war, during the evacuation
of military and political people. Carroll has the military dialogue and
backgrounds down pat. His characters may be cliches, but the flying and assorted
heroics seem true to life. Although "No Place to Hide" is conventional stuff,
there is something honest and heartfelt about it, and the writing is clear and
concise.

THE LAST LIEUTENANT, by John J. Gobbell (St. Martin's, $23.95), is another novel
by a military man, this one a former weapons officer on a destroyer. Just as "No
Place to Hide" is about the evacuation of Saigon, so "The Last Lieutenant" is
about the evacuation of Corregidor during the early days of American involvement
in World War II.

After the surrender of Corregidor to the Japanese, Lieut. Todd Ingram, the
skipper of a minesweeper, gathers together a group of men and tries to flee to
Australia in a PT boat. Other characters include a stock Nazi type who has
infiltrated the code room of an American ship. Almost everything we encounter is
what one might expect: the Japanese fleet, submarine warfare, a very important
message that must be sent to American headquarters. Nonetheless, "The Last
Lieutenant" makes for interesting reading.

LOAD-DATE: August 27, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              210 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 27, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

THE REAL CHINESE THREAT

BYLINE: By NICHOLAS D. KRISTOF;    Nicholas D. Kristof is the Tokyo bureau chief
for The New York Times and author of "China Wakes: The Struggle for the Soul of
a Rising Power."

SECTION: Section 6;   Page 50;   Column 1;   Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 1731 words


ALMOST NO ONE NOTICED, BUT THIS summer the Pentagon drew a line in the sand.
Washington committed itself to using American military force, if necessary, to
keep international shipping lanes open in the South China Sea.

International, at least, in American eyes. But Beijing's maps put the entire
area within China's territorial waters. If a stronger China eventually tries to
enforce its national law, which governs shipping in the area, then American
forces could be called upon to confront a China that has developed enormously
since its troops battled ours to a stalemate in Korea.

The underlying problem is the oldest one in diplomacy: how the international
community can manage the ambitions of a rising power -- and there has never been
a rising power quite like China. It has 1.2 billion people; it has a nuclear
arsenal; it has an army of 3.2 million, the world's largest; and now it has what
may be the world's fastest-growing military budget.

For now, China's conventional forces are no match for America's. One of my
Chinese friends, the son of a general, attended a meeting in which a group of
senior Chinese military officials reviewed films of the American air war against
Iraq. "They sat around the room, moaning about China's lack of preparation,
asking what we could possibly do to modernize," he reported. "I felt like piping
up and saying there was one thing we could do: go capitalist."

Yet given the rate at which China is pouring money into its armed forces, the
situation may eventually be different. The United States Naval War College
conducted computer simulations last year and again this year of battles in Asia
between China and the United States in the year 2010. To everyone's surprise,
China defeated the United States in both. It is said that the Central
Intelligence Agency recently conducted its own simulation of such a battle, set
in the year 2005, and China won that, too.

Simulations don't prove anything. Still, China and Vietnam have both showed, in
Korea and Vietnam, how much damage even a backward army can do, particularly
when fighting on its own turf. And unlike Vietnam, China has nuclear warheads
aimed at the United States. (The United States has stopped targeting China with
nuclear missiles, but China has refused to stop targeting America.) China is
also believed to be developing biological warfare agents.

In Asia, there is now a real fear about what the rise of China will mean. "The
immense presence of China is itself a threat -- whether the Chinese are
conscious of it or not -- that certainly Japan cannot deal with alone," Morihiro
Hosokawa, the former Prime Minister, said recently.

In the United States, the expression "containment" is applied increasingly to
China. The Administration's position is that it wants to engage China, rather
than contain it, but that if necessary in the future it can switch to a
containment policy. "We're not naive," Winston Lord, the Assistant Secretary of
State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs, told a congressional committee in
June. "We cannot predict what kind of power China will be in the 21st century.
God forbid, we may have to turn with others to a policy of containment. I would
hope not."

In the meantime, there is growing alarm in Washington and other capitals at
China's military spending and policies. While most countries in the world have
been cutting back, China has raised its published military budget by 75 percent
since 1988, after adjusting for inflation. And the published budget vastly
understates reality. It does not even include weapons procurement. The real
figure is probably something like $20 billion, which, when adjusted for
purchasing power, may buy as much as a $100 billion defense budget in the West.

Most disturbing, China is pouring money into those activities that allow it to
project power beyond its traditional borders. In particular, it is building a
blue-water navy and developing an air-to-air refueling capability. China is also
becoming more aggressive in the South China Sea and even in the Indian Ocean --
far from its traditional sphere of influence.

All of this notwithstanding, it would be a mistake to think that China is
somehow a ferocious aggressor. It is not. It shows no interest in seizing areas
that it never controlled, like Nepal or Indonesia, and its claims to disputed
areas like some islands in the South China Sea do have some merit to them. The
risk of conflict arises in part because of stirrings of Chinese nationalism.
Nobody believes in Communism anymore, so the Communist Party is trying to use
nationalism as the new glue. To some extent, it is working. In five years of
living and traveling in China, I met innumerable ordinary people who didn't give
two yuan for Communism but who argued passionately that China needed to reclaim
its territories.

Just a couple of weeks ago, I was chatting with an elderly woman from Shanghai
-- not a Communist by any means -- and I asked her what she thought of Mao. "You
know what his biggest mistake was?" she asked, and I thought of the Great Leap
Forward, which led to the deaths of 30 million people. "It was giving up
Mongolia. That's our land, that's part of China! And he allowed Stalin to take
it. What we need to do is get Mongolia back."

I can't say that this woman is representative, although I have occasionally
heard other Chinese say they want to recover Mongolia, which is now an
independent country. But I have heard many Chinese say that they want their navy
to control the entire South China Sea, to seize the Diaoyu Islands from Japan,
even to recover Taiwan.

Moreover, the likely successor to the present regime in Beijing is not a
democracy but a military government. President Jiang Zemin is terrified of a
coup d'etat -- he has appeared before military units behind a bulletproof
shield. If the generals take over in the years following Deng Xiaoping's death,
they may be more aggressive than any Communists.

The placid waters and palm-lined islets of the South China Sea may be the site
of Asia's next war. The Government in China refuses to clarify whether it claims
the entire South China Sea or just the islands in the sea. But in any case, some
of the islands are also claimed by five other countries.

China erected a permanent fortress on a reef near the Philippines earlier this
year, leading to a tense confrontation at sea between naval vessels for the two
sides. Now Americans are training Philippine naval commandos. And Vietnam and
China are jostling each other over rival oil exploration programs, by American
oil companies, in the disputed area.

The worst nightmare in Asia is a Chinese invasion of Taiwan. China regards
Taiwan as a renegade province, while many Taiwanese now hope for a country of
their own. The authorities in Beijing repeatedly warn that they reserve the
right to use force to recover Taiwan. China underlined its threats in July when
it conducted missile tests in the open sea 80 miles from Taiwan, forcing the
closure of fisheries and the diversion of commercial flights. The Taiwan stock
market promptly plunged 6.8 percent amid jitters about a Chinese attack.

In any case, the possibility of clashes in the Taiwan Strait may be increasing
rather than decreasing. For now, it is not clear that China would win if it
attacked Taiwan, but the odds will change as China upgrades its forces. It is
impossible to imagine that an island of 20 million could indefinitely defend
itself against a country of 1.2 billion.

There is, in short, a potential Chinese threat and that drives the question: How
should America deal with it?

The first step is simply to acknowledge that threat and to pay far more
attention to China. America also needs to expand conversations with Chinese
leaders, even if that means boosting their legitimacy at times. President
Clinton has been reluctant to meet with President Jiang because of Chinese human
rights abuses and other problems. But it would be more effective to invite Jiang
to Washington and have him listen to hundreds of demonstrators screaming outside
his hotel all night. This would convey not only America's willingness to discuss
problems but also the seriousness with which Americans take China's misconduct.

Washington's aim in such talks should be to promote American interests, and that
is not necessarily the same as creating a good relationship with China. There is
no reason to provoke a dispute just for the sake of being surly. But the White
House has to be willing to risk a dispute when China tests its resolve. For
example, China has repeatedly promised not to sell M-11 missiles, which are
capable of carrying nuclear warheads, to Pakistan. Each time China makes such a
formal pledge, Washington claims credit for a major breakthrough. And each time,
China has apparently gone ahead and sold M-11's to Pakistan anyway.

These days, the Administration is reluctant to acknowledge what appears to be
the latest sale -- despite satellite evidence and the best judgment of
intelligence analysts -- because it is reluctant to worsen relations. The lesson
Beijing draws from this is that it can continue violating its pledges as long as
it acts greatly offended when someone complains. It would be is better to risk a
deeper chill in relations than to keep on backing down.

America also needs to work with Asian countries to apply joint restraints on
China. The Asean group of Southeast Asian countries, for example, has become
increasingly effective in pressuring China to go slow in the South China Sea.
And whatever the risks of confrontation, I think the United States was right to
declare its willingness to use military force to escort shipping in the South
China Sea. If China were to interfere with those shipping lanes -- blocking the
flow of oil to Japan, for example -- the global economy would be thrown into
crisis.

Americans also need to use the right historical model. China is not bent on
international conquest. Beijing may wish to dominate the region, but it does not
wish to raise the Chinese flag over Jakarta or Tokyo. Rather, it is like Germany
in the run-up to World War I, yearning for greater importance and testing to see
what it can get away with. There could be a major war with China, but if so, it
will be because of ignorance and miscalculation -- in substantial part on the
western rim of the Pacific.

LOAD-DATE: August 27, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: August 27, 1995, Sunday

CORRECTION:

A note identifying the author of an article on page 50 of the Magazine today,
about military expansion in China, omits the name of a co-author of the book
"China Wakes: The Struggle for the Soul of a Rising Power." The book was written
by Nicholas D. Kristof and Sheryl Wu Dunn, not by Mr. Kristof alone.

GRAPHIC: Photo: A pilot in the northwest Chinese desert, where missiles grow.

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              211 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 27, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

FILM VIEW;
Sleepers Sparked The Season

BYLINE: By Janet Maslin

SECTION: Section 2;   Page 9;   Column 5;   Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 929 words


THE IMPERILED ASTRONAUTS OF APOLLO 13 have to navigate within a two-degree
margin of error if they want to hit their target rather than crash and burn.
That challenge isn't so different from the one faced by "Apollo 13" itself,
along with every other big Hollywood film this summer: to find the narrow
corridor reserved for films with across-the-board commercial appeal, and then
make viewers care deeply about what they see.

If that sounds easy, consider the fact that only "Apollo 13" got it right. It
has made $150 million so far while stirring the imaginations of adults and
children alike, whereas most of this summer's big-ticket movies barely made
anything but a financial dent. A gross of $178 million (as of last week) says
that "Batman Forever" is still the hit of the season. And if so, we'd better
rethink our standards. Leaving "Batman Forever," you couldn't feel much more
than glad to go home.

Too many of the summer's would-be big movies shared that hollowness, brought on
by the tie-ins and test marketing that now shape Hollywood decision-making. (How
ironic that in films as crass as "Die Hard With a Vengeance" and "Casper," greed
is the villains' cardinal sin.) In addition, too many big-budget movies shared a
surprising technical sloppiness, especially in light of the huge sums spent on
production. The haste it takes to open a behemoth film in thousands of theaters
means such frantic post-production that parts of "First Knight," "Waterworld"
and "Congo" actually look amateurish. All of "Judge Dredd" looks that way.

So it's lucky that this summer's creative vacuum among Hollywood hit makers has
been offset by so many nice surprises further down the food chain. This has been
a great season for sleepers -- and it would have been even without a cute
talking pig and a bright new comic star whose main acting training came via MTV.
A healthy alternative cinema has offset the season's costly, empty
extravaganzas, and it has brought forth films that aren't simply more serious
than "Under Siege 2"; they're more fun, too.

Who could have predicted that a film about a mail carrier and Pablo Neruda would
be one art house hit this summer, or that a look at the customers of a Brooklyn
tobacco shop would be another? But "The Postman (Il Postino)" and "Smoke" both
have charm to spare, along with great appeal for audiences (the same audiences
who were so glad to get reacquainted with "Belle de Jour"). Whether set in Italy
or Brooklyn, the films made the most of local color.

Meanwhile, "Unzipped," "Living in Oblivion," "The Brothers McMullen" and "The
Usual Suspects" -- a fine collective advertisement for this year's Sundance Film
Festival -- have offered brightly entertaining alternatives to by-the-numbers
multiplex fodder. These have been reminders that it's possible to have a good
time without watching endless car crashes. Another cause for celebration is "I
Just Wasn't Made for These Times," a haunting documentary, to be shown on the
Disney Channel tonight, that explores the genius of the Beach Boys' Brian
Wilson. [Article, page 28.]

For those who prefer film making that is more disturbing to the status quo, Todd
Haynes's "Safe" delivers at least a first hour that is powerfully unsettling.
And when it came to shaking up viewers, Larry Clark's artfully bleak "Kids" did
it best. Mr. Clark's vision of an utterly debased teen-age culture didn't become
a cause celebre, but it cast a long shadow.

As for happier kids, they were well entertained this summer. Children's films
have been especially abundant, and they've been all over the map, even to
Vietnam ("Operation Dumbo Drop"). The usual range from super heroes to
saccharine has been covered, not to mention the efforts at cybercinema aimed at
teen-agers. ("Virtuosity" comes closest to getting this last bit right, since
it's almost unintelligible to adults and includes a scene featuring pornographic
chess.)

The biggest surprises actually came out of the kids' category: "Babe," which
wallows in adorableness but does pull off a remarkable extended animal stunt,
and "A Little Princess," which is beautifully directed (by Alfonso Cuaron) in
ways that stifle none of its magic. But impressive as these are, neither was the
film of choice for most children. That honor went to "Clueless," the summer's
zippiest comedy and (this side of "Unzipped") its most delightful fashion show.

A word about clothes: they've been important this season, and not just because
Kevin Costner's "Waterworld" character wears a salmon-skin jacket and mahi-mahi
pants. We are sure to remember Pocahontas's buckskin sarong, Batman's suit with
nipples, the Apollo astronauts' Ban-Lon civvies, the dress Meryl Streep picks
out for slow dancing in "The Bridges of Madison County," Mel Gibson's kilts and
Michelle Pfeiffer's carefully down-to-earth outfits for teaching school in
"Dangerous Minds." Ms. Pfeiffer's brand of casual chic looks so good, it's the
only explanation for that film's strong grosses.

While Ms. Pfeiffer, Ms. Streep, Julia Roberts (in "Something to Talk About") and
two newly minted major stars -- Sandra Bullock in "The Net" and Alicia
Silverstone in "Clueless" -- dispel last year's thought that Hollywood can't
create roles for women, the summer ends on a different affirmation of star
power. Business is slowish now, and Variety explains it this way: no Harrison
Ford. Mr. Ford's last few films have been gold mines that arrived in August. But
he didn't make a movie to play this summer.

Hugh Grant made three, but really, that's another story.

LOAD-DATE: August 27, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Bill Paxton, left, Kevin Bacon and Tom Hanks in "Apollo 13"--A
rousing, two-pronged success. (Ron Batzdorff/Universal Pictures)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              212 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 27, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD: MURRAY HILL;
Block Party's a Celebration and a Farewell

SECTION: Section 13;  Page 12;  Column 5;  The City Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 235 words


IT'S touted as "the world's largest block party," and it was created to
celebrate the city's volunteerism. But today's event will also mark the curtain
call of We Care About New York, a nonprofit environmental group that works with
individuals, community groups, schools and businesses to clean up the city.

"The board decided we had pretty much accomplished what we set out to accomplish
13 years ago," says Emory Jackson, the organization's president, "so we wanted
to throw the largest party New York has seen."

The radio stations HOT 97, KISS-FM, CD 101.9 and Q 104.3 and Good Times Magazine
will sponsor stages along the party route, Madison Avenue from 28th to 48th
Streets, where musicians, including Larry Coryell, Nelson Rangell, Force M.D.'s
and 4MATT, UTFO, Kwame, Toadies, the Nixons, Smile, and Her Vanished Grace, will
perform. And more than 100 community groups will have booths where volunteers
can sign up.

The sponsors will present their award for entrepreneurial excellence to Reginald
Williams, a Vietnam veteran and former crack addict who overcame 10 years on the
streets to become the general manager of En-Graffiti, a graffiti removal
business that operates out of the Salvation Army men's shelter and employs
formerly homeless veterans.

The World's Largest Block Party, Madison Avenue, from 28th through 48th Streets,
today, 10 A.M. to 6 P.M. Information: (212) 686-1001.

LOAD-DATE: August 27, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              213 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 27, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

IN BRIEF;
Sunken Tanks to Form Core Of New Offshore Reefs

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 13NJ;  Page 5;  Column 1;  New Jersey Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 147 words


If you spot some military-looking maneuvers this weekend off Barnegat Light on
Long Beach Island, don't panic: it's not an invasion. But it is the United
States Army, performing a service intended to attract marine life, divers and
fishermen to the mid-Atlantic coast.

The Army is dropping obsolete tanks and armored personnel carriers used in
Vietnam into the ocean to create artificial reefs. Similar operations will occur
this weekend off Ocean City, Md., and off Long Island at Shinnecock, Moriches,
Fire Island and Hempstead Town.

Yesterday, barges carrying 20 tanks were being towed from Colts Neck, and one by
one, troops will roll the tanks off. The tanks have been stripped of their
engines, weapons and any materials that might seep into the water. Within three
years or so, the reefs will develop into mature ecosystems capable of sustaining
diverse wildlife.

LOAD-DATE: August 27, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              214 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 27, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

BEST SELLERS: August 27, 1995

SECTION: Section 7; Page 30; Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1494 words



          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Fiction

 1      4   2   FROM POTTER'S FIELD, by Patricia Cornwell. (Scribner, $24.) Dr.
                Kay Scarpetta on the trail of a serial killer in Central Park.

 2      2   7   BEACH MUSIC, by Pat Conroy. (Talese/Doubleday, $27.50.) An
                American living in Rome returns to South Carolina and tries to
                cope with his troubled past.

 3      1   5   MEMNOCH THE DEVIL, by Anne Rice. (Knopf, $25.) The vampire
                Lestat is snatched from the world by a mysterious adversary who
                claims to be the Devil.

 4      3   5   LIGHTNING, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $24.95.) The happy
                marriage of a lawyer and her husband is suddenly changed after
                she gets a routine checkup.

 5      6  78   THE CELESTINE PROPHECY, by James Redfield. (Warner, $17.95.) An
                ancient manuscript, found in Peru, provides insights into
                achieving a fulfilling life.

 6      5  18   THE RAINMAKER, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $25.95.) A young
                man barely out of law school tries to expose a corporation's
                multibillion-dollar scam.

 7      8  159  THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner,
                $17.95.) A photographer and a farmer's lonely wife in Iowa.

 8      7   9   ROSE MADDER, by Stephen King. (Viking, $25.95.) Fleeing an
                abusive husband, a woman seeks happiness in a strange city by
                creating her own myth.

 9          1   FOR THE ROSES, by Julie Garwood. (Pocket, $23.) A
                late-19th-century woman with a checkered past investigates her
                identity, resulting in romance.

 10     9   5   DANGEROUS TO KNOW, by Barbara Taylor Bradford. (HarperCollins,
                $24.) A journalist investigates the death of her former
                husband, a philanthropist.

 11    12  62   POLITICALLY CORRECT BEDTIME STORIES, by James Finn Garner.
                (Macmillan, $8.95.) Classic tales respun to avoid offending
                current sensibilities.

 12    11   2   BELGARATH THE SORCERER, by David and Leigh Eddings. (Del
                Rey/Ballantine, $25.95.) A fantasy about the start of a
                7,000-year-long global conflict.

 13    10   9   THE WITNESS, by Sandra Brown. (Warner, $21.95.) A public
                defender who seems happy in her work and her marriage is
                plunged into a morass of bigotry and hate.

 14    13   7   DISNEY'S POCAHONTAS. (Mouse Works, $6.98.) The romance of an
                American Indian princess and an Englishman, told in words and
                pictures.

 15        14   ONCE UPON A MORE ENLIGHTENED TIME, by James Finn Garner.
                (Macmillan, $9.95.) Eight more "politically correct bedtime
                stories."

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Nonfiction

 1      1   7   TO RENEW AMERICA, by Newt Gingrich. (HarperCollins, $24.) The
                Speaker of the House describes his solutions to the country's
                problems. (+)

 2      3  10   NEW PASSAGES, by Gail Sheehy. (Random House, $25.) How changing
                social conditions and longer life expectancies are affecting
                our lives.

 3      4  77   MIDNIGHT IN THE GARDEN OF GOOD AND EVIL, by John Berendt.
                (Random House, $23.) The mysterious death of a young man in
                Savannah, Ga.

 4      2   3   BEYOND ALL REASON, by David Smith with Carol Calef.
                (Kensington, $18.95.) The former husband of Susan Smith, the
                woman convicted of killing their two sons, tells of their life
                together.

 5      6  10   A GOOD WALK SPOILED, by John Feinstein. (Little, Brown,
                $23.95.) The P.G.A. Tour in 1993 and 1994. (+)

 6      5   5   SLEEPERS, by Lorenzo Carcaterra. (Ballantine, $23.) The true
                story, the narrator claims, of four boys in a reformatory and
                the revenge they later take.

 7      7  13   SPONTANEOUS HEALING, by Andrew Weil. (Knopf, $23.) Ways in
                which the body heals itself. (+)

 8     11   3   MY OLD MAN AND THE SEA, by David Hays and Daniel Hays.
                (Algonquin, $19.95.) A sailing yarn about a father-and-son
                voyage from Connecticut around Cape Horn.

 9      8  35   SISTERS. Essays by Carol Saline. Photographs by Sharon J.
                Wohlmuth. (Running Press, $27.50.) The relationships of 36 sets
                of sisters.

 10    10  13   DAVE BARRY'S COMPLETE GUIDE TO GUYS, by Dave Barry. (Random
                House, $21.) A humorist explains the strange ways of a species
                of males called "guys."

 11     9  28   THE DEATH OF COMMON SENSE, by Philip K. Howard. (Random House,
                $18.) How governmental rules and regulations are fettering the
                lives of all Americans.

 12*   16   3   THE LIARS' CLUB, by Mary Karr. (Viking, $22.95.) A poet recalls
                her childhood as a member of a troubled family in East Texas
                during the early 1960's.

 13    13   5   THE EAGLE AND THE ROSE, by Rosemary Altea. (Warner, $19.95.) An
                English psychic tells of her struggle to come to terms with who
                she really is.

 14    12   7   WHEN ELEPHANTS WEEP, by Jeffrey Moussaieff Masson and Susan
                McCarthy. (Delacorte, $23.95.) The emotional lives of animals.

 15    15  88   THE BOOK OF VIRTUES, by William J. Bennett. (Simon & Schuster,
                $30.) Moral stories adapted from the Greeks, the Bible,
                folklore and elsewhere.

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous

 1      1  118  MEN ARE FROM MARS, WOMEN ARE FROM VENUS, by John Gray.
                (HarperCollins, $23.) Relationships. (+)

 2          1   MARY KAY: You Can Have It All, by Mary Kay Ash. (Prima,
                $22.95.) Ways to succeed in business: advice from an
                entrepreneur. (+)

 3      2  23   THE SEVEN SPIRITUAL LAWS OF SUCCESS, by Deepak Chopra.
                (Amber-Allen/New World Library, $14.) How to "generate wealth
                in all its forms." (+)

 4         13   MARS AND VENUS IN THE BEDROOM, by John Gray. (HarperCollins,
                $22.) Maintaining passion. (+)


Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Aug. 12, at 3,050 bookstores
plus wholesalers serving 28,000 other retailers (gift shops, department stores,
newsstands, supermarkets), statistically weighted to represent sales in all such
outlets nationwide. An asterisk (*) indicates that a book's sales are barely
distinguishable from those of the book above. A dagger (+) indicates that some
bookstores report receiving bulk orders for a book.
And Bear in Mind
(Editor's Choices of other recent books of particular interest)

BEHIND THE WHEEL AT CHRYSLER: The Iacocca Legacy, by Doron P. Levin. (Harcourt
Brace, $25.) A Detroit reporter interprets Chrysler under Lee Iacocca's
management as a company far better at making sales and deals than cars.

DARK SUN: The Making of the Hydrogen Bomb, by Richard Rhodes. (Simon & Schuster,
$32.50.) Mr. Rhodes's lucid exposition of technical issues combines fruitfully
with his sharp eye for character, anecdote and political context.

GALATEA 2.2, by Richard Powers. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $23.) Ingenious,
ambitious and cerebral, this novel concerns a novelist (same name as the
author's) who works to perfect a machine intelligence that can learn literature
and sustain belief in purpose and meaning.

GARDENS OF REVELATION: Environments by Visionary Artists, by John Beardsley.
(Abbeville, $60.) An irresistible excursion by an art historian into the small
worlds created by (usually) untutored eccentrics, using junk, found objects,
concrete and their own obsessions to render things nobody has ever seen except
themselves.

GREEN, by Frances Sherwood. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $23.) A picaresque but
sober novel of the Beat era, in which a young California woman keeps banging her
head on the internal contradictions of herself and others.

AN ITALIAN EDUCATION: The Further Adventures of an Expatriate in Verona, by Tim
Parks. (Grove, $22.) By sending his children to school in Italy and thoughtfully
watching them become Italians, Mr. Parks studies the rules that govern a society
other than his native England.

LOST IN PLACE: Growing Up Absurd in Suburbia, by Mark Salzman. (Random House,
$22.) A refreshing memoir of a teen-ager's search for happiness through kung fu
in the 1970's; the jokes are mostly on the author, who is remarkably free from
the customarily licensed resentments.

THE NIGHTINGALE'S SONG, by Robert Timberg. (Simon & Schuster, $27.50.) Mr.
Timberg, a graduate of the United States Naval Academy, examines some of his
fellow alumni in Government service (overrepresented in the Iran-contra affair)
and finds that their conduct was influenced by fear of a second Vietnam.

THE RICHER, THE POORER: Stories, Sketches and Reminiscences, by Dorothy West.
(Doubleday, $22.) Unsentimental, clear, crisp pieces about black middle-class
life by a unique writer, at 87 the last survivor of the Harlem Renaissance.

RL'S DREAM, by Walter Mosley. (Norton, $22.) This emphatic modern-day fable of
nurturance and dying is a Deep South tale set in New York, inhabited by a black
musician, his white lover and the ghost of a mythic blues singer.

VIRTUALLY NORMAL: An Argument About Homosexuality, by Andrew Sullivan. (Knopf,
$22.) The author, who is the editor of The New Republic, reflects reasonably on
society's dealings with the minority of which he is a member; he thinks society
could do a lot better.

LOAD-DATE: August 27, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              215 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 27, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Insecurity Council;
Isolationism Makes China the World's Problem

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE

SECTION: Section 4;   Page 1;   Column 4;   Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 956 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS


SUDDENLY, it seems, China is the world's troublemaker.

For two months it played with the life of Harry Wu, before setting the human
rights advocate free last week so that Washington would not embarrass China by
keeping Hillary Rodham Clinton from a conference on women in Beijing next week.

For most of this year China, bent on preventing any kind of protests, has been
backtracking on promises to let that conference be a free exchange of ideas,
most recently by harassing thousands of foreigners with denied or delayed visas
and repressive regulations. More ominously, it has scared the Taiwanese with
missile tests and military maneuvers for weeks. And its fleet keeps the
Philippines and Vietnam perennially on edge.

All of this begins to look like a new cold war, Chinese style, with bouts of
harsh public bullying and almost continuous if discreet applications of
pressure. Examples are not hard to find here in the halls of an institution
created 50 years ago on the eve of the first East-West superpower conflict.
Where once Khrushchev banged his shoe, now Chinese diplomats police the nooks
and crannies for possible friends of Taiwan or traces of the Dalai Lama's
Tibetan supporters. Where once a stolid Andrei Gromyko delivered Soviet
party-line prevarications, immovable Chinese hold the line in the Security
Council against most punitive measures against rogue nations, while quietly
assembling a new anti-Western bloc in the new East.

That much of China's behavior seems as pointlessly petty as it is threatening
reflects a widening gulf of understanding that could make a new cold war as
dangerous as the last. China sees enemies everywhere; the West founders in
response to a period of political uncertainty. What missile crisis, what Bay of
Pigs could be born of this mistrust? Many who know China well say this is not
the time to walk away but rather to engage the Chinese, however tricky the task
may be.

The first step is understanding their motives. China is the world's most
populous country with growing economic as well as military power. It holds the
only permanent Asian seat on the Security Council. But for all its size and
power it is still an insecure developing nation with huge social problems,
facing a leadership struggle with the eclipse of an aging Deng Xiaoping. And it
wears a bristling nationalism on its shoulder that may be fed by that struggle.

At the United Nations, the Chinese are usually isolated and self-absorbed, and
their actions are a clue to their priorities. Internationalists they are not,
unlike the Soviets. On the Security Council, a diplomat said, "China is just not
part of the party." Silent on most issues, the Chinese weigh in only when they
see themselves or their principles threatened. They don't like sanctions,
embargoes, human rights monitors or peace-enforcement operations, for such
precedents could someday be used against them. In the larger General Assembly,
they have come to form a core around which an unlikely coalition, including
India and Iran and sometimes Mexico, clusters to fend off perceived threats to
national sovereignty.

China is not always alone in self-imposed withdrawal. Other Asian nations
maintain low profiles at the United Nations, an unfortunate trend given Asia's
rising power, and growing concern about China. Ismail Razali, Malaysia's widely
engaged representative, says he understands the symptoms. The United Nations, he
says, is "diminished in stature and regulated by the great powers, who seem to
be disciplining the developing countries." It is a European club that now
includes Russia, he added.

China gets away with browbeating the United Nations for a number of reasons.
Many nations including the United States can and do put intense pressure on the
Secretary General to protect their interests or promote their candidates for
jobs within the system. China, with a Security Council veto, has power to thwart
the selection -- or, in the present case of Boutros Boutros-Ghali, the
re-election -- of a Secretary General. It must also be courted by the other four
permanent Council members to insure that China does no worse than remain on the
sidelines when the "European" majority rams through a resolution.

There is also history. From the 1949 Communist revolution until 1971, China was
frozen out of the United Nations by the intransigence of the United States and
its allies, who for years backed Taiwan (still viewed by China as a renegade
province) in its claim to the Chinese seat in the organization. That period is
not easily forgotten, not only by the Chinese but also by other developing
nations who think of it as a sustained display of American arrogance. An Asian
diplomat said that the feeling is now beginning to dissipate as Taiwan becomes a
major investor in many poor countries.

At George Washington University, Dean Harry Harding, who has written books on
China and the world, says the Chinese seem willing to make sacrifices to be part
of international economic institutions. But, operating on a 19th century concept
of the sovereign state, they find it difficult to join other systems, like arms
control regimes. "The bottom line is that they are reluctant participants in all
of this," Mr. Harding said. "They are moving in the right direction, but they
still have a long way to go."

Waiting for them seems likely to have its continuing frustrations, but diplomats
see few alternatives to patience, however taxed it may be. During one busy week
when the Chinese silently delayed for days an action that displeased them in the
Security Council, the most polished of delegates finally cracked, and he blurted
out: "Are we waiting for instructions from a fortune cookie?"

LOAD-DATE: August 27, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Chinese soldiers view Beijing museum photo of nuclear test.
(Associated Press)(pg.1); Chinese consular officials in New York take visa
applications for women's conference. (Edward Keating/The New York Times)(pg.6)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              216 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 27, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

COMPANIES PRESS CLINTON TO LIFT EMBARGO ON CUBA

BYLINE: By SAM DILLON

SECTION: Section 1;   Page 1;   Column 4;   Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1382 words


A growing number of American businesses have for the first time begun pressing
Washington to reconsider the trade embargo against Cuba, complaining that it
forces them to stand by as foreign competitors lock up an attractive emerging
market.

A handful of corporate executives have spoken out publicly against the embargo
in recent months, and others have testified before Congress. But most of the
pressure has come in private meetings with Clinton Administration officials.

The emergence of a fledgling private-sector lobby against the Cuban embargo adds
an influential new element to a debate in which economic interests have taken a
back seat to political ideology.

"Pressure is growing," a Clinton Administration official said, speaking on the
condition of anonymity. "Businessmen are expressing interest in a transition in
Cuba and complaining that all the deals down there are being cut by foreign
competitors. There's a very high degree of business interest in Cuba."

So far, Clinton Administration officials have responded only by restating
long-held positions, as when Alexander Watson, Assistant Secretary of State for
Inter-American Affairs, recently came under questioning on Cuba after giving a
pep talk on hemispheric trade to an audience of corporate executives at the
State Department.

"The Europeans and the Asians are knocking on the door in Latin America," Mr.
Watson warned. "The game is on and we can compete effectively, but it will be a
big mistake if we leave the game to others."

Eric Williams, managing director for Latin American sales for Federal Express,
asked, "Do your comments on free trade apply to Cuba?"

"No, no," Mr. Watson said. "That simply can't be, not for now."

John D. Tessier, a Connecticut consultant who specializes in Latin America,
waded in. "Isn't there some incongruity on our policy toward the Communist
world?" he asked. "Why do we have one policy toward North Korea, another for
Vietnam, another for China, but complete coldness toward Cuba?"

"Cuba is a special case," Mr. Watson responded. "This Administration will
maintain the embargo until major democratic changes take place in Cuba. Then,
and only then, will the United States respond with carefully calibrated steps.
And that's where we are."

Perhaps the most outspoken critic of the embargo among corporate executives has
been Dwayne O. Andreas, chairman of Archer Daniels Midland, the giant grain
processor in Decatur, Ill.

"Our embargo has been a total failure for 30 years," Mr. Andreas said in a June
interview with CNN. "We ought to have all the Americans in Cuba doing all the
business they can. It's time for a change."

Jose Cardenas, a spokesman for the Cuban-American National Foundation, the
powerful anti-Castro lobby, acknowledged that business interest in Cuba had
increased. "There are always a few people who are willing to make a buck -- and
the moral ramifications be damned," he said. "But most people know that stable
business conditions will not exist in Cuba as long as Fidel Castro is in power.
And when it comes down to it, these businessmen won't bleed for the issue."

Even as executives like Mr. Andreas are urging an end to the embargo, a
Republican bill in Congress would tighten it considerably. The bill, sponsored
by Senator Jesse Helms of North Carolina and Representative Dan Burton of
Indiana, would, among other measures, punish foreign countries and companies,
including subsidiaries of American companies, that trade with Cuba.

The Clinton Administration has threatened to veto the bill, partly because of a
provision that would allow thousands of Cuban exiles to sue the Cuban Government
in Federal courts in the United States to recover properties that have been
expropriated since the 1959 revolution. Administration officials said such
lawsuits could overwhelm the courts with dubious new litigation.

Administration officials say the threat of a tighter embargo has actually
focused the attention of the business executives on the issue, and drawn more
open expressions of disfavor.

John S. Kavulich, president of the U.S.-Cuba Trade and Economic Council, which
works with the cooperation of the Castro Government to disseminate commercial
information about Cuba, said 1995 had brought an increase in the number of
executives scouting out Cuba, even above 1994, when he said more than 500
representatives of American businesses visited there.

More than 100 of the American business representatives who have visited Cuba
have signed "letters of intent" with state-owned businesses, outlining areas of
potential cooperation if trade relations are normalized, Bruno Rodriguez
Parrilla, Cuba's delegate to the United Nations, said in an interview.

The Clinton Administration's decision on May 2 to repatriate Cuban boat people,
reversing three decades of immigration policy and angering the most conservative
Cuban exile organizations, has led some executives to conclude that the
Administration is rethinking its Cuba policy.

Many executives say they sense that change may be coming -- despite repeated
Administration declarations to the contrary. Ron Perelman, who owns Revlon as
well as the Consolidated Cigar Corporation, predicted in a recent interview with
the magazine Cigar Aficionado that the embargo would be lifted within five
years.

"We think it's inevitable," said Thomas J. Polski, a spokesman for Carlson
Companies, which owns the Radisson Hotel chain and a Caribbean cruise liner. "We
see Cuba as an exciting new opportunity -- the forbidden fruit of the
Caribbean."

Others question how rapidly change will come. John E. Howard, international
policy director at the United States Chamber of Commerce, which opposes the
embargo, said American corporations were not yet as active on Cuba as they were
in the lobbying campaign that led to the normalization of relations with Vietnam
in February.

"The time was right, politically, to make that happen on Vietnam," Mr. Howard
said. "I question whether the time is right to make it happen on Cuba."

But executives cut off from a market they consider potentially lucrative are
speaking out anyway.

Carlson is one of several companies whose executives have criticized the embargo
in Congressional testimony since early last year. Another is Otis Elevator,
based in Farmington, Conn., whose executives want the chance to modernize the
thousands of Otis elevators in Cuba and have both testified and sent letters to
Congress protesting the embargo.

At a hearing on American-Cuban relations before the House Ways and Means
Committee on June 30, the vice chairman of the U.S.A. Rice Federation, Keith
Broussard, said, "The U.S. rice industry views the Cuban market as one of great
potential once the embargo is no longer in place."

Sandra M. Alfonso, who heads a commission set up by Gov. Edwin Edwards of
Louisiana, told Congress at the same hearing that pre-embargo Cuba had been
Louisiana's No. 1 trading partner and that the state had lost 6,000 jobs because
of the embargo. Louisiana could easily recover those jobs and more, Ms. Alfonso
said, but not "if the existing sanctions remain."

Although some executives are speaking publicly, Administration officials said
more were expressing their views on the embargo in private meetings at the White
House and the State Department.

"I'm hearing concerns from many U.S. businessmen that they are losing out," said
Richard Nuccio, the White House's special adviser on Cuba. "But frankly I don't
think it's very true" that American businesses are missing major opportunities,
he said. The Europeans, Latin Americans and other foreign competitors investing
in Cuba "are mostly people who put money in short-term or high-risk investments"
and could be displaced by American investors if the embargo is lifted, he said.

One exception, Mr. Nuccio said, is in the modernization of Cuba's telephone
system, an undertaking that has begun with major investments from Italian and
Mexican companies.

"Once others wire the country, Americans are not going to re-wire it," Mr.
Nuccio said. "The embargo against Cuba is the most comprehensive against any
country in the world -- it's a tough embargo. We do it because we believe that
it is only pressure that drives Cuba toward economic or political reform."

LOAD-DATE: August 27, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Graph: "LEDGER: Foreign Investment In Cuba" shows amount in millions of
foreign investments in Cuba. (Source: U.S.-Cuba Trade and Economic Council,
Inc.) (pg. 6)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              217 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 27, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Judge Who Is Also a General Repairs Haiti's Judicial System

BYLINE: By ERIC SCHMITT

SECTION: Section 1; Page 34; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 967 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 26


Donald F. Campbell has two jobs. When he is not presiding over divorcing couples
and deadbeat dads, he is fixing broken countries.

Since American troops entered Haiti last September to reinstate the exiled
President, Jean-Bertrand Aristide, among the biggest challenges has been
resurrecting Haiti's tattered judicial system, which suffered from decades of
neglect under a host of dictators and military juntas.

Much of that burden has fallen to General Campbell, a New Jersey Superior Court
judge in civilian life who is also a two-star general in the Army Reserve
responsible for helping countries rebuild after wars or natural disasters.

General Campbell, a family-law judge in Burlington County, led a team of 18 Army
Reserve judges and lawyers to Haiti in February for a three-month assignment to
review the judicial system, begin training the country's 400 judges (many of
whom have little or no legal background), modernize the country's 19th century
legal code and begin repairing dilapidated rural courthouses.

Since then, from his Army command at Fort Bragg, N.C., and from his courthouse
in Mount Holly, N.J., General Campbell has worked closely with the United States
Agency for International Development, the United Nations and Haiti's Justice
Minister, Jean-Joseph Exume, to maintain the momentum his legal shock troops
started.

"Their needs are so basic you did not need a Harvard law degree to understand
what had to be done to improve their system," General Campbell said in an
interview at the Pentagon. The general, a decorated Vietnam veteran, commands
5,800 Army civil affairs troops who are judges, doctors, health inspectors and
fire chiefs as civilians, and who use those same skills when called to active
duty.

So far, there have been small successes. The Justice Ministry in Port-au-Prince
has light bulbs again.  Each of the country's judges has a set of books
containing Haiti's legal code. And on Thursday, a newly functioning criminal
court convicted a Haitian man of killing a prominent supporter of Mr. Aristide
in 1993, one of the most notorious murders during the country's last three years
of military rule.

But there are still plenty of hurdles. Haiti has no bail system. Its criminal
court is in session only twice a year, leaving many suspects to spend more time
in jail awaiting trial than the length their sentences would be if they were
tried and found guilty. The country's largely rural population still relies more
on vigilante justice than the courtroom variety.

"It's going to be a long, arduous process that will require time, effort and
patience," said General Campbell, 52, who earned sociology and law degrees from
Seton Hall University.

General Campbell's unusual background gives him a good chance to succeed. He has
been a Superior Court judge in Ocean and Burlington counties since 1982, hearing
more than 200 jury trials ranging from death-penalty murder cases to medical
malpractice and child-custody complaints.

"The fact I was a judge gave me credibility with the Haitians," said General
Campbell. "It was absolutely key. We couldn't accomplish anything without their
full cooperation."

The Haitian Government required General Campbell and his team to trade in their
battle fatigues for dark suits during their assignment. "We had to be in
civilian clothing so we gave the impression it was not the U.S. military but the
U.S. legal community that was offering assistance," he said.


In a country in which the Justice Ministry last spring had little idea how many
judges and courthouses it really had, General Campbell sought to bring military
efficiency to disarray and uncertainty.

The team helicoptered around the country with Mr. Exume, visiting virtually all
of the 400 judges and justices-of-the-peace. About one-third had held their jobs
for years, sometimes decades. Most others were appointed by Mr. Aristide.

"In rural areas, a few of them couldn't even read or write," General Campbell
said. "They were respected elders who people thought would make good judges."

The American team interviewed each of the judges, noted their concerns for
improved security, and reviewed with them the Haitian constitution, ethics and
the responsibilities of judges.

At General Campbell's recommendation, Mr. Exume agreed to increase a judge's
salary to about $320 a month from $80 a month.  Legal forms, absent in some
courthouses for 10 years, were flown in.  Fifteen of the American military's
Chevrolet Blazers were donated to help Haitian judges travel around the
countryside.

"They were a roving, experienced and disciplined force that could focus on
problems and get things done," Michael Morfit, head of the Agency for
International Development's Haiti task force in Washington, said of General
Campbell's team. "They were prepared for just about anything."

The team recommended changes to Haiti's Napoleonic legal code. Under the code,
for instance, judges, not police officers, investigate crimes.  That could lead
to conflicts of interest, the general said. Lawyers from France and Louisiana,
the only state with a legal system based on Napoleonic law, were brought in to
help.

In the last few months, the Agency for International Development and the Haitian
Government have opened a formal training center for judges in the Haitian army's
former military academy. French-speaking judges from countries like Canada and
Senegal have joined Haitian lawyers as instructors for rigorous two-week
courses.

The United States plans to spend $18 million over the next five years to restore
the Haitian judiciary, its courthouses and some of the nation's 17 prisons. In
October, General Campbell said he expects an eight-member legal team will return
to some of the areas visited last spring.

NAME: Donald F. Campbell

LOAD-DATE: August 27, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Judge Donald F. Campbell of Burlington County, N.J., is helping
to rebuild Haiti's judicial system. (Laura Pedrick for the New York Times)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              218 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 27, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD: MURRAY HILL;
Block Party's a Celebration and a Farewell

SECTION: Section 13; Page 17; Column 5; The City Weekly/Queens

LENGTH: 235 words


IT'S touted as "the world's largest block party," and it was created to
celebrate the city's volunteerism. But today's event will also mark the curtain
call of We Care About New York, a nonprofit environmental group that works with
individuals, community groups, schools and businesses to clean up the city.

"The board decided we had pretty much accomplished what we set out to accomplish
13 years ago," says Emory Jackson, the organization's president, "so we wanted
to throw the largest party New York has seen."

The radio stations HOT 97, KISS-FM, CD 101.9 and Q 104.3 and Good Times Magazine
will sponsor stages along the party route, Madison Avenue from 28th to 48th
Streets, where musicians, including Larry Coryell, Nelson Rangell, Force M.D.'s
and 4MATT, UTFO, Kwame, Toadies, the Nixons, Smile, and Her Vanished Grace, will
perform. And more than 100 community groups will have booths where volunteers
can sign up.

The sponsors will present their award for entrepreneurial excellence to Reginald
Williams, a Vietnam veteran and former crack addict who overcame 10 years on the
streets to become the general manager of En-Graffiti, a graffiti removal
business that operates out of the Salvation Army men's shelter and employs
formerly homeless veterans.

The World's Largest Block Party, Madison Avenue, from 28th through 48th Streets,
today, 10 A.M. to 6 P.M. Information: (212) 686-1001.

LOAD-DATE: September 19, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              219 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 27, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Submarine Veterans Remember Their Own

BYLINE: By ROBERT A. HAMILTON

SECTION: Section 13CN;  Page 1;  Column 5;  Connecticut Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1030 words


WHEN the black granite panels that make up the Submarine Wall of Honor were
delivered to Groton last month, Robert H. Moore walked down from his insurance
office nearby to look for the name of Joseph Frontino.

Mr. Frontino, Mr. Moore's classmate in torpedo school more than 50 years ago,
had been seasick during his passage to Australia in preparation for a war patrol
in the Pacific, and Mr. Moore urged him to claim chronic seasickness to get out
of the submarine service.

"For whatever reason, he didn't do it," Mr. Moore recalled, his hand lightly
tracing Frontino's name, inscribed in 5/8-inch high letters on a 6-foot-high
granite slab. "He went out on the Trout, and he never came back." Hundreds of
other veterans of the World War II submarine force have made their own personal
pilgrimages to the wall, reliving their own memories. And this week an estimated
4,000 family members and friends of men listed on the wall are expected at a
formal dedication ceremony on Saturday at 10 A.M.

Although submarines made up only a fraction of the fighting force in World War
II, they are credited with the majority of enemy casualties -- at least 201
Japanese warships and 1,000 merchant ships. With stealth and daring, they
ventured into Japanese-dominated waters and halted the advance of that navy. In
fact, of three ships that won the Presidential Unit Citation, two of them were
submarines -- the U.S.S. Tang and the U.S.S. Guardfish.

But it was not without cost. More than 16 percent of submarine officers and 13
percent of the enlisted men were killed in action, the highest rate of any
branch of the service. And they went to deep watery graves, denying their
families even the hope of the comfort of a burial. Of the 3,617 men listed on
the memorial, 47 are from Connecticut.

Most of the 8,000 members of Submarine Veterans of World War II, the
organization that built the Wall of Honor, have stories of narrow escapes under
the depth charges, bomb and artillery attacks by surface craft and airplanes.
"But for a stroke of fate, that could have been our names up on the wall," said
Frank Hamilton of New London, a veteran who visited the wall recently.

Chester Fitzjarrald of Illinois said he plans to make the trip to Groton this
week for the event, to remember his friends on the U.S.S. Bullhead, the last
submarine lost in the war, sunk by an enemy plane on Aug. 6, 1945. Mr.
Fitzjarrald was the Chief of the Boat for the Bullhead's first two patrols, but
did not make its third, fateful voyage so that someone else could qualify for
the chief's job. He was scheduled to go on the fourth patrol, which never
happened. "It was a good ship, brand new, with well-trained people, so no one
was worried about it at all," he said.

Mr. Hamilton explained why he felt the wall had to be built now, or not at all.
"It's only a question of time," he said. "We're all old men now. If we didn't do
it now, it probably would not have gotten done."

Mr. Moore led the three-year effort to raise $250,000 build the wall, which is
similar in style to the Vietnam Memorial in Washington, D.C., listing the names
of all the men who died in submarines in World War II, most of them in the
Pacific. "I knew a lot of men who died in the war, but I was lucky," he said. "I
think I was meant to live, to do this."

A honor roll at Pearl Harbor lists the names of the men who went down in
submarines, about 3,500.

But Mr. Moore said his list includes all the men who died in the submarine
service, including five men killed by sniper fire when their submarine berthed
in Guam, and a sailor lost overboard during a repair operation.

"That added about 115 names to the list," he said. "Those names should be on the
wall. They've earned the right to be there. I've received thousands of letters
from their families, and others, still filled with grief. They've said this is
going to close a chapter in their lives, now that they have their memorial."

Subvets, as the group is known, established a memorial committee in 1957, which
constructed the National Submarine Memorial-East. Until now the memorial, off
Bridge Street in Groton, has consisted of 52 stone plaques engraved with the
names and details of the submarines lost in World War II, as well as the conning
tower of the U.S.S. Flasher, which sank 24 enemy ships totalling 150,000 tons,
the highest total of any U.S. warship in history.

In the 1960's an effort to construct a memorial to the individuals who died in
the submarines failed when the group could not raise enough money. Many thought
Mr. Moore's plans were doomed as well.

"I was at the meeting three years ago when he brought it up, and I sat there and
thought, 'How in the world does he expect us to come up with that much money?
There ain't no way in the world we're going to be able to do that,' " recalled
Floyd Ellis of Groton, who won a Bronze Star on his 11 war patrols. "But it just
kept going and going."

The 48,000-pound memorial consists of 11 stones, each 4 feet wide and 10 inches
thick. A center stone of gray native granite is inscribed with a brief passage
that reads in part: "Their final resting places are known only to the Almighty .
. . They will always be remembered."

Spreading out in a V-pattern from that stone, five on each side, are a series of
African jet black granite stones, inscribed with the names.

Douglas Barnes of Barnes-Macrino Memorials in New London, which built the
memorial, said it was one of the most powerful projects he was ever commissioned
to do. "I don't think there was a minute I didn't have goosebumps all over," he
said.

Roger Potvin of Waterford has organized a parade for 1 P.M. next Sunday, the day
after the dedication ceremonies, that will begin at the Electric Boat shipyard
and make a mile-log trek to the memorial.

"Today's schoolchildren ought to know of the great sacrifices their grandparents
made 50 years ago to save the world for democracy," said Mr. Potvin, who lost a
brother in the World War II submarine service. "And here in southern New England
thousands of their grandmothers worked in the boat yards building the subs that
many of their grandfathers served aboard."

LOAD-DATE: August 27, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: A tribute to the U.S.S. Swordfish, lost in World War II.
(Thomas McDonald for The New York Times)(pg. 4); In Groton, engraved granite
panels make up a Wall of Honor for submarine fleet veterans; the wall is to be
formally dedicated on Saturday. (Thomas McDonald for The New York Times)(pg. 1)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              220 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 28, 1995, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Mexican-Americans March in California To Mark '70 Protest

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A;  Page 12;  Column 1;  National Desk

LENGTH: 212 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES, Aug. 27


Mexican-Americans marched through East Los Angeles on Saturday to commemorate a
bloody anti-war demonstration in 1970 and to condemn perceived threats to the
Hispanic community.

The marchers, estimated at 1,000 to 3,000, walked a 3.7-mile route similar to
that walked by 20,000 people during the Chicano Moratorium to protest the
Vietnam War.

The march on Aug. 29, 1970, ended with clashes between protesters and Los
Angeles County sheriff's deputies. Three people were killed, including a noted
Mexican-American reporter, Ruben Salazar, who was struck by a tear gas cannister
fired into a bar.

No violence was reported on Saturday. Some demonstrators held Mexican flags or
signs saying "Save Our Children" and "Deport Pete Wilson" -- a reference to the
Governor's support of anti-illegal immigration measures like Proposition 187,
which cut off most public benefits to illegal immigrants in California.

At a post-march rally, speakers condemned Proposition 187 along with attacks on
affirmative action and county budget cuts that would close dozens of health
clinics that serve the poor.

"In many ways things are worse for our community than they were 25 years ago,"
said Jaime Cruz, who took part in the 1970 protest and helped organize the
commemoration.

LOAD-DATE: August 28, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              221 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 29, 1995, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Roller Skater, 4, Is Killed Outside Housing Project

BYLINE: By CHUCK SUDETIC

SECTION: Section B;  Page 3;  Column 5;  Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 896 words


Four-year-old Shamone Johnson was roller-skating under the watchful eyes of a
family friend in front of a Brooklyn public-housing high-rise when gunshots
broke through the playful chatter of children.

A moment later, in a din of screams and shouts, neighbors were cradling
Shamone's head in their hands and her playmates were pleading with her to say
she was all right. Shamone never answered.

In about 10 seconds Sunday evening around 8 o'clock, two gunmen turned the
entryway to 1750 Prospect Place in Brownsville into blood-spattered chaos,
killing Shamone and wounding four other children and teen-agers.

Last night, police in the 73d Precinct arrested Terrence Morgan, 19, of 26 St.
Edwards Street in Fort Greene and charged him with murder. Detectives said the
incident was the result of an ongoing dispute between rival youths of the Fort
Greene and Brownsville areas. Mr. Morgan was picked up at Beth Israel Hospital,
where he was being treated for a self-inflicted leg wound.

Yesterday, as workmen used water sprayers to clean the blood from the sidewalk
in Brownsville, residents said they believed the shooting was a brutal case of
revenge for a gang-related killing two weeks ago in Fort Greene.

"It's been like Vietnam around here lately," said Joseph Abel, who has lived in
the neighborhood since shortly after he immigrated to the United States from
Haiti 22 years ago. "There is shooting every night.

"I got a bullet in my window last Friday night. You think I'm going to stay
here? I am going to sleep somewhere else."

Mr. Abel's neighbors said a gang of youths from Fort Greene had been peppering
the Prospect Plaza Houses with gunfire for weeks in retaliation for the killing
of a gang member after a rap-music concert, apparently believing the killers
live in the project.

The Police Department would not comment officially on a possible link between
Sunday's shootings in Brownsville and the murder in Fort Greene, but a detective
in front of the Prospect Plaza Houses yesterday said that investigators were
looking into the connection.


Shamone Johnson was visiting her godmother at the apartment houses for the
weekend. The little girl lives at 522 Herkimer Street, a few blocks from the
scene of the shooting.

Ron Ivory, the 18-year-old son of Shamone Johnson's godmother, Mildred Ivory,
said he was keeping an eye on the little girl and his two sisters when two men
opened fire at them from about five feet away.

"They were using .380's or 9 millimeters," Mr. Ivory said. "I just saw two guns
pointing at me. All I could do was slide down the bench. The two guns were
pointed so close at me that they thought they got me."

"I heard them hitting under the bench," he added, referring to the bullets. "I
lied down on my back and pretended to be hit. A lot of people were just running
and screaming trying to get out of the way."

Sixteen-year-old Lamont Moore was shot in the back of the leg, and his
19-year-old brother, Alex, was reported in stable condition at Brookdale
Hospital with wounds to his arm and leg.

"It stung, but I wasn't thinking about it really," Lamont Moore said. "I just
ran inside."

"Alex was sitting on the bench with us," Lamont Moore said, adding that
neighbors found Alex Moore collapsed at the corner of Saratoga Avenue and
Prospect Place.

Two other children were wounded in the shooting, 13-year-old Charie Mitchell,
with a bullet wound to the leg, and 8-year-old Alfonso Harris, with a wound to
the foot.

Witnesses said the two gunmen approached the sidewalk leading to the apartment
house on foot, one of them bouncing a basketball in an apparent attempt not to
attract attention. They then produced weapons and opened fire.

The two gunmen then got into a dark-colored Nissan Maxima driven by a third man
and sped away.

"It's cruel," Mrs. Ivory said yesterday, gripping an application blank for an
apartment in another public-housing project. "Just to open fire like that on a
bunch of children. The only people playing out there were little girls. My son
was sitting there on the bench and he could feel the bullets going by his ears."

Residents of the housing complex said the shootings on their block erupted
several weeks ago after a neighborhood man in his late teens or early 20's was
robbed of a Rolex watch after leaving a rap-music concert in Fort Greene.

The man then returned to Brownsville, rounded up some friends, went back to Fort
Greene and killed an unidentified man who, residents of the housing project
said, was one of the men who carried out the robbery.

Since then, residents said, young men from Fort Greene had been driving by the
neighborhood firing off their weapons.

"There was at least 12 shots," said Gilberto Pabon, 32, who thought his son
might have been among the victims. "You could hear all of it. I seen the little
girl fall to the ground with three people behind her falling, too. It was all in
one bunch. The bullets caught them all at once.

"There was a pool of blood all around her. There was pandemonium. People didn't
want to give the girl aid because the guy might come back."

Mr. Pabon said he tried to hold the wound to Shamone's neck closed with his
hands. "A lady passed me a towel and I wrapped it around her neck," he said.
"She was trying to move her lips, and I told her to stay up and don't go to
sleep. She looked like a doll."

LOAD-DATE: August 29, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Shamone Johnson, who was killed in the crossfire Sunday evening.
(Ruby Washington/The New York Times)


                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              222 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 30, 1995, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Foreign Affairs;
Australia Goes Pacific

BYLINE: By THOMAS L. FRIEDMAN

SECTION: Section A;  Page 17;  Column 6;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 735 words

DATELINE: CANBERRA, Australia


Sometimes a government has to totally misread the mood of its own people to
fully appreciate where the soul of the nation is on an issue. That was certainly
the case here when, after the French announced plans for seven nuclear tests in
the South Pacific, the Australian Foreign Minister said the decision was
"unfortunate" but could have been worse.

The Australian public didn't think so, and it went on a spontaneous rampage
against all things French. The Asian Wall Street Journal even reported that
Australian prostitutes were charging their French customers double (Sacre
bleu!). Since then, the Australian Government has been scrambling to get ahead
of the public bandwagon. What's funny is that it was the Australian Government
that had built the bandwagon.

You see, the Australian public reaction against the French nuclear test is not
just a sign of the popularity of environmentalism here. It is also a sign of how
successful Australian governments have been in reshaping this country's identity
-- from white, English-speaking and Anglo-Saxon to multiracial, multilingual and
Asian-Pacific.

Think about this: In the 1950's the British tested nuclear weapons, above
ground, in Australia's desert. At the time, there was not a peep of protest
here. Since Australians thought of themselves as British subjects, they didn't
even consider their own backyard their real backyard. They thought their real
backyard was back in England. Today the French are testing their nuclear weapons
at the Mururoa Atoll, which is 4,000 miles from Australia in the South Pacific.
But because Australians now think of themselves as a Pacific nation, they are
protesting the French testing as though it were being conducted under the Sydney
Opera House.

Ever since Australia ended its whites-only immigration policies in 1966, the
country has been taking on an Asian-Pacific identity, but particularly under the
current Prime Minister, Paul Keating, who has passionately promoted
multiculturalism. There are now 140 different ethnic groups here, speaking 90
different languages, and of the 85,000 new immigrants each year the vast
majority are from Vietnam and China. The popular Vietnamese family name Nguyen
is the sixth-most-common name in the Melbourne phone book today. Goodbye
Crocodile Dundee, hello Bruce Lee.

No wonder Mr. Keating refers to Australia not as a melting pot but as Asia's
great "wok" society, into which all sorts of ethnic groups are being diced and
stir-fried for a new Asian-Pacific mix. Go to a pub along the Sydney harbor, and
you are more likely to be served Indonesian satays, or fettuccine with Thai
sauce, than steak and kidney pie.

Australia's increasing Asian-Pacific identity reinforces, and is reinforced by,
its desire to do more business in Asia. Eighty percent of Australia's trade
today is with Asia; 30 years ago it was 20 percent. American Express just
decided to put its new credit card service center for all of Asia in Sydney.
Amex chose Australia over other countries in part because it offered a pool of
employees who could speak English and either Korean, Japanese, Cantonese,
Mandarin, Bahasa Indonesian, Malay, Vietnamese or Hindi. All Australian high
school students today are required to study either Chinese, Korean, Japanese or
Indonesian as a second language.

All of this adds to the desire here to break Australia's last ties with the
Queen of England, who is still, formally, Australia's head of state. Mr.
Keating, who has declared that "We are not a political or cultural appendage to
another country's past," wants Australia to elect its own president for its
centennial in 2001.

Which gets us back to Australia's opposition to the French tests. Historically,
nations have tended to define their political identity as something separate
from their environment and ecosystem. But for more than a decade now the
Australian Government has been imbuing its people with a sense of pride in where
they live, and building a new political and economic identity out of that.

"Well," said an Australian environmentalist, Paul Gilding, "the people have been
listening, and that's why they are telling the French to stay away. This may be
the start of a global trend; Australia's people are defining and expressing
their political identity through a commitment to protect the environment. Now we
just have to get that to happen in the rest of the world."

LOAD-DATE: August 30, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              223 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 30, 1995, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Clifford the Insider Lobbied Against War

SECTION: Section A;  Page 16;  Column 4;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 238 words


To the Editor:

Your review of "Friends in High Places," the new biography of Clark Clifford
(Arts pages, Aug. 24), takes issue with the view that the story is a "Greek
tragedy" about a subject "of truly grand proportions," when "it can't be a
tragedy if the main character was never really a hero."

The review ignores Mr. Clifford's record as Secretary of Defense, when he fought
President Johnson with all the skills honed in his years as a Washington
insider.

Mr. Clifford's opposition to the war in Vietnam was late, and his success
compromised by the Nixon victory of 1968. But no one else in the high councils
of the Johnson Administration was able to do what Mr. Clifford did, turning
around a powerful President's most implacably bull-headed and most profoundly
mistaken commitment.

The heroes of Aeschylus or Euripides are hardly paragons of virtue; they show
desires for glory far more extreme than Mr. Clifford's and, on the whole, less
interest in the public good.

We can nevertheless learn from their stories, not just about the sequence of
pride and fall, but about contradictions in Athenian public ideals.

Belittling Mr. Clifford's achievements, the review obscures what we might learn
of politics, power and values from the successes and failures of a gifted man
ambitious for public honor.

BRUCE L. PAYNE
Lecturer in Public Policy Studies
Duke University
Durham, N.C., Aug. 24, 1995

LOAD-DATE: August 30, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              224 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 30, 1995, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

POP REVIEW;
With Angels and Devils, Guess Who Prevails

BYLINE: By JON PARELES

SECTION: Section C;  Page 9;  Column 1;  Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 504 words


"I didn't write a song for four years," Steve Earle told the audience at the
Bottom Line on Monday night. "And this was the first one I wrote." He sang
"Goodbye," an apology to an ex-lover: "Was I off somewhere or just too high?/But
I can't remember if we ever said goodbye."

Mr. Earle sang in a gruff, offhanded voice, but the lyrics were telling. A
decade ago, he was part of a country-rock renaissance, a songwriter who brought
broad-shouldered rock and tough-minded storytelling to Nashville. By the early
1990's, plenty of new country music sounded like what Mr. Earle had been doing
all along, and other people were performing his songs. But Mr. Earle had a drug
problem, and last September, at the bottom of a self-destructive spiral, he was
imprisoned for possession of heroin.

Now, after a rehabilitation program, he is rebuilding his career. He has just
released an album, "Train a-Comin' " (Winter Harvest), singing early and recent
songs accompanied by an acoustic string band. He has also completed a rock album
for release next year.

The string band backed up Mr. Earle at the Bottom Line, linking his melodies to
time-honored Appalachian traditions. Mr. Earle's songs revisit traditional
country themes, from honky-tonking to outlaw life to heartbreak, but his lyrics
have a modern sense of disillusion and disquiet. He doesn't pretend to be a
naif; in his early set, he offered "apologies" to Thomas Wolfe and Doc Watson
before singing "Hometown Blues."

Mr. Earle's characters are often renegades and outsiders, perpetually
unsatisfied and decidedly unheroic. Angels and devils often turn up in his
songs, but the devil prevails far more often than any possibility of hope or
redemption. In his early set, Mr. Earle sang about a Civil War soldier enduring
the futility of combat (in a new song, "Ben McCulloch"), and about a
moonshiner's son who comes back from Vietnam and starts growing marijuana
("Copperhead Road").

Mr. Earle sang about guns as something that "can get you into trouble but it
can't get you out" ("The Devil's Right Hand") and about a desperado's grudging
faith ("Tom Ames's Prayer"). He was closer to country's standard attitudes about
women, contemplating temptation in lines like "Every inch she drags me down/I'm
closer to the glow," from "Angel Is the Devil."

With Norman Blake on guitar, dobro or fiddle, Peter Rowan on mandolin and Roy
Huskey Jr. on bass, the songs echoed jug-band blues and Celtic ballads. Mr.
Earle's voice has grown more tattered through the years. The country baritone he
had on his early albums has lost most remnants of clarity, turning grizzled and
rough; now he sounds something like John Prine. But his voice, and the band's
folky delicacy, brought to the songs the sense of contemplation that has long
been a part of mountain music: the spirit of having seen the worst and survived
to remember it. At the end of the set, there was a standing ovation, and Mr.
Earle smiled behind his sunglasses. "Thank you," he said. "I needed this."

LOAD-DATE: August 30, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Steve Earle, who is rebuilding his career, appeared at the
Bottom Line on Monday night. (Rahav Segev)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              225 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 31, 1995, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Silence Is Golden

SECTION: Section C;  Page 5;  Column 1;  Home Desk

LENGTH: 128 words


To The Home Section:

Regarding "Close to Home: War Legacies From Fathers to Children" by James
Schembari (Aug. 17) -- my father had remained silent about his war. Pop died
last September, and after the funeral, Mom said Pop was in the Battle of Berlin.
From what I have read and have seen in film clips, Pop experienced one horrible
and grueling time. Since the day of the funeral I have been feeling a lot of
anger toward him for not sharing that difficult time in his life.

"Why?" is a question I have been asking ever since. Mr. Schembari's phrase "For
all the right reasons, my father was proud when I joined the Navy; silence was
my way of keeping my children from ever wanting to" is an answer that works.

JURIS VILHELMS (BILL) RUNDANS
Albany

LOAD-DATE: August 31, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              226 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 31, 1995, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

CHRONICLE

BYLINE: By ELAINE LOUIE

SECTION: Section B;  Page 26;  Column 5;  Style Desk

LENGTH: 195 words


MICHAEL PALIN, comedian, novelist and traveler, is going fishing in the Bering
Strait.

On Tuesday he left London on his way to Little Diomede, part of the Diomede
Islands in the middle of the strait, which separates Alaska and Siberia. There
he will join 160 Eskimos who make their living fishing for whales, walruses and
seals. As they fish, they will be filmed for "Palin's Pacific," a documentary
that will follow Mr. Palin around the Pacific Rim, through Japan, Vietnam and
other countries, ending in Alaska next August. The documentary, Mr. Palin's
third, is a production of BBC Worldwide Americas and Prominent Television Ltd.
It will be broadcast in the fall of 1997 on PBS.

In his version of "Around the World in 80 Days," which was released in 1988, Mr.
Palin sailed across the Persian Gulf and ate snake. In the filming of the 1990
"Pole to Pole," he broke some ribs while bungee jumping in Africa.

What might he face during "Palin's Pacific"? Sarah Frank, the president and
chief executive of BBC Worldwide Americas, said she did not know, then added:
"He was thinking of working in an automobile factory in Japan for a day."
ELAINE LOUIE

LOAD-DATE: August 31, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              227 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 3, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

IN SHORT: FICTION

BYLINE: By KEITH DIXON

SECTION: Section 7;  Page 14;  Column 2;  Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 119 words



THE BURNING
By Frank Norwood.
Dial, $21.95.

Frank Norwood's novel "The Burning" is a highly charged investigation of racism
that circles around Larry, a white rookie police officer who is forced after an
outbreak of violence to seek shelter with Arletha Mae, a 15-year-old black
mother who has devoted herself to "good Christian thinking." Mr. Norwood subtly
renders the anger and prejudices of these and other characters, including a
tormented Vietnam veteran and an unemployed engineer. Although the novel is
somewhat compromised by contrivance, Mr. Norwood successfully creates a bleak
and hostile urban landscape, with only Arletha, its moral center, as a frail
hope for redemption.   KEITH DIXON

LOAD-DATE: September 3, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              228 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 3, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Clinton Sees Lessons in the Postwar Era

BYLINE: By ALISON MITCHELL

SECTION: Section 1;    Page 16;    Column 1;    National Desk

LENGTH: 743 words

DATELINE: HONOLULU, Sept. 2


Fifty years after Japan formally surrendered to Gen. Douglas MacArthur on the
deck of the battleship Missouri, President Clinton today urged Americans to
regain the sense of national purpose that propelled the United States into its
postwar period of economic expansion and world leadership.

On the second day of ceremonies marking the end of World War II, Mr. Clinton
heralded the valor of the Americans who fought in what he called the "most
destructive conflict in all human history." But he also touched on the ways that
the war and the helping hand the nation extended to returning veterans changed
the social and economic fabric of the country.

"In order to succeed, we must remain true to the spirit of that brilliant time,"
the President said in an address at the National Cemetery of the Pacific, where
small American flags marked the graves of more than 33,000 servicemen and
servicewomen.

"A time when our people cared for each other and sacrificed for others," he
continued, "when our nation stood united in purpose and mighty in spirit as
never before. A time when Americans forged the strength of their diversity into
a community for victory and progress."

Mr. Clinton recalled how the G.I. Bill of Rights gave returning veterans
previously unimagined access to post-secondary education and allowed them to buy
their first homes. He spoke of how 16 million women kept the nation's assembly
lines working in the war and how afterward the United States "would begin to
integrate this extraordinary force into the economy and into our nation's
military."

And he remembered the black Americans who had fought for their country in
segregated units until, slowly after the war, the country recognized that "if
people of different races could serve as brothers abroad in uniform, they could
surely live as neighbors at home."

"You understood that you could together make the world a better place, and that
you could not permit America again to withdraw from the world," Mr. Clinton said
to the thousands of elderly veterans who had come to Hawaii to remember the war
in a weekend of pageantry and commemoration.

Mr. Clinton's remarks were solemn and nonpolitical. But they laid the groundwork
for a theme that he is expected to flesh out in California on Monday and Tuesday
and throughout the fall's budget battles with the Republican Congress: a call
for the country not to abandon programs like education and training that lend
support to Americans as the G.I. Bill once did.

Mr. Clinton, the first President since World War II not to have served in the
military, paid tribute to the five Presidents before him who served in the
Pacific. He noted in particular President John F. Kennedy, who served on an
ill-fated PT-109, and President George Bush, who was shot down as a pilot.

After he spoke, Mr. Clinton, visibly moved, laid a wreath at the cemetery
accompanied by two veterans of World War II's Pacific campaign: 82-year-old
Robert Allen, who was a prisoner of war in Manila, and 72-year-old Alfred Los
Banos, who lost his legs during the Korean War and came to the President's side
in a wheelchair.

The three remained together as the war dead were honored with a 21-gun salute, a
rendition of taps and a fly-over. "There's so many people that I went to war
with," Mr. Los Banos said afterward, "and as taps play, it's something that I
look back on and I'm thankful to them for giving us this day. So when taps play,
I always cry."

Later Mr. Clinton visited PearlHarbor, where 3,600 American servicemen were
killed or wounded in the Japanese attack on Dec. 7, 1941. He visited the U.S.S.
Carl Vinson and the U.S.S. Arizona Memorial.

Mr. Clinton did not serve in Vietnam, a war he opposed. And his relationship
with the military has often been strained by his lack of service and by his move
early in his Administration to allow homosexuals to serve in the armed forces.
But his reception from veterans and active-duty personnel this weekend has been
warm.

Today the President lingered at the National Cemetery long after the ceremonies
had ended, shaking hands with elderly veterans, hugging one, signing an
autograph for another. And on Friday, after reviewing troops at Wheeler Army
Airfield, Mr. Clinton mingled with about 500 of the men and women who had
marched, even posing for pictures wearing a camouflage fatigue hat. At several
points the troops broke out in cheers. Someone even shouted, "Four more years."

LOAD-DATE: September 3, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: President Clinton and two veterans, Robert Allen, left, and
Alfred Los Banos, yesterday in Honolulu during ceremonies marking the end of
World War II. (Reuters)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              229 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 3, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Aug.27-Sept.2: Needles for Sale;
One State Finds a Way To Cut Addicts' AIDS Risk

BYLINE: By GEORGE JUDSON

SECTION: Section 4;  Page 2;  Column 3;  Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 162 words


In the late 1960's and early 70's, heroin was plentiful, thousands of Vietnam
veterans were returning hooked, and inexpensive disposable syringes had just
come on the market. So industrial states with large numbers of urban heroin
users squeezed the source of needles by barring sales without a prescription.

Decades later, states like New York, Pennsylvania and Illinois still have heroin
users, but now they also have the nation's highest rates of AIDS infection. A
shortage of syringes, public health officials say, led addicts to share needles.

Among the 10 states and the District of Columbia that enacted prescription laws,
only one, Connecticut, has so far changed its mind. Last week studies in the
Journal of Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndromes reported that the state's
approval of over-the-counter sales in 1992 appears to have cut needle-sharing by
40 percent, offering hope that repealing such laws can have a dramatic effect.
   GEORGE JUDSON

LOAD-DATE: September 3, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              230 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 3, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

ATLANTIC CITY;
Hard Labor

BYLINE: By BILL KENT

SECTION: Section 13NJ;  Page 14;  Column 4;  New Jersey Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 682 words


MOST Americans are not working on this Labor Day weekend. Casino employees are.

The 45,000 men and women who deal the blackjack games, maintain the slot
machines, greet the customers, cook the meals, mop the floors and otherwise keep
Atlantic City's 12 casinos running 24 hours a day typically work holidays, often
pulling long, hard shifts at night or in early morning when most other people
are doing anything but work.

Shirley L. Loughlin, an Atlantic County psychotherapist who estimates that she
has treated 100 casino employees over the last 10 years, suspects that it can
all add up to what she calls "casino life style syndrome": persistent feelings
of exhaustion, drug and alcohol abuse, alternating moods of anxiety and despair,
chronic feelings of isolation and alienation, a tendency to live beyond one's
means.

The idea that casino workers have high-stress, high-burnout jobs is not new.
What is new is a growing sense among therapists that there may be something
unique about working in a casino, some syndrome that deserves its own name. No
therapeutic organization has recognized such a syndrome, but Dr. Ange Puig, a
Cherry Hill psychologist who has treated casino workers, says Ms. Loughlin "has
pulled together an extremely timely concept."

"This is not just another manifestation of burnout, but that's what casino human
resource managers have been calling it, if they call it anything," Dr. Puig went
on. "It took the Vietnam War before we were willing to admit post-traumatic
stress syndrome was more than just battle fatigue."
 Ms. Loughlin, 67, a licensed social worker with a master's degree from Rutgers,
has become an unlikely advocate for casino employees, speaking out against a
working environment that can be, in her words, "toxic for certain kinds of
people -- the blinking lights, the constant noise, excessive cigarette smoke and
the knowledge that you're constantly under surveillance."

Despite repeated phone calls, no casino executive or spokesman would comment for
this article; one, speaking only on condition of anonymity, said he hated
"stories like this" because they "exaggerate the problems of a very small
percentage and only make us look bad." But it is only fair to note that the
casinos provide generous benefits and training -- including some courses in
stress management. All casinos have procedures to deal with employee grievances
and on-the-job disputes.

Still, workers complain that casinos are quicker to fire them than listen to
them, especially in situations involving disputes with gamblers. On and off the
casino floor, an employee's relationship with an important gambler can be more
significant than job performance. And despite the occasional training course,
stress is something that workers are expected to just deal with.

"The attitude in the industry," said a casino pit boss, speaking on the
condition that he would not be identified, "is, basically, if you can't take the
heat, get out of the kitchen. You're supposed to learn how to deal with the heat
on your own, and that's supposed to prepare you as you work your way up. But the
only thing you really learn is that you're all alone if anything happens to
you."

Dr. Marvin Rose is former clinical director of the Therapeutic Intervention
Center, an Atlantic City mental health clinic that treated some 500 casino
employees from 1982 to 1990. In a 1988 article in Professional Counselor
magazine, Dr. Rose called Atlantic City a "counselor's nightmare."

"I remember being obsessed by a question relating to the causes of this behavior
among casino employees," he said. "I wanted to know if they were victims of a
way of doing business that can and should be changed, through employee training
sessions and employee assistance programs. Or were they attracted to, and
perhaps even admiring of, an antagonistic, arrogant, obnoxious operating style,
and that their problems stemmed from a perceived failure to measure up?"

Dr. Rose now lives in Florida and no longer practices psychotherapy. But he
said, "I'm still obsessed with the question."

LOAD-DATE: September 3, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Casinos, says Shirley L. Loughlin, a psychotherapist, can be
"toxic for certain kinds of people -- the blinking lights, the constant noise .
. . ." (Frank C. Dougherty for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              231 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 3, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

TELEVISION;
The Perpetual Man of the Hour

BYLINE: By ALAN BRINKLEY

SECTION: Section 2;    Page 1;    Column 2;    Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 2316 words


THE TRANSFORMATION OF Harry Truman from the hapless, unpopular leader he seemed
during much of his Presidency to one of America's most beloved folk heroes began
with the publication of one book and reached its apogee with the publication of
another.

In 1974, little more than a year after Truman's death, Merle Miller published
"Plain Speaking," an oral biography filled with spicy (and, many scholars now
believe, largely apocryphal) stories of Truman's life and Presidency. It became
a major best seller, inspired a popular one-man show (starring James Whitmore)
and launched Truman's improving image into orbit. In 1991, David McCullough
published his elegant, affectionate biography of Truman, which won a Pulitzer
Prize and has now been adapted for an HBO movie. Unlike Mr. Miller's book, Mr.
McCullough's was grounded in extensive research. But like Mr. Miller's, it
became outstandingly popular and cemented, at least for now, Truman's iconic
status in the American political memory.

It cannot be entirely accidental that these two important moments in the
rehabilitation of Truman's reputation coincided with two of the bleakest moments
in recent American politics. Mr. Miller's book appeared at the height of
Watergate and just before the fall of Saigon. Mr. McCullough's appeared at a
time of unparalleled public cynicism about politics, which has continued (and
accelerated) to this day. The Truman of his admirers' imagination -- a flinty,
honest, principled man who stuck to his guns and said what he thought; a
politician who defied what we now assume are public life's norms -- is a figure
who resonates with our discontent. He is an anti-politician for our
anti-political age.

It is perhaps not entirely inappropriate then, although it is almost certainly
unintentional, that the Harry Truman who appears in the HBO movie, which will
have its premiere on Saturday at 8, looks and sounds less like Truman than like
Ross Perot. Gary Sinise ("Forrest Gump," "Apollo 13") portrays Truman with a
twang that sounds more Texan than Missourian, barks orders at everyone around
him except his wife, played in a vaguely shrewish way by Diana Scarwid, and
seems never to waver from a clear set of firm goals and rigid beliefs.

The movie, which was directed by Frank Pierson, begins with the famous 1948
whistle-stop campaign tour and closes with the rousing welcome Truman received
on his return home to Kansas City after leaving the Presidency in 1953. In
between, it weaves back and forth through revealing moments in his public and
private life.

Remarkably for a man who spent more than 30 years in the thick of political
battles, Truman emerges from this earnest film -- much more than he does from
Mr. McCullough's book -- as a man almost wholly outside of, even somehow above,
real politics. That, of course, is the image many Americans wish to embrace, and
an image Mr. Perot has effectively embraced for himself. But it bears only a
passing resemblance to the realities of Truman's career.

Truman's life was, in fact, both more and less impressive than his contemporary
popular image suggests. Celebrated today as a simple man who raised himself to
greatness, Truman was actually quite unsuccessful for the first 40 years of his
life: a struggling farmer who hated farming; an aspiring haberdasher whose store
quickly failed; a suitor to, and eventually husband of, a woman whose family
held him in contempt; a man who, once married, lived unhappily in his
mother-in-law's house and never had a home of his own until he moved into the
White House.

What lifted Truman from obscurity was not his energy and intelligence, real as
they were; it was his fortuitous relationship with the powerful Kansas City
political boss Tom Pendergast, whose nephew Truman had met while serving in the
Army in World War I. Pendergast, played appealingly in the film by Pat Hingle,
arranged for Truman's election as an administrator in Jackson County, Mo., chose
him to run for the United States Senate in 1934 and engineered his re-election
six years later.

Truman operated largely independently of the machine (despite the contemptuous
nickname his Senate colleagues bestowed on him, the "Senator from Pendergast"),
but he was always loyal and, when necessary, obedient -- as the film suggests in
a scene in which Truman, given a choice between maintaining ethical purity and
building roads using Pendergast's contractors, chooses the roads.

Truman was a capable administrator and a capable Senator, but was rarely
distinguished in either position. He had no clear or consistent public
philosophy, other than a general sympathy for "ordinary people." His political
successes were mostly the gifts of others, not achievements of his own.

SO WAS HIS ASCENT TO THE Presidency. In 1944, when a dying Franklin Roosevelt
ran for a fourth term, Democratic leaders were looking desperately for a
moderate, unthreatening candidate to replace Vice President Henry Wallace, whom
many considered erratic and radical and too much a risk to remain in line for
what seemed an increasingly likely succession. Truman had been a loyal but never
conspicuous New Dealer in the 1930's. He had received much favorable publicity
for his handling of a committee investigating war contracts, a committee that
was diligent in uncovering fraud but that almost always deferred to the
Administration when asked. He seemed safe and, if not brilliant, at least
competent. In the summer of 1944, party bosses persuaded a reluctant Roosevelt
to choose him as running mate, and an equally reluctant Truman to accept. Less
than a year later, Truman was President.

Truman was not, in short, a man who stood outside politics. He was a product of
the party system and an obedient servant of that system. Public office was, in
fact, the only stable job he ever had. Perhaps that is why he so loved politics
and so enjoyed the company of other politicians.

In the film, we see Truman receiving his summons to the White House after
Roosevelt's death as he was having cocktails with the "Board of Education," the
clubby group of insiders that Speaker of the House Sam Rayburn regularly
assembled in his office in the Capitol. Later, one of Truman's many problems as
President, unexplored by the film, grew out of his close association with old
political friends (or "cronies," as his critics described them) from Missouri,
who were not always as honest as he.

Despite the decisiveness and self-confidence of his posthumous image, Truman was
often painfully insecure. Even as a United States Senator, he had a hard time
thinking of himself as anyone important, anyone worth respecting; and he was
always a little surprised when other people took him seriously. In 1937, for
example, he wrote his wife, with a mixture of pride and amazement, of attending
tea at the home of Louis Brandeis: "The Justice spent more time with me than any
of his other guests. . . . It was a rather exclusive and brainy party. I didn't
exactly belong but they made me think I did."

When he became President suddenly in 1945, he was extraordinarily naive about
the demands of the job. In June 1945, two months after he took office, he wrote
his wife, who had, characteristically, left him alone for several months while
she stayed with her mother in Kansas City: "I'm getting better organized now. My
office soon will be shaken down and so will my Cabinet when I've gotten State
straightened out. . . . It won't be long until I can sit back and study the
whole picture and tell 'em what is to be done in each department. When things
come to that stage there'll be no more to this job than there was to running
Jackson County and not any more worry."

It is hard not to sympathize with a man who became President at one of the most
perilous moments of the 20th century knowing so little about his job. Proponents
of term limits and other critics of today's Washington sometimes treat political
inexperience as a virtue. For Truman, it was often a significant handicap. He
had only the faintest idea what a President was supposed to do. He had no
important allies in Washington. He had only the barest information about the
issues before him. He had not even been told about the Government's most
important secret: the construction of the atomic bomb. Into these untested hands
fell some of the gravest decisions ever to face an American leader. Truman often
did considerably better than his limited preparation would lead one to expect,
but he did not always do well.

The dark counterpoint to Truman's refurbished reputation has long been his
controversial decision to use atomic weapons against Japan in 1945. Truman
always claimed that he had a choice between two terrible options: he could use
the atomic bomb or he could sacrifice the lives of thousands of American
soldiers in an invasion of Japan. Given those options, no American leader could
have chosen differently. But were those the only options available to him? David
McCullough and legions of Truman admirers argue that it was. (It was such
arguments that helped derail the Smithsonian's proposed Enola Gay exhibit
earlier this year.) But even many of Truman's contemporaries believed otherwise,
just as many scholars do today.

The frequently cited official estimate that there would be up to a million
American casualties in an invasion of Japan was dismissed by most military
leaders at the time as absurdly high, although it has survived as part of the
defense of Truman's decision. Gen. Dwight D. Eisenhower, Adm. William D. Leahy
and others thought Japan was effectively defeated even before Hiroshima and
considered the use of the bomb unnecessary -- and deplorable. There is reason to
believe, although no way to prove, that factions within the Japanese Government
working to end the war might have succeeded if given more time. Truman's quick,
and many believe excessively hasty, decision may have foreclosed that
possibility.

The HBO film, unlike Mr. McCullough's book, presents a cursory version of almost
every argument for and against using the bomb, in the form of private
conversations between Truman and his friends and aides. The film itself takes no
clear position on the controversy; and in suggesting that Truman was later torn
by doubts and regrets, it contradicts his consistent claim that he never lost a
night's sleep over the decision.

There is, in short, much in Truman's record to suggest that his oft-vaunted
strengths -- his forthrightness, his decisiveness, his belief in the power of
common sense -- have been much exaggerated or, to the extent they were real, did
not always serve him, or the world, well. A better case for Truman would rest
not on his supposedly anti-political style and his Perot-like certitude, but on
his ability to rely on knowledgeable, experienced people, his ability to
compromise and his ability to learn.

And learn he did. Few Presidents have changed so much in office. Terrified to
the point of near paralysis in April 1945, he soon developed an at least outward
confidence in his abilities that had not always been visible in his earlier
career. He overcame the racial prejudices he had inherited in Missouri and took
some courageous positions on behalf of civil rights, including proposing the
first civil rights bill since Reconstruction and integrating the armed forces.
He stifled whatever remained of the Midwestern anti-Semitism he had at times
unthinkingly embraced and became a great champion of Israel. And he helped
create a new framework for foreign policy and a new American role in the world
that, despite many flaws, survived with considerable success for more than 40
years.

The most celebrated event in Truman's career, however, is none of these
decisions or achievements but his dramatic victory in the 1948 election. (That
initially forlorn campaign is the HBO film's starting point; the night of his
triumph becomes its climax.) For the first time in his life, Truman was running
for office largely on his own, abandoned by factions of his party. And his
surprising upset of the heavily favored Thomas E. Dewey almost immediately
became a part of American folklore.

Many things contributed to Truman's unexpected triumph: Dewey's incompetence as
a campaigner, Republican overconfidence that led to a low Republican turnout,
the basic health of the economy at the dawn of the great postwar economic boom.
But Truman himself was the crucial factor. The man whom Time magazine had
dismissed in 1946 as "awkward, uninspired and above all mediocre," and whom a
Republican Speaker of the House had called "the worst President in history,"
succeeded at last in making himself the dominant political figure in America.

AND HE DID SO NOT BY Rejecting party politics but by embracing it. For all the
bluntness and seeming independence of Truman's "give 'em hell" style in 1948,
his campaign was fundamentally and intensely partisan. It was a defense of the
Democratic Party, a defense of government and an attack on self-interested
elites who were, he said, trying to undo the great achievements of the New Deal.
It was Dewey, not Truman, who tried to present himself in 1948 as the man above
politics, the man who would take a broom to Washington and sweep it clean of
special interests. Truman the politician defeated Dewey the anti-political
technocrat.

If Truman was "one of our greatest Presidents," as the HBO film proclaims and as
many Americans now believe, the case for his greatness rests only in part on his
gritty, iconoclastic style. It rests, too, on his love for and skill at
politics, his ability to draw on insiders and "elites" for advice, and his deep
faith in the central institutions of politics and government: the party system,
the Congress and the Presidency itself. Truman was an honest and appealing man.
He was also a politician. He would want to be remembered as both.

NAME: Harry Truman

LOAD-DATE: September 3, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: In the HBO film "Truman," Gary Sinise, center, is Harry Truman;
Diana Scarwid, left, is his wife, Bess, and Amelia Campbell is his daughter,
Margaret. (D. Stevens/HBO) (pg. 1); President Truman in 1948 on a campaign tour
that was widely viewed as an exercise in futility--It provides HBO's "Truman"
with its start and its climax. (Associated Press) (pg. 28)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              232 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 4, 1995, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Bush's Sponsor in Japan Is Linked to Rev. Moon

BYLINE: By ANDREW POLLACK

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 2;  Column 1;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 779 words

DATELINE: TOKYO, Sept. 3


Former President George Bush is planning to spend nearly a week in Japan this
month speaking at meetings sponsored by an organization connected with the
Unification Church of the Rev. Sun Myung Moon.

The organization, the Women's Federation for World Peace, was founded and is
headed by Hak Ja Han Moon, the wife of the church leader. At the "Global Family
Festival" on Sept. 14 in the Tokyo Dome baseball stadium, Mr. Bush and his wife,
Barbara, are to share the speaker's podium with Mrs. Moon.

The scheduled appearance is being seen by some here as lending legitimacy to the
South Korea-based religious group, which has been accused of dubious recruitment
and fund-raising tactics.

"The Women's Federation for World Peace is a widely known front organization of
the Unification Church," Hiroshi Yamaguchi, a Tokyo lawyer who fights the
church's practices, said in a letter sent to Mr. Bush a few days ago. Mr.
Yamaguchi said the federation often uses celebrities to lure people to the
events, where church members try to strike up relationships aimed at soliciting
donations.

A worker at the federation's Japan office, Masako Ochiai, said the person
designated to answer questions about Mr. Bush's visit was away at the women's
conference in China. She said the federation engages in charitable work and is
distinct from the church. A telephone number listed for the federation in
Washington was disconnected.


James McGrath, a spokesman for Mr. Bush in Houston, said he did not know how
much the former President would be paid for his trip to Japan. The primary
purpose of the visit is to appear at federation events in Tokyo and other cities
including Nagoya and Fukuoka, Mr. McGrath said.

Mr. Bush, who is also going to Vietnam and China this month, will reportedly
receive a six-figure fee from Citibank for speeches he will give in Vietnam.
Former President Ronald Reagan received about $2 million from a Japanese media
conglomerate for an eight-day visit to Japan in 1989.

Mr. Bush's visit, which has received almost no publicity here, comes at a time
when Japan is edgy about unorthodox religious groups because of the poison gas
attack carried out by the Aum Shinrikyo sect in the Tokyo subway in March.

Mr. McGrath said the Bushes know that the federation is headed by Mr. Moon's
wife but are convinced that it is distinct from the church.

"We were comfortable with the fact that it was not a Unification
Church-sponsored event," Mr. McGrath said. "They are not promoting any kind of
cult agenda."

He said that the Bushes had spoken at a federation conference in Washington this
spring at which the religion was never mentioned, and that other prominent
speakers included Coretta Scott King and Barbara Walters.

"The sense the Bushes have is that these are about family and about building
bridges of friendship between the Japanese and American people, which is
something they wholeheartedly endorse," Mr. McGrath said. Those topics are what
the former first couple will speak about in Japan, he said.

But at a similar "Global Family" festival run by the federation in Tokyo Dome
two years ago, the main part of the proceedings was a two-hour speech by Mrs.
Moon extolling her husband, said Hiromi Hoshino, who attended the gathering with
her sister, a member of the church then.

Mr. Moon was convicted of income tax evasion in 1982 and spent nearly a year in
federal prison.

The program for the festival in September 1993 listed the Unification Church as
a supporting organization. A guest speaker was Marilyn Quayle, the wife of Mr.
Bush's Vice President, Dan Quayle.

A poster advertising the Tokyo Dome festival does not mention the the
Unification Church. It states that the conference, with the theme "love will
save the earth," is about protecting children. Ticket prices range from about
$80 to about $150.

Mr. Yamaguchi, the lawyer, said he represents a network of about 300 other
lawyers who have offered services to more than 16,575 people in Japan who have
been victimized by what are called "spiritual sales." In this practice, church
members pressure someone into buying certain objects or making large donations
on the grounds that it will help their family's karma or allow a deceased
relative to rest in peace.

Although Mrs. Moon is Korean, the three-year-old women's federation appears to
be mainly a Japanese organization, which says it has branches around the world.

In April 1994, the federation sponsored a meeting at Purchase College in
Purchase, N.Y., that was advertised as "promoting peace and reconciliation"
among different peoples. The program turned out to be one praising the
Unification Church.

LOAD-DATE: September 4, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Former President George Bush is to speak in Japan at events
sponsored by the Women's Federation for World Peace, led by Hak Ja Han Moon,
wife of the Rev. Sun Myung Moon of the Unification Church. A poster shows Mrs.
Moon with Mr. Bush and his wife, Barbara.


                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              233 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 4, 1995, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Helpful Corporate Pressure on Cuba

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 18;  Column 1;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 538 words


Frustrated as they watch foreign companies making deals with Cuba, American
business executives have increased pressure on the Clinton Administration to end
the American economic embargo. That is a healthy sign. Corporate pressure was a
key element in the recent change in policy toward Vietnam.

Cuba does not loom large as a market for the United States. But for some
businesses it could represent significant opportunities, and it is galling for
these companies' executives to watch helplessly while corporations from Japan,
Canada, Europe and other Latin American nations take advantage of Cuba's new
openness.

American telecommunications companies have had to stand by while Grupo Domos, a
Mexican corporation, recently signed a huge deal to overhaul Cuba's telephone
system. Louisiana rice growers would love to recapture what was once their
biggest export market. Otis Elevator fears that Japanese manufacturers will move
in to replace Otis equipment installed throughout Havana before Fidel Castro
took power.

Executives confronting Assistant Secretary of State Alexander Watson at a recent
State Department briefing, however, received the worn, formulaic response: "This
Administration will maintain the embargo until major democratic change takes
place in Cuba."

The business people at the meeting were not mollified. They pointed out to Mr.
Watson the inconsistency in Washington's stance towards other Communist
countries, notably China and Vietnam, where trade has gone forward despite the
presence of authoritarian governments. As Mr. Watson noted at the meeting,
however, Cuba is a special case.

The primary reason is the influence of the Cuban exile community. The Cuban
American National Foundation, which has worked tirelessly for the overthrow of
Mr. Castro, contributes heavily to Congressional campaigns and sways a large
bloc of voters in Florida. Few politicians, including Presidents, have chosen to
tangle with so powerful a lobby.

But the unity of the exile community is beginning to crack. Its leaders'
messianic insistence on deposing Mr. Castro has begun to alienate a younger
generation and more recent arrivals from Cuba. In June, Eloy Gutierrez Menoyo, a
man with impeccable anti-Castro credentials -- he spent 22 years in a Cuban jail
-- visited Havana and spent three hours talking with Mr. Castro. Mr. Gutierrez
represents a new, moderate faction in the Cuban diaspora, a faction recognizing
that many Cubans still support Mr. Castro.

Cuba has kept its commitments to the United States on immigration. With the end
of the cold war, it poses no security threat to the United States. Yet the
sanctions on Havana are tighter than those imposed on Iraq. Legislation now
before Congress -- which President Clinton has sensibly threatened to veto --
would tighten sanctions even further.

The legislation has clearly alarmed many business people. Some of its provisions
would threaten their subsidiaries in other countries that already do business
with Cuba. If the executives are serious about changing Cuba policy, they need
to help the Administration find the courage to take on the conservative exile
lobby, and make their wishes known to Congress. They are on the right track.

LOAD-DATE: September 4, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              234 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 5, 1995, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Cooler Economy in Hawaii Makes a Paradise Look a Lot Like Other Cities

BYLINE: By ASHLEY DUNN

SECTION: Section A;  Page 12;  Column 1;  National Desk

LENGTH: 1443 words

DATELINE: HONOLULU, Sept. 1


Randy Schoch, one of the best-known restaurateurs in Hawaii, first came to the
islands 18 years ago to surf the wild waves of Oahu's North Shore, but stayed to
ride the tide of Hawaiian prosperity that turned him into a millionaire by the
time he was 32.

He had worked his way up from being a busboy in Honolulu to co-owner of Nick's
Fishmarket, a celebrity hangout in the heart of Waikiki, and the fashionable
Black Orchid restaurant. With his new-found wealth, he built a $1.8 million
palace in paradise, at the top of Hawaii Loa Ridge, with a view that stretched
from Koko Head to the cane fields of Ewa.

Today, after four years of recession, he is leaving the islands to take a job on
the mainland. Through the depths of the recession, he watched as the number of
tourists dwindled and the real estate market crashed to the sea floor. To keep
afloat, he sold his BMW, the Black Orchid and his home in the mountains.

"I chased the market all the way down," said Mr. Schoch, who sold his home,
taking a loss of $500,000. "Here I was driving a $60,000 BMW with a $1.8 million
house, and I couldn't afford a refrigerator. I had to bring ice home from the
restaurant so we could have milk for the kids."

Hawaii has an image as a paradise of balmy trade winds, where mangoes grow like
weeds and bikinis dot the beaches while the rest of the country is shivering in
thermal underwear. But for many residents who came for the good life, Hawaii has
become paradise lost.

"Hawaii's time was in the 80's," said Wayne Hyna, a general contractor who has
returned to being a carpenter since work began to dry up. "It's the greatest
weather in the world, but you can't live off the weather."

After a decade of booming growth, the Hawaiian economy has stagnated -- a victim
of dwindling tourism, shrinking investment and fading industries, like sugar
cane.

Although not so severe as the economic downturns suffered in California and
Texas, the recession here, which began in 1991, is the longest since Hawaii
became a state, in 1959. Tourists still pack the streets in trendy Waikiki, but
the unemployment rate has doubled in six years, to 5.3 percent, as have the
number of bankruptcies.

Tourism has dropped for the first time in decades, going from a high of nearly 7
million visitors a year in 1990 to 6.5 million last year. The state's $629
million surplus six years ago has dwindled, even after $144 million in emergency
budget cuts, to about $50 million.

The state has eliminated 600 jobs and is considering a $1 charge for checking
out a best seller from a public library. Honolulu recently began charging
tourists $5 to snorkel in the coral mazes at Hanauma Bay.

While Hawaii has begun a comeback this year, some residents say the sheen of
paradise has been scuffed for good. It is a different Hawaii -- a place of
humbled optimism and growing social ills that in some ways have made it
indistinguishable from the mainland.

"We're sort of going through a midlife crisis," said Paul Brewbaker, chief
economist for the Bank of Hawaii. "It was really a cool and mellow place when I
was growing up here. But now it's just become like a lot of other places."

The mystique about Hawaii has always exceeded reality. Even two decades ago,
many people found Hawaii to be a place of backbreaking work in the cane fields;
many lived in company shacks, tucked far away from the high-rise hotels that
were beginning to sprout across the islands. Work in the cities could be scarce,
rents sky high and the cost of living among the highest in the nation.

Mr. Schoch, 38, remembered that when he first came to Honolulu in 1977, it was
already a tough town.

"I mean, I couldn't even get a busboy job in this restaurant," he said as he sat
in the dark art nouveau interior of Nick's Fishmarket on Kalakaua Avenue.

Mr. Schoch had grown up in Southern California, surfing at places like
Huntington Beach. So when it came time for an adventure, it was natural to pick
Hawaii.

"It was very exotic, and it had waves," he said.

Eventually, he got the busboy job, and in three years, he became the manager of
Nick's, which led to becoming a partner. With his earnings, Mr. Schoch joined
the thousands of people on the islands who rode a booming real estate wave
fueled by Japanese investment.

Prices were rising so fast, he said, that he once bought a condominium for
$700,000 and sold it a few months later for $875,000.

His biggest real estate investment was his $1.8 million, 5,500-square-foot house
on Hawaii Loa Ridge. But just as construction was starting in 1991, the high-end
real estate market was beginning to crash. Real estate investment by the
Japanese plunged from a high of $2.3 billion in 1991 to $633 million the next
year, according to state figures.

It took Mr. Schoch two years to sell his house.

In the past year, Mr. Schoch's restaurant business has recovered, he has bought
a cheaper house in a nice neighborhood, and he has become a partner in another
Honolulu restaurant. But he has still decided to take a job this month as an
executive with Ruth's Chris Steak House in Scottsdale, Ariz.

"I have two successful businesses, I own my own home, but when I look at the
future, I just don't see much of a future here," Mr. Schoch said. But he added
that he would hold on to his Hawaii restaurants.

At its worst, in 1991, the Hawaiian economy shrank just four-tenths of 1
percent. But Mr. Brewbaker, of the Bank of Hawaii, pointed out that even that
small decline had been a shock because of the decade that preceded it, when the
economy kept growing above the national rate.

Still, Hawaii's troubles are relative. Although the unemployment rate and number
of bankruptcies have doubled, those numbers are below the national average.
Unlike other hard-hit states, Hawaii still has a budget surplus, even though it
is much smaller.

"The problem is that this place is accustomed to growth," Mr. Brewbaker said.
"It's a whole new era."

Mr. Brewbaker said Hawaii was changing fundamentally. Big industries like
agriculture and the military are beginning to fade. And tourism, which now
accounts for almost 30 percent of the economy, is not the booming industry it
was, although it is beginning to improve as more visitors come from Asia.

The changes of the 1990's have turned parts of Honolulu into a tropical version
of any other American city. Residents grumble about muggings in Ala Moana Park
and homeless people on the beaches. Traffic on the Kamehameha Highway rivals
that on the Santa Monica Freeway, and residents talk of a rat race. Honolulu,
packed with minimalls and cheap apartment buildings, even looks a lot like Los
Angeles.

A grim sign of the change is that for the young, life is harsher than it was for
their parents.

For the last four years, 28-year-old Lisa Tanaka has worked three jobs to get
ahead. Monday through Friday, she is at First Hawaiian Bank, working as a
business development officer. On Wednesdays and Thursdays, she leaves the bank
at 5 P.M. and heads to the Itoguruma restaurant in Waikiki to work as a waitress
until midnight. On Sundays, she puts in a whole day at Sekiya's Restaurant &
Delicatessen.

"It's worth it because I can get a little cash on the side," Ms. Tanaka said.
"But I am tired."

With her three jobs, Ms. Tanaka brings in about $40,000 a year. Her fiance, Chad
Kamibayashi, makes another $40,000. They have saved enough to buy a $233,000
two-bedroom condominium in Honolulu.

The recession has pushed some residents, particularly native Hawaiians, to the
edge of the economy.

Michael Spencer worked for years as a disk jockey, but he has been making his
living lately by selling a sticky sweet taro delicacy known as kulolo by the
side of the road. He said many of his friends had already left the islands for
greener pastures.

"Like everyone else, we're struggling to stay here," Mr. Spencer said. "It's
outrageous here: $4.50 for a gallon of milk, $5 for a box of cornflakes, $1.50
for a gallon of gas."

Others who came to Hawaii in search of paradise have now turned their eyes
farther west.

Mr. Hyna, who came to Hawaii in 1974 after serving in the Vietnam War, said it
had become too hard and frustrating to live in paradise.

He said he would always love some things about Hawaii: the mountains and
beaches, the weather and the friendliness. But he also said he had grown tired
of the struggle.

After a vacation in New Zealand, he and his wife have sometimes thought about
moving there in search of a new life.

"It's a laid-back place," he said. "There's no rat race, and the beauty of the
place is just spectacular. It's absolutely gorgeous. It's paradise."


LOAD-DATE: September 5, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Randy Schoch, a restaurateur, is one of many people who
prospered with Hawaii's boom times and suffered with its recession. Now Mr.
Schoch, seen on his office balcony in Waikiki, says he is ready to leave the
state. (Ken Ige for The New York Times)

Graph: "KEEPING TRACK: Hawaiian Tourism: The Figures" tracks number of visitors
from 1985 through an estimated 1994. Also tracked is visitor spending from 1985
through 1993. (Source: Hawaii Visitors Bureau)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              235 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 5, 1995, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

William Kunstler, 76, Dies; Lawyer for Social Outcasts

BYLINE: By DAVID STOUT

SECTION: Section B;  Page 6;  Column 1;  National Desk

LENGTH: 1256 words


William M. Kunstler, the gravel-voiced radical lawyer whose wild hair seemed to
symbolize his distrust of government and his kinship with unpopular people and
causes, died yesterday. He was 76 and lived in Manhattan.

Mr. Kunstler died of heart failure at Columbia Presbyterian Hospital in
Manhattan after a short illness, said his law partner, Ron Kuby. Mr. Kunstler
had a pacemaker implanted on Aug. 7 and had been hospitalized since Aug. 28.

Mr. Kunstler's championing of left-of-center causes dated from the early days of
the civil rights movement and spanned the bitterest days of the Vietnam War. One
of his early clients was the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. At the time of his
death, he had a role in the defense of the suspects in the 1993 bombing of the
World Trade Center.

Mr. Kunstler made not just a career but also a life out of representing people
and movements that were disliked, even despised. His clients' unpopularity
seemed to inspire Mr. Kunstler, who was recognized by admirers and detractors
alike as a lawyer who embraced pariahs. He seemed to seek out the most loathed
of people and causes. For a time, he represented Colin Ferguson, who shot six
people to death on a Long Island Rail Road train in December 1993 and was
convicted last February.

Admirers saw him as a brilliant lawyer, and a skillful and courageous litigator,
while his critics saw him as a showoff and publicity seeker. Nor did Mr.
Kunstler entirely disagree with his detractors. "To some extent, that has the
ring of truth," he once said. "I enjoy the spotlight, as most humans do, but
it's not my whole raison d'etre. My purpose is to keep the state from becoming
all-domineering, all powerful."

Perhaps his best-known case was that of the Chicago Seven, who were tried on
charges that they conspired to incite riots that made a tumult of the 1968
Democratic National Convention in Chicago.

His clients in the trial before Judge Julius J. Hoffman were people whose names
were constantly linked to the turbulence of that era: Jerry Rubin, Tom Hayden,
Rennie Davis, David Dellinger, Abbie Hoffman, John R. Froines and Lee Weiner.
The Black Panther Bobby Seale was originally included but his case was separated
from the others, leaving the seven.

Mr. Kunstler complained constantly that Judge Hoffman favored the prosecution in
his rulings. At one point, Mr. Kunstler boasted that his own entry in "Who's
Who" was three lines longer than the judge's.

"I hope you get a better obituary," Judge Hoffman shot back, lamenting that such
exchanges were not consistent with the dignity that ought to prevail in the
courtroom.

Before the trial was over, there was precious little dignity and a lot of what
seems almost surreal. The defendants munched jellybeans, wore judicial robes in
mockery and tried to hold a birthday party in court. They referred to the
combative, nearsighted judge as "Mr. Magoo," to use one of their kinder
nicknames.

At one point, Abbie Hoffman received in the mail an envelope with dried green
vegetable material that appeared to be marijuana. Mr. Kunstler brought that fact
to the judge's attention.

"I'm sure counsel can find a way to take care of this matter without further
troubling this court," Judge Hoffman said.

"Your honor," replied a deadpan Mr. Kunstler, "I will personally see that it is
burned this evening."

The defendants were acquitted of conspiracy, although five were found guilty of
crossing state lines with intent to riot. His many sharp exchanged with Judge
Hoffman brought Mr. Kunstler a contempt-of-court sentence of 4 years 13 days.

But all convictions, including Mr. Kunstler's, were overturned on appeal, and he
spent no time in jail. Years later, Mr. Kunstler looked back on the uproarious
trial and suggested that Judge Hoffman himself had been more victim than
oppressor, and that his own conduct had been "pretty shrill."

In his career, Mr. Kunstler represented Dr. King as he battled segregation in
Georgia; Representative Adam Clayton Powell Jr., who contended that his skin
color, not his high-living and eyebrow-raising ethics, made him unpopular with
Congressional colleagues; Stokely Carmichael, who popularized the "black power"
rallying cry, and Mr. Seale.

He did not just represent people in the trenches, he jumped into the trenches
with them, as when he played tennis in 1962 with a black minister on a
whites-only court in Albany, Ga., until he was removed by the police.

Mr. Kunstler represented people as varied as Wayne Williams, ultimately
convicted of killing a number of children in Atlanta; the actress Joey
Heatherton, who was charged with attacking a passport clerk; Darryl Cabey, one
of four black youths wounded by the subway gunman Bernhard Goetz in 1984; the
Rev. Daniel Berrigan, a comrade-in-protest from the Vietnam years, and Joseph
Bonnano, a reputed mobster.

Mr. Kunstler helped to defend prisoners charged in the aftermath of the 1971
rebellion at Attica Correctional Facility in upstate New York in which more than
40 convicts and corrections officers were killed.

He also defended Lemuel Smith, who was serving a life sentence for murder at
Green Haven state prison in Stormville when he was charged with killing a
corrections officer there in 1981. Until New York's old death penalty law was
overturned, Mr. Smith was only inmate on the state's death row, and Mr.
Kunstler's work on his behalf helped to save his life.

William Moses Kunstler was born July 7, 1919, in New York to Dr. Monroe Bradford
Kunstler, a doctor, and the former Frances Mandelbaum, whose father had been a
prominent doctor. He majored in French at Yale University, where he was elected
Phi Beta Kappa. He graduated in 1941.

He served with the Army Signal Corps in the Pacific in World War II, rising to
the rank of major and earning a Bronze Star. After the war, he attended Columbia
Law School, graduating in 1949 and seemingly poised for a prosperous suburban
life.

But in the mid-1950's, he represented a State Department employee whose passport
had been confiscated when he traveled to China as a freelance reporter. By the
early 1960's, he was doing work with the American Civil Liberties Union and
representing Dr. King and his allies, and his course was set.

One of his notable victories of recent years was winning acquittal of El Sayyid
Nosair on murder charges in the 1990 death of Rabbi Meir Kahane, despite
eyewitnesses who said they had seen the defendant slay the militant Jewish
leader. Mr. Nosair was convicted of gun possession and other lesser charges.

Mr. Kunstler wrote several books, including "Beyond a Reasonable Doubt?: The
Original Trial of Caryl Chessman," a 1961 account of a California convict
executed after more than a decade on death row, and "The Case for Courage: The
Stories of Ten Famous American Attorneys Who Risked Their Careers in the Cause
of Justice," published in 1962.

David Lerner, director of the Center for Constitutional Rights, which Mr.
Kunstler helped to found in 1966, said yesterday, "We mourn the passing of a
great American hero, and a leader of the fight for social justice and against
racism in America."

Mr. Kunstler married Lotte Rosenberger in 1943. They were divorced in 1976. That
year, he married Margaret L. Ratner, who survives him. Surviving also are two
daughters by his first marriage, Karin Goldman of New York and Jan Drazek of
Wichita, Kan., and two by his second marriage, Sarah and Emily, both of New
York; a sister, Mary Horn of Baltimore, and four grandchildren.


NAME: William M. Kunstler

LOAD-DATE: September 5, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: September 6, 1995, Wednesday

CORRECTION:

An obituary yesterday about the lawyer William M. Kunstler misstated the title
of David Lerner at the Center for Constitutional Rights, which Mr. Kunstler
helped to found in 1966. Mr. Lerner is a spokesman for the center; its executive
director is Ron E. Daniels.


GRAPHIC: Photo: William M. Kunstler, right, and Jerry Rubin in 1973 just after
they were freed without having to serve jail sentences on contempt-of-court
convictions stemming from the Chicago Seven trial in 1968. (Associated Press)


TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              236 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 6, 1995, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Northfield Journal;
Women Are 'No Big Deal' At an Old Military College

BYLINE: By SARA RIMER

SECTION: Section A;  Page 16;  Column 1;  National Desk

LENGTH: 698 words

DATELINE: NORTHFIELD, Vt.


It was Rook Week at Norwich University, the country's oldest private military
college, and it was nothing like The Citadel, in Charleston, S.C., where the
cadets cheered when the first woman among them, Shannon Faulkner, dropped out.

Inside the Norwich's stately brick barracks on the first day of the school year,
Joseph Glasser, an upperclassman who is a squad leader, was watching as Kerry
Marinecz, a 19-year-old rookie, raced to make her bed for inspection. "She's
good," Mr. Glasser told the platoon sergeant, Kevin LeBlanc. "She's fast."

Across the hall, two rookie roommates, Jason Jones, 21, and Tim Stone, 17, were
concentrating on trimming their sheets to the regulation 45-degree-angle corners
when a visitor asked how they felt about women in the corps.

"Ma'am!" said Mr. Jones, from Beaumont, Tex., snapping to attention. "I think
it's great! Ma'am!"

Mr. Stone, from Andover, Mass., said, "They have every right to be here."

So far, two rookies have quit this semester. They were both men.

Norwich, founded in 1819, admitted its first eight women in 1974, two years
after it merged with Vermont College, a nonmilitary institution. "It was the
right thing to do," said Richard Hansen, senior vice president of the
university, adding that concerns about enrollment in the post-Vietnam-War era
also played a role.

This year's freshmen military class has 245 men and a record 65 women. "To us,"
said Opher Heymann, a 21-year-old platoon leader, "it's no big deal."

Indeed, Mr. Heymann and the other cadets were baffled by the reporters who
showed up for Rook Week this year, asking about the role of women at Norwich.

"I never thought about it, really, until this Shannon Faulkner thing," said
Casey Barnes, a 22-year-old battalion commander, and as a lieutenant colonel the
second-highest-ranking cadet. "No matter where you go, unless you make your own
club, you're going to have to deal with women."

Walking across the grassy campus in the Green Mountains, Mr. Barnes, who was
wearing his fatigues, greeted Hannah Amon, a civilian junior. "She's the
place-kicker on the football team," he said matter-of-factly. The varsity
football team.

Like The Citadel, Norwich does not require its graduates to enter the military,
though 60 percent of last year's graduating class did.

Mr. Barnes is awaiting a posting, having recently completed Marine officer
training at Quantico Marine Base in Virginia. So did a Norwich classmate,
21-year-old Tricia Angelini. "I did it because I always wanted to be a Marine,
not to prove that all females can make it," Ms. Angelini said over lunch in the
mess hall. Outside after lunch, Ms. Angelini dropped to the ground and easily
did 35 push-ups -- in 30 seconds.

Like the other women interviewed here, Ms. Angelini, who was the captain of her
high school basketball and volleyball teams, said she did not view herself as a
feminist. "People know me as just me -- Tricia," she said.

Nor did she, or the other women, identify with Ms. Faulkner's struggle to get
into The Citadel. But once she did get in, they said, her decision to quit was a
disappointment. "She should have been physically fit," said Carrie Ogden, a
17-year-old rookie.

Ms. Marinecz, from Youngstown, Ohio, one of eight women in her 29-member
platoon, said she did not enroll at Norwich to make a statement. "I want to be
an officer," she said.

Across campus, the cadets still talk about one recent graduate, Dianna Zito. Two
years ago, she was, like Mr. Barnes today, a lieutenant colonel, the
second-highest-ranking cadet on campus. She is now an Army intelligence officer,
stationed in Germany.

"She could P.T. like there's no tomorrow," Mr. Barnes said, referring to Ms.
Zito's zeal for physical training.

In his office, Colonel Craig Lind showed off a Norwich recruitment poster, with
a picture of Ms. Zito and another recent female graduate, Megan Driscoll, along
with the slogan, "What's this about a few good men?"

Colonel Lind graduated from Norwich in 1971, when it was still all-male. "I tell
these young men, 'You're going to work for, and work with, women,' " he said. "
'The sooner you understand that the better.' "

LOAD-DATE: September 6, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Female cadets at the nation's oldest private military college,
Norwich University, are treated equally to the male cadets: They are screamed at
just as loudly. Getting the message from a drill sergeant last week were Carrie
Ogden, 17, left, of Chesterland, Ohio, and Jamie Rasp, 19, of Plymouth, N.H.
(Keith Meyers/The New York Times)


                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              237 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 6, 1995, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

In Hanoi, Bush Defends Delay in Opening Normal Relations

BYLINE: By The New York Times

SECTION: Section A;  Page 5;  Column 1;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 570 words

DATELINE: HANOI, Vietnam, Sept. 5


Former President George Bush, who refused to open diplomatic relations with
Vietnam while in office, defended that decision and the American role in the
Vietnam War today before an audience of Vietnamese officials and business
leaders.

"There is no point in me trying to convince people in this room the rectitude of
what we did," Mr. Bush said in response to a question after his speech.

"I'm not a revisionist," he said. "I disagree with McNamara." Robert S.
McNamara, the Defense Secretary during the early years of the Vietnam War,
asserted in his recent memoir that American policy then was "wrong, terribly
wrong."

Mr. Bush said: "I'm more interested in dwelling on the present, looking to the
future. There is no point in opening old wounds."

Mr. Bush, 71, arrived here on Monday for a four-day tour sponsored by Citibank,
the first American bank to open a branch in Vietnam. His visit comes less than
two months after President Clinton recognized Hanoi, which defeated the
American-backed South Vietnamese in 1975.

In Hanoi, the former President and his wife, Barbara, have been greeted more
with curiosity than enthusiasm.

One policeman watching Mr. Bush walk down a downtown street asked a bystander,
"When does Hillary Clinton come?"

The visit is nonetheless significant. Mr. Bush is the first retired or sitting
President to visit Vietnam since the war. Today he met with Prime Minister Vo
Van Kiet and President Le Duc Anh.

He is scheduled to visit a rehabilitation clinic for disabled children on
Wednesday and to speak to foreign business representatives. On Thursday he is to
tour a site in central Vietnam where investigators are searching for the remains
of American soldiers missing from the war. He will also travel to Ho Chi Minh
City, formerly called Saigon.

Later on his Asian tour, he will also visit China and Japan.

Today's speech was the first by any American in the auditorium of the Hanoi
People's Committee, a prominent symbol of Communist authority.

The audience of about 125, including Citibank representatives and State
Department officials, greeted Mr. Bush with a standing ovation.

In his 32-minute speech, he said he welcomed a new relationship with Vietnam,
while mildly criticizing the country for its human rights record. In recent
weeks several political dissidents and monks who belong to an outlawed Buddhist
sect have been tried and imprisoned.

"I of course want to see a more democratic Vietnam," Mr. Bush said.

He added that as contacts between Vietnam and the United States increase, "the
more likely it is that we will see an increase in individual liberties,
something that's on the move right here in Vietnam today."

A banker in the audience, Bui Hung, asked, "Why is it that the mission of
normalization with Vietnam fell to your successor?" And Pham Minh, director of a
construction company, asked: "We have all heard about the generosity of the
American people. But how do you explain the lingering bitterness of the United
States, the not having fair play after the Vietnam War?"

Mr. Bush ascribed the delay in establishing diplomatic relations to the
sensitive issue of Americans missing in action.

"It's hard to explain to you the emotion that one feels in this country about
feeling that there are people that are unaccounted for," Mr. Bush said. "That
now, I think, is well on the road to solution. But that wasn't always the case."

LOAD-DATE: September 6, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              238 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 6, 1995, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Cement Plant in Vietnam

BYLINE: Dow Jones

SECTION: Section D;  Page 18;  Column 2;  Business/Financial Desk

LENGTH: 50 words

DATELINE: BOSTON, Sept. 5


The Stone & Webster Engineering Corporation said today that it had agreed to
form a joint venture to build and operate a $200 million cement plant in
Vietnam. The company, a unit of Stone & Webster Inc., which is based in New
York, said the plant would produce 1.2 million tons a year of cement.

LOAD-DATE: September 6, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              239 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 6, 1995, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

Some Law Firms Practice Art for Art's Sake

BYLINE: By LISA ANDERSON

SECTION: Section C;  Page 11;  Column 5;  Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1146 words


During the 1980's, an art collection became the symbol that separated the
in-vogue law firms from the unhip ones. Recession-provoked budget trimmings soon
replaced the desire for cachet, and collecting dropped off. But it didn't go
away.

Currently, more than 70 American law firms with collections ranging from 50 to
1,400 artworks have listed themselves in the International Directory of
Corporate Art Collectors.

In some firms the offices have practically been turned into galleries. Most of
the collections focus on contemporary artists, some of significance. The
collection of Fried, Frank, Harris, Shriver & Jacobson in Manhattan, for
example, includes works by Ad Reinhardt, Frank Stella, Roy Lichtenstein, Jim
Dine, Berenice Abbott, Jasper Johns, Andy Warhol, Julian Schnabel, David Hockney
and Robert Mapplethorpe. Weil, Gotshal & Manges, also in Manhattan, owns work by
Claes Oldenburg, Jennifer Bartlett, William Wegman and Cindy Sherman.

Some of the lawyers involved have re-created themselves as curators who provide
tours, lend artworks to museums and occasionally accept work from artists in
lieu of legal fees.

"It is my passion," said Ed Abramson of Herrick, Feinstein, a firm that collects
architectural artifacts from New York City, like the original 1913 copper finial
from the Woolworth building, a 1924 brass elevator dial from the Roosevelt Hotel
and one of the early ticket booths from the subway. "I take tender loving care
of it."

Of course, many of these firms have seen their works increase substantially in
value, though for the most part they were reluctant to divulge figures or
discuss in detail the financial arrangements for buying and insuring the works.
But James A. Dobkin, a partner at Arnold & Porter in Washington, said his firm's
225 works, which were worth $250,000 in 1978, are now valued at more than $1.5
million. And Gregg Thomas, a lawyer who heads the art committee at the Tampa,
Fla., office of Holland & Knight, said his firm had allocated "a six-figure sum"
to begin its collection in 1989.

Barry Sanders, a lawyer with Latham & Watkins in Los Angeles, said the firm's
decision to buy 400 photographs, including works by Ansel Adams, Robert
Doisneau, Elliott Erwitt and Henri Cartier-Bresson, was "price effective."

"We could get a lot of money for the prints," Mr. Sanders said, "because they're
worth more than what we paid for them, but that's not why we went into
collecting."

Indeed, most firms rejected any notion that the decision to buy was a business
decision.

"It is really for the employees," said Mr. Dobkin, who oversees Arnold &
Porter's collection, which includes works by Sam Gilliam and Gene Davis, and who
has shown his own sculptures in 14 solo exhibitions.  "We don't buy for
investment."

Still, especially for firms that began collecting in the late 70's and early
80's, an art collection has become a valuable asset, particularly for a business
that does not have many tangible assets.

Some firms say that collecting art is a way to support local artists or causes.
When members of the art committee in the Tampa office of Holland & Knight found
out that a local river was drying up and would soon disappear, they commissioned
an artist to paint scenes along the river. The office has 91 contemporary
paintings, photographs and sculptures by artists who live in Florida or whose
works were inspired by the Florida landscape.

"People have forgotten how a lot of art was created," said Neale Albert, a
partner in the New York office of Paul, Weiss, Rifkind, Wharton & Garrison.
"Just going out and buying pieces isn't fun. I find it much more rewarding to
get to know an artist and commission something, and when it is done, I feel I am
a part of a process."

Mr. Neale commissioned the artist George Deem to paint "The Triumph of Art,"
based on Mantegna's masterpiece. Mr. Deem's work now hangs in a hallway. But
buying art for the workplace often raises questions of taste.

"In some ways, it is like polite society," said Arthur Fleischer of the New York
office of Fried, Frank, Harris, Shriver & Jacobson. "You don't discuss sex,
religion or politics. You don't want to offend anyone."

A series of 12 prints in which the artist Martha Rofler placed images of Vietnam
in the White House caused such a stir at the New York office of Weil, Gotshal &
Manges that they were put in storage.

But firms have found that lawyers may become fond of works that at first offend
them.

"You have to have a rule," said Carolyn Alexander, a consultant with Cooper
Alexander, art dealers who helped partners at Weil, Gotshal & Manges assemble
their collection of more than 400 paintings, drawings and photographs. "No one's
complaints are answered for at least six months because by and large they do
become attached to them."

Ms. Alexander recalled the complaints she received from a lawyer who did not
like Richard Bosman's "High Tide, Low Tide," a colored woodcut print of what
appear to be two rocks sitting on a beach. Some months after the piece had been
moved, Ms. Alexander said, the lawyer came begging to get it back, asking,
"Where are my rocks?"

To make their art more accessible, many firms have mounted museum-type placards
identifying objects by artist, title and year of creation, in addition to
providing catalogues that range from fancy productions to rudimentary
photocopies.

Most firms with collections have consultants or art committees that often
include members of the legal support staff as well as lawyers, to make selection
more democratic. But some lawyers -- those who sit on museum boards, frequent
galleries and auctions, and roam through artists' studios in their spare time --
prefer to work alone.

"Committees can't choose art," said Jack Combs of Warner, Norcross in Grand
Rapids, Mich. "There are too many tastes. It really has to reside under one
person."

In many instances, one lawyer is the impetus for beginning a firm's collection.

"What happens usually in these cases is that a partner takes a particular
interest," said Barbara Toll, a consultant who helped lawyers start a collection
at Wachtell, Lipton, Rosen & Katz in Manhattan.

Even firms that have seen their collections increase in value find that the
lawyers with great interest in the art are unwilling to part with it. And though
there are Jasper Johnses and Schnabels hanging at many of these firms, financial
reality has also driven lawyers to support a host of unknown, "emerging"
artists.

"We don't have famous artists," Mr. Combs said. "These paintings are not
particularly expensive. "We buy pieces for the enjoyment they bring to our
lives."

It is this enjoyment that may be the most compelling reason to support a
collection, said Mr. Sanders of Latham & Watkins.

"You live here," Mr. Sanders said. "You work a lot of hours in this business. It
should be a place of beauty."


LOAD-DATE: September 6, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: September 15, 1995, Friday

CORRECTION:

An article on Sept. 6 about law firms that collect art misstated the name of the
organization that provides information on such collections. It is the Artnews
International Directory of Corporate Art Collections.


GRAPHIC: Photo: James A. Dobkin, chairman of the art committee at Arnold &
Porter, standing before Morris Louis's "Picture With Blue Stripe." (Marty Katz
for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              240 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 7, 1995, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Vietnamese Plaque at U.S. Embassy Revives Bitter Memories

BYLINE: By The New York Times

SECTION: Section A;   Page 14;   Column 1;   Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 579 words

DATELINE: HO CHI MINH CITY, Vietnam


Just one month after American diplomats opened a new embassy in Hanoi, pledging
to put old hostilities behind them, a small plaque commemorating a pivotal
battle here is reviving bitter memories of the Vietnam War and slowing
reconciliation.

The problem is a simple stone tablet hanging on a wall outside the old United
States Embassy compound in this city once known as Saigon. It marks the site
where a battle was fought during the Tet offensive in 1968. Five G.I.'s were
killed defending the compound.

It was one of the most humiliating moments of the Vietnam War for the United
States. For the North Vietnamese, it was the day they made a superpower look
vulnerable.

Now, with full diplomatic relations, the United States is reclaiming the
property its abandoned 20 years ago at war's end, including the former embassy.
In all likelihood, this will be the site of the American Consulate and the
United States Government has demanded that the Vietnamese plaque be removed.

Officially, the Vietnamese Government agreed. In March, Prime Minister Vo Van
Kiet issued a decree that the plaque be taken down. But it remains on the
embassy wall.

"It will be moved," promised Luong Van Ly, an official of the Vietnamese Foreign
Ministry. "The Ho Chi Minh City authorities are still thinking about a place to
relocate the plaque, because it is of very important significance for the
Vietnamese people in general and Vietnamese veterans in particular," Mr. Ly
said.

Some Vietnamese, though, want to leave it right where it is, including the
architect of the Tet Offensive, retired Gen. Tran Van Tra.

"The plaque not only marks the contribution but also is a historical relic, a
tradition. Not moving it to another place is a rational request," General Tra
was quoted as saying in a Ho Chi Minh City newspaper. "The attack on the U.S.
Embassy shook the White House as well as the world," he said. "The price we had
to pay in return for the victory was the death of some courageous commandos.
Each drop of blood was priceless."

If General Tra has historic sentiment on his side, the Americans have property
law on theirs. In January, Vietnam returned the embassy to the United States.
And the wall on which the sign hangs, an American official said, is decidedly
United States Government property.

So why, seven months later, have American officials not just taken a screwdriver
to the 6-by-3-foot gray slab and cart it away?

"We don't feel so incensed about it that we're going to go over there and chisel
it off the wall," said a State Department official. "But it has to go."

Vietnamese officials cannot decide what to do with it without looking like they
are caving in to the Americans.

At first, they suggested embedding it in the sidewalk outside the compound but
American officials were not enthusiastic. The Vietnamese now plan to move the
plaque to a museum, once they figure out how to make it appear to be their own
idea.

The United States owns five parcels of property in the city. The old embassy,
while structurally sound, needs "several million dollars" of renovations,
according to Chris Runckel, Deputy Director of the United States Embassy in
Hanoi. But the compound sits on one of the most valuable parcels of land in
Vietnam.

The State Department may decide to solve all of these problems by constructing a
new consulate. "For a lot of people," a State Department official said, the old
building "just has too many bad memories."

LOAD-DATE: September 7, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              241 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 7, 1995, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

David D. Henry, 89, President Of Illinois U. in Time of Tumult

BYLINE: By ROBERT McG. THOMAS Jr.

SECTION: Section B;   Page 17;   Column 5;   National Desk

LENGTH: 491 words


David Dodds Henry, a onetime English professor who served as president of the
University of Illinois during a period of significant expansion in the 1950's
and the era of campus unrest in the 1960's, died on Monday at a nursing home in
Naples, Fla. He was 89.

If there were times when Dr. Henry regretted his decision to abandon the
contemplative field of literature for the politically charged world of college
administration, he had only his talents for leadership and his vision for public
education to blame.

From the time he was elected president of the student government at Pennsylvania
State University in the 1920's, Dr. Henry, a quiet, forceful man who could
energize a board meeting with cool, detached efficiency, was in demand.

A native of East McKeesport, Pa., Dr. Henry was, in succession, an instructor in
a land grant college (Penn State), a teacher and department head at a small
liberal arts college (Battle Creek), a state education administrator (Michigan),
president of a large municipal university (Wayne State in Detroit), executive
vice president and chief educational officer at the nation's largest independent
university (New York University) and, from 1955 to 1971, president of one of the
largest state university systems (Illinois).

It was a measure of the confidence he instilled in his fellow administrators
that he was chosen to head six of the nation's leading organizations of higher
education, including a stint as president of the Association of American
Universities.

As a public education administrator during politically perilous times, Dr. Henry
was frequently on the firing line, once because he unilaterally suspended a
professor who had created a furor by publicly condoning premarital sex for
mature students, and later because he deferred to a faculty committee and did
not suspend a professor who had created a similar furor by saying the
assassination of President John F. Kennedy had been a Communist plot.

As a champion of universal public education for every qualified high school
graduate, Dr. Henry sometimes bit off more than he could chew. In 1968, for
example, he recruited more black students for a special program than the
university could accommodate, touching off a violent protest that included the
slashing of his own presidential portrait.

Dr. Henry, who did not apologize for taking a hard line against violence by
students demonstrating for civil rights or protesting the Vietnam War, regarded
it as a tribute that he was once burned in effigy by student protesters.

For all that, Dr. Henry was credited with doubling the enrollment at Illinois
and supervising a vast building program that included the creation of the Circle
campus in Chicago, while simultaneously improving the university's academic
standing significantly.

Dr. Henry, who was predeceased by his wife, a son and a grandson, is survived by
two grandsons and five great-grandchildren.

NAME: David Dodds Henry

LOAD-DATE: September 7, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              242 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 7, 1995, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

TELEVISION REVIEW;
Nocturnal and Excited About Books

BYLINE: By JOHN J. O'CONNOR

SECTION: Section C;   Page 18;   Column 1;   Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 437 words


Disney's animated series "Gargoyles," seen in this area on WPIX, Channel 11,
Mondays through Thursdays at 4:30, offers its fans gobs of violence spiked with
occasional wit and spurts of do-goodism. The do-goodism gets a workout today.

The show's concept is elaborate, occasionally impenetrable. The gargoyles,
possibly evolved from dinosaurs, are nocturnal creatures who fly about at night
and, turning to stone, hibernate during the day. They originated at a castle in
Scotland a thousand years ago and now, sporting names like Hudson, Lexington,
Broadway and Bronx, prowl the canyons of Manhattan, often with humans. Battles
using laser guns and various other mega-weapons are commonplace.

But however unsteadily, a sense of responsibility hovers above the series, now
in its second season. Working with the American Library Association, the show is
part of a poster campaign urging youngsters to read. The "Gargoyles" poster has
Goliath, educated leader of the clan, perched on a building ledge clutching a
volume of Shakespeare. The one-word message: Read.

Today's plot, grandly entitled "A Lighthouse in the Sea of Time," has cave
explorers discovering two fifth-century scrolls of the wizard Merlin. Before
they can be delivered to the Metropolitan Museum, however, one is stolen by the
villainous Macbeth (voice by John Rhys-Davies).

The other is saved by the wise but unschooled Hudson (Ed Asner). He is given
shelter by a blind Vietnam veteran named Jeffrey Robbins (Paul Winfield), who is
now a novelist.

Hudson shamefacedly confesses that he cannot read. Jeffrey tells him, "It is not
a shame to be illiterate; it's only a shame if you stay that way."

Of course, earlier, one gargoyle simply shrugs off the need to read. "I can buy
the video," he says.

But the young Broadway (Bill Fagerbakke), after hearing a passage from the
scrolls, is dazzled by Merlin's own words.

"It's his life!" he cries. "When you read the words, they take you there!"

"We'll read them ourselves," several gargoyles decide, "as soon as we learn
how."

Meanwhile, Jeffrey is rhapsodizing about books as "windows on the past, prisms
on the present, lighthouses in the sea of time." Next time, of course,
"Gargoyles" will be back to action business as usual. But even an occasional
effort to look responsible is encouraging.

GARGOYLES

Channel 11, today at 4:30 P.M.
Frank Paur, supervising producer and director; Greg Weisman, supervising
producer and story editor; Dennis Woodyard, Bob Kline and Butch Lukic,
producers. Produced by Walt Disney Television Animation for Buena Vista
Television.

LOAD-DATE: September 7, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Goliath, a leader who reads. (Buena Vista Television)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              243 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 9, 1995, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Packwood Is Leaving As a Pariah In His State

BYLINE: By TIMOTHY EGAN

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 8;  Column 1;  National Desk

LENGTH: 1202 words

DATELINE: PORTLAND, Ore., Sept. 8


All states have narrative myths, the heroic images that are chiseled into
granite in the Capitol building and passed on through the generations. In the
Beaver State, people worship the Oregon Trail pioneer and the political
maverick.

Until recently, Senator Bob Packwood could lay claim to a bit of both
traditions. His great-grandfather, he said, was an Oregon pioneer. And on
political matters, he became known as a giant-killer, someone with extraordinary
political instincts. Long before he was Bob Packwood the political pariah, he
was the man who took on Presidents from his own party and muscled through
legislation considered impossible to pass.

So, among the many paradoxes in his fall from power, friends and foes here say,
are that he leaves office, not just as someone who left a written record of
politics at its most cynical level, but as someone who had become a stranger in
his native state.

In his last months, he tried to embrace the maverick image -- the fighter
against doctrinaire feminism and "political correctness," as he put it -- but to
no avail.

"He made this state a laughing stock of the country," said Georgia Vareldzis, a
62-year-old Portland cookbook author. "The only Oregonian Bob Packwood
represents today is Bob Packwood."

Over the last three years, Mr. Packwood had become a spectral figure in Oregon,
rarely coming home and refusing to talk to the state's leading newspaper. He did
not even have a home in Oregon; for a time, he lived out of a trailer.

His rise and fall, viewed from his home state, is a story of a man who forgot
some of the lessons of the great Oregon mavericks.

"He was a procedural master, brilliant in many ways, but what did him in with
the Senate was the same thing that got him in trouble with the women -- he
couldn't read human nature," said James Moore, a political science professor at
the University of Portland. "It wasn't that he doesn't get it on women's issues.
He doesn't get it on people."

Had Senator Packwood followed the example of his mentor and fellow Oregon
Republican, Senator Mark O.  Hatfield, he might have saved his political career,
Professor Moore said. When, in the mid-1980's, Mr.  Hatfield got in trouble with
the Senate Ethics Committee for accepting gifts, he apologized profusely, threw
himself at the mercy of the committee and returned all the gifts.

Today, there are buildings in this state named after Mr. Hatfield, and he is
sometimes referred to as Saint Mark.

More than 40 years ago, Mr. Hatfield was a teacher of political science at
Willamette University, and Mr. Packwood was his prize student.

"I never had a more brilliant student than Bob Packwood," Mr. Hatfield said on
the day of Mr. Packwood's resignation. He then recounted a story that may have
seemed arcane to the national television audience but is legendary in this
state.

After a few terms in the State Legislature, Mr. Packwood, in 1968, took on Wayne
Morse, a United States Senator for 23 years, and an Oregon maverick as well,
known for his early opposition to the Vietnam War. Nobody gave Mr. Packwood a
chance. He was "a sacrificial lamb," as Mr. Hatfield said.

"But he was energetic, young and brilliant," said Jeanette Slepian, who has
known Mr. Packwood since 1963. A televised debate in the 1968 campaign showed a
young and eloquent Bob Packwood, and a verbose Senator Morse, his hands shaking.
Mr. Packwood won by just over 3,000 votes out of 813,999 cast.

In the Senate, he was a liberal Republican who considered himself a feminist. He
introduced legislation to legalize abortion and wanted to take tax breaks away
from parents who had too many children. He was a friend of Gloria Steinem, a
leading feminist, and promoted women to top positions in his staff.

In 1969 and 1970, early in his first term in the Senate, he bucked President
Richard M. Nixon and voted against two of the President's Supreme Court
nominees, Clement Haynsworth Jr. and G. Harrold Carswell. And when President
Nixon found himself in trouble with the Watergate scandals, Mr. Packwood called
on him to resign well before it was a foregone conclusion.

By then, he had earned his maverick status, some people here said. Although
nobody compared him to Tom McCall, the former Republican Governor who had almost
Lincoln-like status in Oregon, he was considered to be in the tradition of
Oregon politicians who marched to a different drummer.

A member of the Senate Finance Committee since 1973 and the chairman or
top-ranking Republican on that panel for the last decade, Mr. Packwood stood out
in the Senate as a master of the tax code and the intricacies of health policy.

His best-known achievement came in 1986 when he pushed through legislation that
cut top Federal income tax rates almost in half and eliminated scores of
deductions, exemptions and other tax breaks. The measure, the Tax Reform Act of
1986, affected the taxes of almost every individual and company in America and
was one of the most important laws enacted in the last 30 years. Its central
philosophy was that taxes should be levied to raise money, not to achieve social
or economic purposes.

In working on the law, Mr. Packwood also displayed the ability to put together a
political coalition, a skill many did not know he possessed.

But the writing of this law exposed another side of Mr. Packwood as well: his
tendency to do political about-faces and, as is evident now from his diaries, to
use his position to grant political favors.

When his supporters compare his accomplishments with the details of his diaries,
made public on Thursday, they flinch.

In the diaries, Mr. Packwood talks about taking money from supporters after
doing them favors. Even his friends say this revealed a bald political deal
maker -- anything but the maverick, standing on principle.

One entry, for example, notes a favor he did in the 1986 tax code overhaul, when
he had inserted a $5 million tax break to benefit an Oregon firm owned by a
friend. Another time he wrote that he was doing his "Christian duty," by having
sex with a female staff member.

"It doesn't paint a picture of the kind of character you would want your kids to
emulate," said Randy Miller, chairman of the state Republican Party in Oregon
and, until Thursday, a staunch Packwood defender.

In his final months, Mr. Packwood tried desperately to play the maverick card.
He said he was a victim of the liberal press, dogmatic women and political
correctness. But these arguments did not take hold here, some experts say,
because he had, by then, removed himself from the state and its traditions.

"Sympathy? For Bob Packwood? No way," said Ana Thompson, a flower shop owner in
Portland.

Len Bergstein, a political consultant, said, "The maverick stuff didn't work for
him in the end because he forgot his roots. He had stopped practicing the kind
of retail politics that people in this state like."

Some of the women who brought Mr. Packwood down see his legacy as a cautionary
tale. "What I learned from all this," said Maura Roche, one of 19 women who have
accused him of sexual misconduct, "is that it is possible to go up against
someone that's far more powerful than you and prevail."

LOAD-DATE: September 9, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: After winning election 27 years ago, a young Bob Packwood was
welcomed to the Senate by Vice President Hubert H. Humphrey, left, and the
Senate Republican leader, Everett M. Dirksen of Illinois. (Associated Press,
1968)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              244 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 9, 1995, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

New Vietnam Plaque

SECTION: Section 1;   Page 18;   Column 4;   Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 106 words


To the Editor:

A solution to the problem of "face-saving" in the promised removal of a plaque
commemorating a Vietnam War battle that hangs on a wall outside the old United
States Embassy in Ho Chi Minh City (news article, Sept. 7):

Let our officials place and dedicate a new plaque honoring the dead of both
sides who fell in battle there. We should offer the Vietnamese people a
permanent message that most Americans now believe this was a war that should
never have happened, that we have learned from it and that we honor all those
who paid the price of our learning.

JOEL TAUNTON
Tacoma, Wash., Sept. 7, 1995

LOAD-DATE: September 9, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              245 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 10, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

New & Noteworthy Paperbacks

BYLINE: By LAUREL GRAEBER

SECTION: Section 7;  Page 50;  Column 1;  Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 936 words



FATHERALONG: A Meditation on Fathers and Sons,
Race and Society
By John Edgar Wideman. Vintage, $12.

The author reflects on his upbringing in Pittsburgh and his relationships with
the men in his family, relationships that helped define him as a black man and
as a father. This "is an impressive work," Mel Watkins said here last year, with
scenes "illuminated by Mr. Wide man's keen eye and evocative prose."



IN THE LAKE OF THE WOODS
By Tim O'Brien. Penguin, $10.95.

The title refers to a remote spot in Minnesota where a man has run, trying to
escape his past. John Wade, a Vietnam veteran, has lost the primary race for the
Senate because his involvement in the My Lai massacre of 1968 has finally been
made known. Now his wife, who was also unaware of his secret, has vanished.
Their story -- part mystery, part meditation on the nature of truth -- was
selected by the Book Review as one of the best books of 1994. Our reviewer,
Verlyn Klinkenborg, called it a "grim, telling novel" written "about what
happens when you try to pretend that history no longer exists."

MANDATE OF HEAVEN: The Legacy of Tiananmen Square and the Next Generation of
China's Leaders
By Orville Schell. Touchstone/Simon & Schuster, $14.

The author portrays a country where the desire to get rich has created odd
alliances between entrepreneurs and autocrats. Writing in these pages last year,
Lucian W. Pye praised his "graceful analysis and unobtrusive firsthand
reporting." The future of democracy is considered in CHINA WAKES: The Struggle
for the Soul of a Rising Power, by Nicholas D. Kristof and Sheryl WuDunn
(Vintage, $14). Written by journalists who were correspondents in Beijing for
The New York Times from 1988 to 1993 and are now Tokyo correspondents for the
paper, the book demonstrates that China is ruled by individuals rather than by
law. That environment has given birth to a fledgling free market rife with
corruption. The authors "have raised the right questions about China," Ian
Buruma said in the Book Review last year.

THE GRASS DANCER
By Susan Power. Berkley, $5.99.

Mingling the real and the spiritual, this novel traces the personal history of
Harley Wind Soldier, a Sioux Indian, and the collective history of his people.
The author, a Sioux herself, possesses "an inventiveness that sets her writing
apart," Lawrence Thornton said here in 1994.

"DADDY'S GONE TO WAR": The Second World War
in the Lives of America's Children
By William M. Tuttle Jr. Oxford University, $15.95.

The sons and daughters of servicemen experienced a range of reactions in
wartime: some felt abandoned and terrified, some suffered from bigotry and
others were exhilarated by thoughts of victory. This analysis of testimony from
more than 2,000 is a "valuable and moving book," Nora Sayre wrote in these pages
in 1993.

WHORES OF LOST ATLANTIS
By Charles Busch. Penguin, $10.95.

Who would be better suited to write a novel about a drag queen who writes and
produces a play than a drag queen who has written and produced plays? Charles
Busch, author of the Off Off Broadway hit "Vampire Lesbians of Sodom," knows
whereof he speaks. In 1993 our reviewer, Robert Plunket, found this a "right-on
satirical picture of the East Village theater scene."

MIND OVER MATTER: The Epic Crossing
of the Antarctic Continent
By Ranulph Fiennes. Delta, $12.95.

When the author and a fellow explorer, Dr. Mike Stroud, attempted to traverse
1,700 miles of frozen terrain, matter won: they had to abandon their goal. But
they still achieved the longest polar crossing ever. This is "an indelibly
readable account of a nightmare journey," Annette Kobak said in the Book Review
last year. A nightmare stay is the subject of ALONE, by Richard E. Byrd
(Kodansha Globe, $15). Now restored to print, this book captures the desperation
experienced by Admiral Byrd when he spent six months alone in Antarctica.
Writing in The New York Times in 1938, R. L. Duffus called it "full of interest
and suspense."

THE ADVOCATE'S DEVIL
By Alan M. Dershowitz. Warner, $6.50.

A celebrity lawyer has moral qualms when he suspects that his client -- a famous
athlete accused of rape -- just might be guilty. (Yes, this is fiction.) The
novel "earns a thumbs-up verdict in the pleasant-surprise department," Kinky
Friedman said here earlier this year. In his latest nonfiction, THE ABUSE
EXCUSE: And Other Cop-Outs, Sob Stories, and Evasions of Responsibility (Back
Bay/Little, Brown, $12.95), Mr. Dershowitz argues that too many criminals use a
personal history of abuse to justify their actions, thereby trivializing real
victims. "Its certainty . . . can be bracing, if abrasive," Lincoln Caplan wrote
in the Book Review last year.

TALTOS: Lives of the Mayfair Witches
By Anne Rice. Ballantine, $14.

Published last year, this is the author's third in a series of novels about
supernatural creatures ranging from Louisiana witches to giants who are nearly
immortal. Although our reviewer, Gahan Wilson, did not find all of them
convincing, he said the Taltos (the title characters) "have some flavor of the
sweep and glamour of similar beings found in the cosmic novels of H. G. Wells
and Olaf Stapledon, and that is far from faint praise."

GLORIA
By Mark Coovelis.
Washington Square/Pocket Books, $10.

The narrator embarks on an odyssey to understand the violent death of his
mercurial sister, a journey that leads him into the nether regions of his own
soul. This is an "engaging first novel" with "a powerful impact," James Polk
said here last year.   LAUREL GRAEBER

LOAD-DATE: September 10, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              246 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 10, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

The Immortal Duke

BYLINE: By Julie Salamon;    Julie Salamon's most recent book is "The Devil's
Candy: 'The Bonfire of the Vanities' Goes to Hollywood."

SECTION: Section 7;   Page 28;   Column 1;   Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 798 words



JOHN WAYNE: AMERICAN
By Randy Roberts and James S. Olson.
Illustrated. 738 pp. New York:
The Free Press. $27.50.

THE authors of this biography claim that "the doyens of high culture" -- whoever
they are -- just haven't taken John Wayne seriously. He wasn't merely a major
movie star, they say; he was America's "alter ego," and attention must be paid.

That explains the portentous title, "John Wayne: American." But even serious
history professors -- in this case Randy Roberts of Purdue University and James
S. Olson of Sam Houston State University -- know that a celebrity biography
needs a little dish. So here it is:

Duke Wayne loved to shop.

Catalogues were his obsession, though he also "enjoyed wandering through stores,
looking at Early American furniture, smelling perfumes, handling decorative
accessories and pulling garments off the racks."

What's more, Duke was a bit of a dandy. He was "fastidiously clean, well groomed
and had great taste in clothes. He liked the feel of his skin after he had taken
a hot shower with Neutrogena soap." His second wife's inclination for wearing
dresses without stockings and without having shaved her legs, a close friend
reported, "drove Duke nuts."

He was also a hypocrite, though Mr. Roberts and Mr. Olson more generously refer
to his "contradictions." He lived openly with the woman who was to become his
second wife before divorcing his first wife, but he kept a scornful distance
from Sophia Loren when they were making a film together, because she was dating
a married man while engaged to someone else. He was a man who sneered at draft
dodgers during the Vietnam War but had spent World War II safely making war
movies -- becoming a hero thousands of miles from the front.

These "contradictions" don't deter the authors from declaring John Wayne
"American bedrock" and proclaiming: "Those who hope to understand America must
understand John Wayne's appeal. No other country could have produced him."

In other words, John Wayne was as American as . . . a dysfunctional family. He
came from one and then created several of his own. "I don't give a damn about
him," his mother once said of her son. His parents divorced and he himself was
married three times to much younger women (he confessed that he never understood
any of them). He was, moreover, a distant father to his seven children.

Mr. Roberts and Mr. Olson write about their man with the devotion and indulgence
of the doting parents he never had. For example, they argue that Wayne's critics
"misunderstood" his affiliation with the reactionary John Birch Society. And
what about the years he spent as president of the Motion Picture Alliance for
the Preservation of American Ideals, a stridently anti-Communist group that
encouraged the Hollywood blacklist? Again, a silver lining is found: "John
Wayne, to his credit, was one of the quickest members of the alliance to extend
his forgiveness" to blacklisted writers and actors.

THE book undermines its own theory -- that the man was interchangeable with the
icon -- by being much more perceptive about his movies than about his life and
politics. Like the majority of Hollywood biographies, this one is most
interesting when the star is rising. Writing in a plain-spoken style that avoids
both fanzine and academic cant, the authors nicely retell the story of Wayne's
relationship with John Ford, the director most responsible for setting him apart
from the gunslinging crowd. Some powerful artistry emerged from this strange
pair, with their peculiar male-bonding rituals. Ford liked to humiliate actors
on his set, or have Wayne do it for him.

Though he was said to be haunted by his failure to enlist for military service
during World War II, Wayne managed to capitalize on his warrior image throughout
his career. In 1967, when Gen. William Westmoreland predicted that the end of
the Vietnam War might be near, Wayne, the authors observe, was "praying for his
country's sake that victory was at hand, and hoping for his own sake that it
might just coincide with the scheduled spring 1968 release of 'The Green
Berets.' He saw nothing inconsistent, or unseemly, in combining patriotism,
politics and profit." He would come close to matching his film heroics in real
life only when he was stricken by cancer in 1964 at the age of 57 and again,
fatally, in 1979.

By the end of this 738-page monument to John Wayne it has become clear that too
much knowledge is a dangerous thing for a hero who embodied -- at least on film
-- a harsh, stoic eloquence. In any case, now we know that John Wayne smoked
1,752,000 cigarettes in his lifetime, that he liked mashed potatoes but not as
much as he hated liberals, and that one of his leading ladies never bathed. He,
however, was very, very clean.

LOAD-DATE: September 10, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              247 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 10, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

The Curse of Hyde Park

BYLINE: By Joe Queenan;    Joe Queenan is the author of "If You're Talking to
Me, Your Career Must Be in Trouble," a collection of movie commentary, and a
forthcoming book, "The Un kindest Cut," about making a film.

SECTION: Section 7;   Page 16;   Column 2;   Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 941 words



BROTHERS NO MORE
By William F. Buckley Jr.
294 pp. New York: Doubleday. $23.95.

THE late summer of 1995 can be described as the Golden Age of Derivative
Republican Fiction. First comes Newt Gingrich, the architect of the conservative
counter-revolution, with "1945," his implausible remake of Jack Higgins's novel
"The Eagle Has Landed." Then comes William F. Buckley Jr., the philosophical
architect of the conservative insurgency, with "Brothers No More," an epic saga
of doomed Yalies that is easily the best Louis Auchincloss novel to come along
in years. It only remains for Patrick Buchanan to write a wise, knowing,
incandescent novel about the dreams of an Iowa housewife for this literary cycle
to be complete.

In "Brothers No More," Mr. Buckley parts company with Blackford Oakes, the spy
hero of so many previous novels, and sets out to achieve something far more
ambitious and, perhaps, far more personal. The plot of "Brothers No More"
underscores the difference between neoconservatives, a bunch of
Johnny-come-latelies who simply can't get the 1960's out of their system, and
old-fashioned conservatives, who simply can't get the 1930's out of their
system. The central character is Daniel Tracey O'Hara, a liar, a cheat, a
philanderer, an embezzler, a murderer and -- not terribly surprisingly -- the
grandson of Franklin Delano Roosevelt, architect of the New Deal.

O'Hara will use every trick in the book to try to get himself elected to the
Senate in 1964, where he can inflict even more serious wounds on the nation than
those inflicted by his famous grandfather. An astonishingly primitive political
allegory, "Brothers No More" seems to suggest that the sins of the grandfather
will inevitably be visited on the grandson, and, thereupon, on the grandson's
country. A more charitable view is that Mr. Buckley, writing in the best
tradition of the worst television mini-series, was merely trying to fashion a
ripping good yarn and figured F.D.R. always makes a nice, big target. Unlike,
say, Alf Landon. Or Wendell Willkie.

The foil for O'Hara is his lifelong chum, Henry Chafee, who panics and tries to
kill himself late in World War II while the two are sharing a foxhole in Italy.
O'Hara lies to his superiors about the cause of Henry's abdominal wound, and
Chafee is decorated for bravery. He will then spend the rest of his life trying
to atone for this single moment of cowardice. "Lord Jim," anyone?

O'Hara subsequently marries Henry's sister, the pious, dim Caroline, and begins
a cycle of infidelity and financial peculation that will eventually lead him to
the very threshold of greatness inside the Democratic Party. Meanwhile, Henry
gets a job as a foreign correspondent for Time magazine, which leads him to
Vietnam in the early 1960's, just as things are starting to get really ugly.
This enables Mr. Buckley to share a few thoughts about America's experience in
Southeast Asia. War, to hear the author tell it, is hell.

Mr. Buckley regularly mixes his own fictional creations with real people, like
Time's editor, Henry Luce, the famed mystery writer Georges Simenon and the
journalist William F. Buckley Jr. This technique has become annoyingly
ubiquitous in American pop culture, with Elvis Presley, Shoeless Joe Jackson and
Adolf Hitler popping up everywhere. But whereas the juxtaposition of the real
and the unreal does no damage to a film like "Forrest Gump," where the fictional
and nonfictional characters have only incidental contact with one another, in
"Brothers No More" this overworked gimmick sabotages the novel.

Here's why. First, it confuses the reader, who will have trouble figuring out
which characters really are related to F.D.R. and which are not. Second, we all
know for a fact that Robert F. Kennedy was elected to the Senate from New York
in 1964. So where do O'Hara's aspirations for the Senate fit in? Where's the
drama? The reader already knows that O'Hara will never become a Senator, much
less President of the United States, because Mr. Buckley has set the novel in
the real world where real historical figures already hold those positions.

"Brothers No More" is best thought of as patrician trash: long on yachting,
short on lingerie. Mr. Buckley seems to be on solid footing when the subject is
jibs, halyards or mainsails; but when the book ventures into the boudoir, he's
completely at sea. "Oh God, how he loved her, loved loving her, loved making
love to her, her responses so copiously reciprocal," is how the author describes
an evening Danny spends with his mistress. This is bad writing, but not nearly
as bad as it needs to be to fulfill the demands of the genre. For trash to work,
the writing has to be genuinely trashy, as in Jackie Collins, Danielle Steel,
Judith Krantz. For trash to work, the writing has to be positively awful.

The greatest problem with a highly derivative work of fiction like "Brothers No
More" -- whose principal artistic forebear is "Rich Man, Poor Man" -- is that
the author constantly invites comparisons with other, better novelists. When you
set out to write about Vietnam, you'd better be aware that Graham Greene, Philip
Caputo, Robert Stone and Thom Jones have been there before you and have
dramatically raised the stakes. When you set out to depict Machiavellian
characters in the yachting set, you'd better look over your shoulder to keep an
eye on Nelson DeMille. And when you set out to lambaste F.D.R., you'd better
come loaded for bear. In "Brothers No More," as opposed to his wispy Blackford
Oakes novels, Mr. Buckley seems to want to play with the big boys.
Unfortunately, the big boys are big.

LOAD-DATE: September 10, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              248 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 10, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

The Monument Glut

BYLINE: By James Reston Jr.;   James Reston Jr. is the author of "Sherman's
March and Vietnam."

SECTION: Section 6;  Page 48;  Column 1;  Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 1643 words


There's a monumental competition going on in Washington that has nothing to do
with balanced budgets or Presidential politics. It has to do with, well,
monuments. Every war, it seems, now has to have its own triumphal memorial, and
it's all the fault of one immensely popular and profoundly moving monument: the
Vietnam Veterans War Memorial, specifically The Wall.

Other wars are envious of Vietnam. It's as if that dirty little kid down the
block slipped under the fence and stole all the glory. Now the proper folks want
their due. After 13 tortuous years when one design after another was rejected
and the original competition winners sued the organizers, the Korean War
Veterans Memorial was dedicated with military flourishes this summer near the
Lincoln Memorial. Between them, the Vietnam memorial and the Korean War memorial
have gobbled up close to 14 of the manicured acres encircling the Reflecting
Pool.

But that's far from all. A Black Revolutionary War Patriots Memorial has been
approved for a site south of the Vietnam memorial. Construction has begun at
Arlington Cemetery for a monument to women in the military. Two years ago the
Vietnam Women's Memorial, honoring the few thousand nurses in Vietnam (this,
though only one woman was killed by hostile fire in Vietnam), was unveiled not
far from Frederick Hart's statue The Three Servicemen. Discussions are well
under way for a colossal World War II Memorial, on the order of the Arc de
Triomphe in Paris, perhaps on Constitution Avenue just down from the White
House. Can the War of 1812 be far behind? The Spanish-American War? The Persian
Gulf war?

Behind this march to glory is an independent, Federally funded, Presidentially
appointed panel called the American Battle Monuments Commission. It was
established after World War I to maintain the foreign cemeteries of American war
dead but over the years took on the more active role of promoting the
construction of military monuments. In recent years the panel assigned itself a
new mission -- to reclaim the war memorial business for the generals, colonels,
veterans, corporate chiefs and Medal of Honor winners who lost control of the
process (to artists!) with the Vietnam memorial.

The Korean War memorial is unfortunate proof of a mission accomplished, a sign
that we now have an entrenched quasi-governmental lobby advancing the cause of
glorifying past American military conflicts. The commission -- and its $20
million annual budget -- is not, near as anyone can tell, in danger of falling
under Speaker Gingrich's budget ax.

THE VIETNAM VETERANS MEMORIAL WALL IS, BY FAR, THE MOST popular memorial in
Washington. The brilliance of its conception is well recognized, but it is often
forgotten that the famous Maya Lin design was chosen by a jury of
internationally recognized artists and architects. How Vietnam was to be
remembered in Washington was, by implication, a question too subtle and too
incendiary to leave to the generals and the colonels. They were in disrepute,
after all.

Since the dedication of the Vietnam memorial in 1982 -- the year the first
legislation for a Korean War Veterans Memorial was introduced in Congress --
more than 40 Vietnam memorials have been built around the country. In one
fashion or another, they all mimic their Washington progenitor; they all accent
tragic loss, and most contain realistic figures of the human form in battle
dress. But the Vietnam memorial left the established veterans organizations
deeply unhappy. The Vietnam memorial (and the Vietnam War itself) had challenged
the principles of obedience, of unquestioning service, of the nobility of the
supreme sacrifice.

The Korean War memorial is meant to redress this hurt. Perhaps it is meant to do
more: to deny the experience of Vietnam or, at least, to neutralize it. On
either side of the Reflecting Pool, with Lincoln sitting in judgment, the
memorials engage in a kind of dialectic.

The planners of the new memorial had a problem. The Korean War was the war of
the Silent Generation. Its veterans were neither overly proud nor deeply
wounded. Short and violent though it was, killing as many Americans in three
years as Vietnam killed in 14, the Korean War nevertheless did not destroy a
generation. It was not so much undigested as forgotten history.

In planning their memorial, the Korean advisory board ran to old-fashioned, pre-
Vietnam patriotism, and Congress complied with legislation for a memorial with a
traditional, narrow purpose.

"We have tried to give the veterans here what we could not give them with the
Vietnam memorial," says Kent Cooper of Cooper-Lecky, the architects of record
for the Korean War memorial. "We are not glorifying war but esteeming the honor
of service to country. That is what the vets cried out for." Cooper refers to
the two memorials as the yin and the yang. "The Korean War Veterans Memorial is
in some way a tribute to simpler times. This is a monument to blind devotion."

The architect's sentiment is reflected in his message. One approaches the space
along a winding pathway. In a triangular garden, stationed amid silver lindens
and juniper and granite slabs -- initially, red bayberry was proposed to
symbolize a field of blood, and distressed sycamore trees were supposed to
simulate the battlefield -- a column of 19 stainless-steel figures looms on the
right. Clad in ponchos, suggesting harsh conditions, and carrying an assortment
of weapons and walkie-talkies, their alert faces are grim, full of tension and
fear. They are, indeed, larger than life, humanoids just over seven feet tall
who are most impressive when viewed at a distance. The first figure seen by the
visitor warns of danger ahead, with his hand extended to "stay back."
Politically and militarily correct, the figures represent the races and the
branches of service that fought in Korea.

Unlike the shocked immobility of the figures in Frederick Hart's Three
Servicemen, these G.I. Joes are moving forward, up a slight incline toward their
goal: the American flag. In stark contrast to the profoundly human Vietnam
soldiers, there is nothing vulnerable about these figures. They are impersonal,
opaque, overtly ghostlike, but their humanity is not important: this is a
tribute to military action itself. Their mission is undefined, but that is
irrelevant, for they are unquestioning. Only sentiments of duty and country draw
them forward.

On a wall flanking the column -- a wall again! Are there no new ideas here? --
random faces of G.I.'s and their supporting units are sandblasted into black
California granite. The impressions come from the archives, real faces of real
people interspersed with the occasional pagoda or tank. These images have the
feeling of clippings strewn on a floor, raw material in search of a theme.

At the top of the incline, where the visitor attains the goal of the flag, a
slogan provides a warning, ponderous and menacing, above the statistics of the
war's casualties: "Freedom Is Not Free." And then you turn, and there, at your
feet, inscribed in granite, is the dialectic with Vietnam:

Our nation honors her uniformed sons and daughters

Who answered their country's call to defend a country

They did not know and a people they had never met.

It has been said that Korea was the last war of the foot soldier. But that, too,
will be part of the dialectic. It may be that Korea is the last war in which the
foot soldier did not question the validity of the mission.

NO LAW STATES THAT EVERY ARMED CONFLICT ABROAD DESERVES a permanent tribute in
granite and steel along the avenues of Washington or within Washington's crowded
monumental core. Instead, what gets built in Washington has been left to the
anarchy of politics and money. Apart from the contributions of established
veterans groups, the Korean War memorial is brought to us largely by the
generosity of Hyundai.

As the soul of the nation, the nation's capital should reflect the breadth of
the society's achievements. But coming to Washington is turning into a martial
experience: a contemplation of wars won, lost and stalemated. The remaining 70
acres of the Washington Mall may be on the road toward the cluttered look of the
Gettysburg battlefield. It is as if America recognizes only one type of hero.
What happened to the American hero as scientist?  As religious leader? As artist
or musician? Shouldn't a memorial to the Rev. Martin Luther King Jr. take
precedence over black Revolutionary War veterans on the mall?

One wonders how the great Lincoln will breathe now, flanked as he is on both
sides by two "Books of the Dead" from two nasty, inconclusive, foreign wars.
The truth is that the closeness of the Korean and Vietnam memorials dilutes the
importance of Lincoln and the American Civil War. In about a half-hour's walk
the visitor can contemplate the lessons of the Civil War, the Korean War and
Vietnam all at once. It will be the walking-around equivalent of changing
channels on the television.

"IN THEIR VANITY," WROTE LEWIS MUMFORD ABOUT THE monuments of cities, "the
eminent and the powerful seek a petrified immortality: they write their boasts
upon tombstones; they incorporate their deeds in obelisks; they place their
hopes of remembrance in solid stones joined to other solid stones . . .
forgetful of the fact that stones that are deserted by the living are even more
helpless than life that remains unprotected and unpreserved by stones."

For the moment, curious tourists are flocking to see the new Korean War
monument. But, as with any hollow propaganda piece, the crowds will soon fade.
And what then? I put this question to the head of the Commission of Fine Arts in
Washington a few weeks ago as the finishing touches were being applied to the
landscape.

"Then we'll just have to live with it," he replied.

Permanently.

LOAD-DATE: September 10, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Map of Washington showing locations of selected monuments.

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              249 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 10, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

THE ANNOTATED CALENDAR;
TELEVISION

BYLINE: By BILL CARTER

SECTION: Section 2;  Page 67;  Column 1;  Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 3233 words


Here is a selective guide to cultural events in New York and beyond in the
months ahead. As usual, programs change, some events are sold out, and some have
not yet scheduled locations or exact opening dates. Unless indicated, all dates
listed are for openings, all addresses are in Manhattan, and all telephone
numbers have a 212 area code. Addresses for locations in New York City cited
more than once appear at the bottom of page 68.


NEW SERIES
ABC

"THE DREW CAREY SHOW" -- A ferociously funny stand-up comic from Cleveland named
Drew Carey becomes Drew, an assistant personnel manager for a Cleveland
department store who hangs out with his high school buddies and pursues
happiness. Perhaps an effort to be a blue-collar, Midwestern "Seinfeld." Of
course it's a long way from Cleveland to Manhattan. Wednesdays at 8:30, starting
Wed.

"THE NAKED TRUTH" -- When ABC said it needed more adult comedies, it got this
saga: a beautiful ex-wife of a media mogul is forced to work for a tabloid
magazine. This leads to toilet jokes, gynecological jokes and the like, but Tea
Leoni, the star, is a winning one, so maybe she'll elevate the humor. Wednesdays
at 9:30, starting Wed.

"CHARLIE GRACE" -- It has been a while since television tried the old-fashioned
private-eye series. This one has most of the conventions: an ex-cop, down on his
luck, quick with a quip, lightly armed but heavy with morals. It also has Mark
Harmon ("St. Elsewhere"). Thursdays at 8, starting Thur.

"THE MONROES" -- Think politics, think dynasties, think sex and skulduggery.
Think Kennedys? That's the point, predictable but not pedestrian, with a good
cast headed by William Devane. Thursdays at 9, starting Thur.

"MAYBE THIS TIME" -- The singer-turned actress Marie Osmond is a divorcee, but
don't worry; she's still as sweet as powdered doughnuts. She has forsworn men,
but her mother, played by Betty White, and her 10-year-old daughter will keep
her in dates. Saturdays at 8:30, starting Sat.; preview Fri. at 9:30.

"MURDER ONE" -- The year's most gripping new drama, with the best new concept: a
single murder case, played out over an entire season. At the center is a
brilliant defense attorney played by the arresting Daniel Benzali. You probably
have to be hooked to follow one story for a full season, but it's hard not to be
hooked by this one, which is the latest from Steven Bochco ("Hill Street Blues,"
"St. Elsewhere"). Thursdays at 10, starting Oct. 12; preview, Sept. 19.

"SOMEWHERE IN AMERICA" -- ABC continues to try its luck with stand-up comics,
this time turning to Jeff Foxworthy, who has milked redneck humor in comedy
albums and books and tries to do the same in this show about a Southern dad and
his family. Saturdays at 8, starting Sat.

"HUDSON STREET" -- Tony Danza, one of the most enduring sitcom stars, returns in
a family comedy with an unusual edge. He's a divorced cop from Hoboken who has a
10-year-old son and is in a fractious relationship with a feminist crime
reporter. She's played by Lori Loughlin, late of "Full House." An odd mix of
romantic, family and political comedy. Tuesdays at 8:30 P.M., starting Sept. 19.


CBS

"BLESS THIS HOUSE" -- In television they call this a "hard" comedy; that means:
skip the sophistication and lay on the Brooklyn accent. But in a season of
fern-bar dating shows, this one stands out. In an overt homage to "The
Honeymooners," Andrew Clay (no Dice) is the loving blue-collar husband with the
gruff exterior. Cathy Moriarty is his tough-talking spouse. Wednesdays at 8,
starting Wed.

"CENTRAL PARK WEST" -- The symbol of CBS's shift toward the viewers Fox appeals
to: a serial drama from the creator of "Melrose Place." It's populated by the
usual soap suspects -- good girl, bad girl, hunks by the handful -- with the
publishing world as the background. But the New York setting adds style, and the
show is smartly filmed and well cast with beautiful people (Mariel Hemingway for
one). Wednesdays at 9, starting Wed.

"COURTHOUSE" -- The seamy underside of the life of judges. Judges? Apparently
the city courthouse is rife with sex and corruption, and not just when it comes
to the cases. Patricia Wettig, late of "Thirtysomething," is the presiding
judge. Robin Givens is a public defender. Wednesdays at 10, starting Wed.

"AlMOST PERFECT" -- This series, one on a seemingly endless list of relationship
comedies, may turn out to be the best of them, thanks to a star turn from Nancy
Travis ("Married to the Mob," "The Vanishing") as the harried executive producer
of a television cop show who starts a romance with a harried prosecutor (Kevin
Kilner). Sundays at 8:30, starting Sept. 17.

"CAN'T HURRY LOVE" -- Friends and neighbors and dating and New York, the comic
theme of the season, centering this time on Nancy McKeon, who interacts with the
usual assortment of oddball and romantically challenged friends. Sounds a lot
like a lot of other shows, but you never know. Mondays at 8:30, starting Sept.
18.

"IF NOT FOR YOU" -- They're engaged to other people when they meet cute at a
Chinese restaurant. It's love, but is it a series? Elizabeth McGovern and Hank
Azaria are the couple.  Mondays at 9:30, starting Sept. 18.

"JOHN GRISHAM'S THE CLIENT" -- John Grisham says this is his only novel that can
be turned into a television series. JoBeth Williams takes on the role of Reggie
Love, lawyer for troubled children, who battles the district attorney Roy
Foltrigg (John Heard) when she isn't engaging him in sexual innuendo. Tuesdays
at 8, starting Sept. 19.

"AMERICAN GOTHIC" -- One of the few truly original new series, this one has as
its star the darkest of villains, a murderous sheriff played by Gary Cole
("Midnight Caller") who has demonic control of a tiny South Carolina town. The
mood is heavy with foreboding. Atmospheric, gripping, chilling -- the furthest
thing from plain-vanilla television drama. Fridays at 10, starting Sept. 22.

"BONNIE" -- A project involving a sure-fire comedy star, Bonnie Hunt, and the
former head writer for David Letterman, Rob Burnett. She plays a feature
reporter for a Chicago television station, and at least some of every episode is
supposed to be improvised. Fridays at 8:30, starting Sept. 22.

"DWEEBS" -- If all those young model types on "Friends" were nerds, this would
be their story. Peter Scolari ("Newhart") stars as the leader of a group of
Internet devotees looking for love in all the wrong chat rooms. Funnier than it
probably ought to be, and sweeter, too. Fridays at 8, starting Sept. 22.

"NEW YORK NEWS" -- More media drama. Behind the scenes at a New York tabloid.
Mary Tyler Moore is the paper's matriarch, and the place roils with ink-stained
action. Does Lou Grant know that Mary has come to this? Thursdays at 9, starting
Sept. 28.

NBC

"BROTHERLY LOVE" -- In the year of the young adult comedy, this may turn out to
be the best new family sitcom in years. Three Lawrence brothers -- Joey, Matthew
and Andy -- play stepbrothers. Joey returns to Philadelphia to run his late
father's auto-repair business with his stepmother and her two sons. The brothers
are all funny, and 8-year-old Andy is a knockout performer. Sundays at 7,
starting Sept. 24; preview, Sat.

"MINOR ADJUSTMENTS" -- More standard family stuff, with Rondell White, a
stand-up comic, playing a famous child psychologist who finds being a parent
more challenging. Sundays at 7:30, starting Sept. 24; preview, Sat. at 8:30.

"PURSUIT OF HAPPINESS" -- An odd comedy about a Chicago lawyer and his work and
family tribulations: offbeat law partner, mouthy secretary, out-of-work wife,
mentally fading grandmother and lecherous brother-in-law. Tuesdays at 9:30,
starting Sept. 19.

"THE SINGLE GUY" -- The premise of "Friends" (except this time all the
characters are married except one, played by Jonathan Silverman) and the tone of
"Seinfield." The question is, is it too much like "Seinfield"? Thursdays at
8:30, starting Sept. 21.

"CAROLINE IN THE CITY" -- This show has gotten what may be the best time period
in television history (between "Seinfeld" and "E.R."). It's well cast, with Lea
Thompson (of the "Back to the Future" movies) as the cartoonist of the title and
Malcolm Gets as her assistant. The much-ballyhooed pilot was smartly written.
Will it be an instant hit? Maybe. Thursdays at 9:30, starting Sept. 21.

"JAG" -- The adventures of a Navy lawyer who also flies jets (played by David
Lames Elliott). A contrived concept but spectacularly well produced, with
movielike hardware and effects. Saturdays at 8, starting Sept. 23.

"THE HOME COURT" -- A work and family comedy, about a family-court judge who has
lots of problems with the young ones at home. The question is, is a fine actress
like Pamela Reed too theatrical for a sitcom? Saturdays at 9:30, starting Sept.
30.

Fox

"THE CREW" -- A flight from hell. Four airline attendants (two female, two male)
insult passengers, walk around in their underwear and talk about sex. Make sure
your chair backs are in the upright position. Thursdays at 8:30.

"THE PRESTON EPISODES" -- A showcase for the very funny David Alan Grier, who
plays a staid English professor who sets out to change his life by becoming a
journalist (only in television is this considered a dream job). Of course he
winds up working for a sleazy tabloid. Saturdays at 8:30.

"NED AND STACEY" -- The premise here: A pair of people who can't stand each
other get married. He needs a wife to please the boss; she needs a better
apartment. Thomas Haden Church and Deborah Messing star as the not-very-likable
characters. Mondays at 9:30, starting tomorrow.

"PARTNERS" -- This may turn out to be Fox's best new comedy, though it's far
from perfect. Two friends (Jon Cryer and Tate Donovan) who run their own
architecture firm cope with the decision of one of them to get married. Maria
Pitillo is a find as the girlfriend. Mondays at 9, starting tomorrow.

"STRANGE LUCK" -- A provocative premise, centering on a photojournalist who
survives a plane crash and finds luck, both good and bad, following him
everywhere. D. B. Sweeney ("Eight Men Out") is the star. Fridays at 8, starting
Fri.

"SPACE" -- The latest sci-fi saga, with young (what else? it's Fox) cadets
battling alien foes on the fringes of the universe. Great effects are promised.
Sundays at 7, starting Sept. 24.

"MISERY LOVES COMPANY" -- In this show, a bunch of unhappily divorced guys
complain about their ex-wives. The original pilot was so off-putting that it
went back for a complete overhaul, but it still may draw more groans than
laughs. Sundays at 9:30, starting Oct. 1.

"TOO SOMETHING" -- The team from the film "My Life's in Turnaround" tries to
take their act to television: Eric Schaeffer is a would-be writer looking for
inspiration; Donal Lardner Ward is in night school, with big dreams. They're
working in the mail room of an investment bank. Sundays at 8:30, starting Oct.
1.

"MAD TV" -- A sketch-comedy show designed to do battle with the shaky king of
the hill, "Saturday Night Live," with evocations of Mad magazine, including the
classic cartoon "Spy vs. Spy" brought to animated life. Saturdays at 11,
starting Oct. 14.

UPN

"NOWHERE MAN" -- Quite a premise. A photographer (Bruce Greenwood) goes to the
men's room in a restaurant, and when he returns his life has been wiped out. His
wife doesn't recognize him; she has remarried. It all has something to do with
one of his photographs. Mondays at 9.

"DEADLY GAMES" -- A video-game inventor battles villains -- led by Christopher
Lloyd -- who have come to life in one of those ever-popular "freak lab
accidents." Tuesdays at 8.

"LIVE SHOT" -- "E.R." in the newsroom of a local television station. Surely that
can be frenzied, but staffers rarely have to strap on electronic paddles and zap
people back to life. The cast includes David Birney, Cheryl Pollak and Sam
Anderson. Tuesdays at 9.

WB

"CLEGHORNE" -- Ellen Cleghorne, fresh from that red-hot "Saturday Night Live,"
gets her own vehicle as a single mother trying to make it on her own. You
probably know the rest. Sundays at 9:30, starting tonight.

"FIRST TIME OUT" -- They're young, they're bright-eyed, and they think they can
make it in -- Los Angeles? A dozen other shows also liked this concept. Sundays
at 9, starting tonight.

"KIRK" -- Warner Brothers believes Kirk Cameron can still be a star playing a
grown-up. He has three siblings to take care of while he tries to make it as an
artist in New York. Plausible, right? Sundays at 8, starting tonight.

"PINKY AND THE BRAIN" -- A cartoon spinoff of characters from "Animaniacs," this
features two lab mice who want to rule the earth. Who doesn't? Sundays at 7,
starting tonight.

"SIMON" -- A young, cockeyed optimist, working for a cable channel that shows
old television series, thinks he can make it in New York. His cynical brother
tries to puncture his balloon. Sundays at 8:30, starting tonight.

MINI-SERIES

"STREETS OF LAREDO" -- This is Larry McMurtry's adaptation of his sequel to
"Lonesome Dove," about the further adventures of Woodrow Call, now a bounty
hunter and played by James Garner. The cast also includes Sissy Spacek, Sam
Shepard and Wes Studi. CBS in November.

"DEAD MAN'S WALK" -- This prequel to "Lonesome Dove," chronicling the early
adventures of Gus McCrae and Woodrow Call, was filmed as a mini-series even
before publication of the novel. No cast yet announced. ABC in May.

"GULLIVER'S TRAVELS" -- An ambitious rendering of Swift's classic novel about a
British doctor shipwrecked among the Lilliputians and Brobdingnagians. The
oddest casting is the decidedly un-British Ted Danson in the starring role.
Special effects from Jim Henson Productions. NBC in the spring.

"RODGERS AND HAMMERSTEIN'S CINDERELLA" -- A remake of a previous musical
television special (which starred the young Lesley Ann Warren) tailored to the
talents of Whitney Houston. CBS in the spring.

PBS

"ROCK-AND-ROLL" -- A 10-hour documentary about the music form that has now been
shaking the foundations for more than 40 years. It will include interviews with
big-name performers, archival film of performances and the layering of cultural
significance that PBS provides. Five consecutive nights at 9 P.M., beginning
Sept. 24.

"THE BUCCANEERS" -- To celebrate the 25th anniversary of "Masterpiece Theater" a
three-part adaptation of the unfinished Edith Wharton novel about young, rich
American debutantes invading staid British society in the 1870's. Starting Oct.
8 at 9 P.M.

"MARSALIS ON MUSIC" -- A truly original series, and one likely to show up only
on public television. Wynton Marsalis brings his trumpet and his wit to lessons
for young people in the fundamentals of music construction. Fascinating and
entertaining. Four hours on Mondays, starting Oct. 9 at 8 P.M.

"HOOP DREAMS" -- The first showing on television of the extraordinary 1994
documentary about the troubled fortunes of two high school basketball players.
It shook up the Academy Awards when it was not nominated for an Oscar. Nov. 15
at 8.

"AMERICAN MASTERS" -- The 10th-anniversary season of the series about creative
Americans starts with a look at one of the most original minds ever to work in
television, Rod Serling of "The Twilight Zone." Nov. 29 at 9.

"FAT MAN IN FRANCE" -- Aside from having one of the great titles, this is a very
funny series in which a host named Tom Vernon explores the French countryside on
a bicycle. Starting Dec. 21 at 8.

TV MOVIES

"A STREETCAR NAMED DESIRE" -- In a demonstration of how far television has come
(or where movies used to be), this is the first time the entire Tennessee
Williams play will be put on film. The Marlon Brando-Vivien Leigh version was
heavily censored. Alec Baldwin and Jessica Lange star as Stanley and Blanche,
with Diane Lane and John Goodman as Stella and Mitch. CBS on Oct. 29.

"BYE BYE BIRDIE" -- More Broadway. The classic musical redone for television
with a cast that includes Vanessa Williams, Jason Alexander, Tyne Daly and
Chynna Phillips. ABC in November.

"ANNIE II" -- Anne and Warbucks go to London. A curious sequel: no singing. ABC
in November.

"THE CANTERVILLE GHOST" -- Updating the Oscar Wilde tale involves casting
Patrick Stewart as the professor who rents an English castle, which turns out to
have a very civilized ghost. ABC in December.

"THE WEST SIDE WALTZ" -- More Broadway on CBS, with Ernest Thompson adapting his
play about women who share an unusual friendship. The starry cast includes
Shirley MacLaine, Liza Minnelli, Jennifer Grey and Kathy Bates. CBS in late
1995.

"THE SUNSHINE BOYS" -- Neil Simon has updated his script but the real reason for
this remake is the casting: Woody Allen and Peter Falk play the aging comedy
team turned enemies. The winsome Sarah Jessica Parker is Mr. Falk's niece. CBS
in early 1996.

"TO SIR WITH LOVE, '95" -- How do you update this 1960's film about tough
youngsters in Britain and their determined teacher? Have Sidney Poitier reprise
the role of Mack Thackeray, moving to the United States, where he finds a new
job dealing with tough youngsters. CBS in early 1996.

"THE SEARCH FOR JACK O'GRADY" -- Barbra Streisand returns to television movies,
as a producer, with this story about a pilot who is declared missing in action
in Vietnam and how his disappearance affects the relationship between his wife
and his daughter. NBC in the spring.

CABLE

"THE MAN IN THE ATTIC" -- A true-story movie about a young man's 20-year affair
with an older woman, set at the turn of the century. It stars Neil Patrick
Harris (late of "Doogie Howser, M.D.") and Anne Archer. Showtime, tonight at
10:15 P.M.

"VOYAGES" -- A series that examines the ways scientific knowledge is used in
various aspects of everyday life. from solving crime to operating computers.
A&E, Sundays at 10, starting Oct. 1.

"PLANET OF LIFE" -- A seven-part series examining plant and animal evolution
since the first signs of life emerged nearly four billion years ago. Discovery
Channel, beginning Oct. 2 at 9 P.M.

"THE HEIDI CHRONICLES" -- An adaptation of Wendy Wasserstein's Pulitzer
Prize-winning play about the life and loves of a very contemporary young woman.
Starring Jamie Lee Curtis. TNT, Oct. 15 at 8 P.M.

"P. T. BARNUM: AMERICA'S GREATEST SHOWMAN" -- A three-part mini-series in the
Ken Burns style, meaning vintage photographs, period music and celebrity voices.
Karl Malden is Barnum; Robby Benson is Tom Thumb, with Cliff Robertson
narrating. Discovery Channel, beginning Oct. 15 at 8 P.M..

"LITTLE LULU" -- Monthly episodes of the comic book character in the red dress,
brought to life by Tracey Ullman. HBO, starting Oct. 22 at 7:30 P.M.

"THE LINCOLN ASSASSINATION" -- An in-depth look at one of the enduring mysteries
of American history, presented by both the History Channel and A&E on Nov. 12 at
8 P.M.

"KISSINGER AND NIXON" -- One crucial year of the Nixon Presidency, from March
1972 to March 1973, as seen dramatically through a relationship that was played
out behind the door of the Oval Office. With Beau Bridges as Richard Nixon and
Ron Silver as Henry Kissinger. TNT, December.

"PRIDE AND PREJUDICE" -- A new production of the Jane Austen classic, produced
with the BBC, starring Colin Firth, Jennifer Ehle, Alison Steadman and Julia
Sawalha. A&E, Jan. 14 at 9 P.M.

LOAD-DATE: September 10, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: September 10, 1995, Sunday

 CORRECTION:

An article on page 49 of the Arts and Leisure section today about "Murder One,"
an ABC television series that is to have its premiere on Sept. 19, and a listing
on page 67, attributed a past series incorrectly to the producer Steven Bochco.
"St. Elsewhere" was created by Bruce Paltrow.

GRAPHIC: Photos: Tate Donovan, left, Maria Pitillo and Jon Cryer are in Fox's
"Partners," a new comedy on Monday nights at 9, starting tomorrow. (John
Ragel/Fox); Lucas Black is in CBS's "American Gothic," a dark new drama that
starts Sept. 22. (Monty Brinton/CBS)

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              250 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 10, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

CONNECTICUT GUIDE

BYLINE: By ELEANOR CHARLES

SECTION: Section 13CN; Page 14; Column 5; Connecticut Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1224 words



TIPTOP CYCLISTS

Serious cyclists will be participating in 50- or 100-mile tours of eastern
Connecticut next Sunday morning, starting at the Groton Cyclery, 1360 Route 184
in Groton.

Organized by the Pequot Cyclists, the tours do not provide assistance to
participants, so riders and bikes should be in tiptop condition. Helmets are a
must, as are waivers, which for riders under the age of 18 must be signed by a
parent or guardian. Riders under 16 must be accompanied by an adult.

The route will be marked by bright green arrows on the pavement and it will wind
through farmland, woods, Colonial villages and old mill towns. Light
refreshments will be provided at the starting point and mid-point.

Registration begins at 6:30 A.M., starting time for the 100-miler is 7 A.M. and
the fee is $10 at the site or $8 in advance by calling 443-8973. Starting time
for the 50-miler is 7:30 A.M. and the fee is $7 on the day, $6 in advance.

CATHOLICS AND JEWS

"The Catechism and Catholic-Jewish Relations" is the theme of a conference at
Sacred Heart University tomorrow from 1 to 4 P.M. in the Schine Auditorium.

Open free of charge to the general public as well as members of the various
religious communities, it will focus on the Catholic Church's new catechism and
the changes within it that are the first to be made since the Council of Trent
400 years ago. The new catechism, designed to increase understanding between the
two religions and eliminate some of the friction that has prevailed for
centuries, was approved by Pope John Paul in 1992. It is meant to be used as a
tool for teaching Catholic-Jewish relations in a spirit of respect and
cooperation.

Speakers include the Most Rev. Edward M. Egan, J.C.D., Bishop of Bridgeport;
Rabbi Jack Bemporad, director of the Center for Christian-Jewish Understanding
at the university; Rabbi Jonathan Housman of Congregation Sinai in West Haven;
and Anthony J. Cernera, Ph.D., president of Sacred Heart University.

Reservations should be made by calling 365-7592. The university is at 5151 Park
Avenue in Fairfield.

ATHENEUM CRAFTS

The Wadsworth Atheneum will hold its second annual crafts show on Saturday and
Sunday at the University of Hartford Sports Center, 200 Bloomfield Avenue in
West Hartford. A gala preview party, at $50 to $100 per ticket, is scheduled on
Friday from 6 to 10 P.M. There will be music, a cocktail buffet and awards for
Best of Show, and guests may purchase items in advance of the show. Reservations
may be made by calling 677-4127.

Unique this year are ivory-like miniatures carved by William Cudnohusky out of
Tagua nuts from South America, and jewelry by Dell Fox, made by combining
granulated high-karat gold with precious and semi-precious stones. Andrew Peklo
3d, the architect and joiner, will exhibit furniture; Lucille Scelfo marbleized
silk, and Irene Reed whimsical creations exemplified by a crocheted cotton
rooster chair.

Admission on Saturday, from 10 A.M. to 6 P.M., and Sunday, 10 to 5, is $4. Call
523-2666 for more information.

ANOTHER POCAHONTAS

In addition to the Disney animated film, there is a new, unrelated, live musical
titled "Pocahontas," produced by Premier Productions. It will be performed on
Saturday and Sunday at 2:30 P.M. at the Klein Memorial Auditorium in Bridgeport.

Ted Simons adapted the script from the familiar legend and put a score together
from authentic Indian music and his own original compositions. Randy Letzler was
the director and Jane Galt designed the sets.

After each performance there will be an opportunity for children in the audience
to mingle with the cast for photographs and autographs.

Tickets are $9.50 at the door, or $7.50 in advance by calling 333-5000. The
theater is at 910 Fairfield Avenue.

EXOTIC BIRDS

More than 50 varieties of exotic poultry will be for sale today at French Farm,
a National Register of Historic Places property in Greenwich where the birds are
raised. A Toulouse goose, a crested Swedish duck, a golden pheasant, quail,
white and pied peafowl, tick-eating Guinea fowl and many others are among
available species.

The sale is for the benefit of the Greenwich Historical Society and the
Greenwich Garden Conservancy and it will be in progress from 10 A.M. to 4 P.M.
at 516 Lake Avenue.

The unusual farm also has a miniature pig, a black lamb and other farm animals
as pets, and a collection of gardens cultivated for bark, fragrance, foliage,
fall bloom, ornamental characteristics and other special attributes -- all
recorded on computer with their botanical names.

Fresh laid eggs are as various as the fowl that lay them -- pastel
blue-green-pink combinations of the Araucana chickens, speckled turkey eggs,
duck eggs, and tiny bantam eggs. But David Wierdsma, owner of the farm, never
parts with the peacock eggs. "They are too rare," he says.

Admission to the poultry exhibition and garden tour is $4, free to children
under 6.

To reach the farm, take the Lake Avenue exit from the Merritt Parkway and drive
south to the farm. More information is available by calling 869-8786.

GRIM TO GRAND

The Old New-Gate Prison and Copper Mine in East Granby, where felons were forced
to work in the mines during the day and shackled inside the prison at night, is
the first stop on a Fairfield Historical Society outing to North Central
Connecticut on Friday.

Segueing from grim to grand, the next stop will be the Hatheway House in
Suffield, an 18th-century residence with French wallpapers, gilded mirrors,
Oriental rugs and fine furnishings. However, the original wing has been retained
in its Spartan simplicity, with whitewashed walls, bare floors and a minimum of
rudimentary furniture.

The final destination is the New England Air Museum in Windsor Locks, where more
than 70 aircraft on display take viewers through the history of commercial and
military aviation. Among the more unique craft are a 1911 Bleriot, the Marcoux
Bromberg piloted by Clark Gable in the film "Test Pilot," and an F4 Phantom from
the Vietnam war.

The bus will leave the society's parking lot at 636 Old Post Road at 8 A.M. and
return around 6:30 P.M. The fee, including lunch at the Old Oak Tavern in the
Granby area, is $51.50. Call 259-1598 for reservations or more information.

CASSAVETES FILMS

A series of films that John Cassavetes directed, acted in, or both, will be
shown at the Stratford Library beginning Monday through Friday at noon. With his
wife, Gena Rowlands, Cassavetes was a favorite of critics and show business
professionals for his bold choices of subject matter and consummate acting
skills.

"Shadows" (1960), his first directorial effort opens the series tomorrow,
followed on Tuesday by "Faces," produced in 1968 with Cassavetes and Ms.
Rowlands in the leading roles.

"A Child is Waiting" (1963), with Burt Lancaster, Judy Garland, Ms. Rowlands and
Steven Hill is the Thursday feature, and "A Woman Under the Influence," a 1974
film in which Ms. Rowlands portrayed a mentally unstable wife and Peter Falk the
bewildered husband, will be screened on Thursday.

Ms. Rowlands, Ben Gazzara, Joan Blondell and Zohra Lampert are featured in the
1977 film "Opening Night," the final offering on Friday. The library address is
2203 Main Street and admission is free.   ELEANOR CHARLES

LOAD-DATE: September 10, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Wooden boxes by Douglas Jones and Kim Kulow-Jones of Brooklyn,
Conn., will be part of the second annual Wadsworth Atheneum craft show at the
University of Hartford.

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              251 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 10, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

SCHOOLS;
A Teaching Experiment From the 1970's May Hold Lessons for the Future

BYLINE: By ABBY GOODNOUGH

SECTION: Section 13NJ;   Page 7;   Column 1;   New Jersey Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 991 words

DATELINE: LEONIA


In the 1970's, while other teen-agers studied algebra and earth science, Lisa
Lehman took classes in Russian literature and gourmet cooking. While they
hunched over wooden desks in standard classrooms, she sat cross-legged on her
teacher's living-room floor. And while their instructors were certified by the
state, most of hers were volunteers: college professors, artists, ministers and
others who lacked education degrees but offered the knowledge drawn from their
own careers.

Now Lisa Lehman Trager, she was among 150 teen-agers who attended the Leonia
Alternative High School, a state-financed program for students who were unhappy
at the local high school. Last weekend, alumni met for the first time since
1976, when the school closed after losing a lawsuit filed by the local teachers'
union, which had protested its use of uncertified instructors.

The reunion gave graduates like Ms. Lehman Trager, who now lives in Hillsdale, a
chance to celebrate an educational experiment that changed their lives. But the
story of their school and its downfall has a broader significance today as New
Jersey and other states examine aspects of alternative education, like using
nontraditional teachers and granting schools more autonomy, in their efforts to
improve public education.

Looking back, the Leonia alumni said their school's relaxed structure and wide
range of course offerings made their education worthwhile and unique.

"This was one of the most intense and indelible experiences of my life," said
Derick Schilling, who graduated in 1975. "It felt like we were in this new world
that we had a part in creating."

The Leonia Board of Education started the alternative school in 1972, when the
Vietnam War was still raging and thousands of American teen-agers were
questioning the status quo. For disenchanted students, the program was a chance
to defy the norm and experiment with the unknown.

"There was a feeling that America was badly broken and radical action was needed
to fix things," said Robert Orloff, another 1975 graduate. "We got to be in
charge of our own destinies, making our school up as we went along."

The students were instrumental from the start, painting the building, designing
courses and even interviewing potential teachers. Four state-certified teachers
supervised the program and taught the English, history, math and science classes
that fulfilled graduation requirements. But alumni said the elective courses
taught by volunteers, ranging from "Oriental Mysticism" to "The Art and Science
of Kite-Building," were the most memorable.

Although the teachers' union argued that people who had not taken education
courses should not teach without supervision, volunteers who attended the
reunion said the life experience they brought to the classroom made students
more excited about learning.

"The teachers were indignant because we were jeopardizing their positions," said
Stanley M. Crain, a professor at Albert Einstein Medical College who taught
neurology at the alternative school. "But in my mind, people who had backgrounds
that went far beyond what high school teachers could offer should have been
welcomed."

Lynn Maher, a spokeswoman for the New Jersey Education Association, says the
union's position is basically unchanged: If an alternative school like Leonia's
opened today, the union would still oppose it because students cannot learn
effectively without trained, certified instructors. Although the union supports
the idea of parents and other volunteers helping with activities like sports and
music, its members still believe that academic subjects must be taught by
state-certified teachers.

"I'm not trying to take anything away from community resource people because
they bring a tremendous asset to the field," Ms. Maher said. "But you also must
have the supervision of certified professionals."

Mary Anne Raiwid, a professor at the Hofstra University School of Education who
specializes in alternative education, said that in the 1970's, when alternative
schools were first catching on, opposition from teachers' unions was actually
rare. "They were a way to get out of the classrooms the kids that teachers
didn't want," she said.

But now, as alternative education gains popularity around the country, teachers
are more likely to feel threatened, she said. Alternative schools have been so
successful in cities like New York that they have become models for national
reform. And one of their most important tenets, she said, is freeing individual
schools from centralized control. "This is terribly difficult for unions to
accommodate," she said.

In New Jersey, it may be years before teachers' unions have to worry about
alternative schools. Professor Raiwid says that although dozens of alternative
schools exist in New York and Philadelphia, the concept has not yet caught on in
the suburbs. In New Jersey, alternative education usually means schools for
troubled teen-agers who are disruptive and at risk of dropping out.

"When we use the labeling 'alternative school,' the reference is to students who
are at risk of failing," said Robin Bryant of the State Department of Education.

If the state does not yet welcome alternative schools like Leonia's, it is at
least considering them. Nineteen states have passed legislation approving
charter schools, and New Jersey is considering similar proposals.

But many Leonia graduates warned that the education they received is not
appropriate for everyone. Since nobody took attendance and the schedule was not
rigid, students had to be extremely self-disciplined. For those who excelled in
traditional classrooms, the transition might have proven difficult. But for
motivated teen-agers who did not fit in, the alternative school was a godsend.

"We were criticized for being separatists, but we couldn't have survived without
the separation," Ms. Lehman Trager said. "Without it, we would have suffocated."


LOAD-DATE: September 10, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Alumni and volunteers catching up at the Leonia Alternative High
School's first reunion since it closed in 1976. (Dith Pran/The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              252 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 10, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THE NATION;
Bill, Bob, Newt: Watch Cal

BYLINE: By R. W. APPLE Jr.

SECTION: Section 4;   Page 6;   Column 1;   Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 868 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


AS has been its habit recently, Washington supplied a villain to the nation last
week, in Bob Packwood of Oregon. But Washington was fresh out of heroes. It has
been for some years now.

So, stolid, working-class Baltimore, just an hour's drive up the road, supplied
one, a baseball player named Cal Ripken Jr. who embodies many of the virtues
that voters seek in vain in their politicians and public officials.

Intelligent, steadfast and self-effacing, as honest as Abe, the unashamed
examplar of the simple, unadorned values of the American Sunday School, Ripken
last week broke the 56-year-old record of another like him, Lou Gehrig, the
Pride of the Yankees, for the most consecutive big-league games played.

The fireworks went off and the band music blared -- a fanfare for a most
uncommon common man.

Which is precisely what our Presidents often try to be. Thus, Lincoln and the
log cabin, Jackson the backwoodsman, Truman the plain-spoken haberdasher and
even Bill Clinton, the boy from Hope who made it to Oxford. Aw, shucks.

A youngster in the seats below me at Camden Yards, Baltimore's handsome new
ballpark, held up a home-made sign that said it all. "C for class," it said, "A
for ability, L for longevity."

And as the numbers 2,131 unfurled on the wall of the old B&O warehouse that
stands beyond the right-field fence, the crowd went bonkers, shouting for 22
minutes, 15 seconds, by official reckoning -- the most spontaneous, unbridled
public show of affection I can remember since the Democratic convention in
Atlantic City in 1964, when Robert F. Kennedy, whose brother John had been dead
less than a year, came out to make a speech.

We were a different country then, more unified, more inclined to cheer. Since
then, we have had the worst of Vietnam, and the assassinations of RFK and Martin
Luther King Jr., and Watergate and everything-else-gate.

With the signal exception of Ronald Reagan, people have felt let down by the
pols.

By baseball, too. For most fans' taste, the players make too much money, brag
too much, hot-dog it too much. Ripken is different. As the people at the game
kept saying to each other, he is a throwback to a less complicated era.

He is a hero in an age of celebrity, the real thing in an age of phonies, a guy
who runs out pop flies and dives after low liners as aggressively now as he did
when he was 18. Damn the torpedoes; he decided long ago that if he got hurt, he
would break his streak rather than maintain it with a token appearance.

When Ripken hit a home run in game number 2,131 (he had also homered in games
2,129 and 2,130), it seemed almost too pat. It was a relief when he hit a
hump-back liner to the second baseman with the bases loaded later on.

THE streak is remarkable for a number of reasons. The first is perhaps the least
commented upon: you have to be, and stay, a good enough player to discourage
your manager, especially in the early days, from benching you when you're in a
slump or holding you out of the second game of a double-header. It's not good
enough just to show up at the ball park, ready to play.

Ripken managed that for 13 years. He did it because he is much more than a
plugger; he is one of the best shortstops in major-league history, an all-star
13 times. He has hit more home runs as a shortstop (317) than any shortstop in
history, and in 1990, he set all-time major-league records for the highest
fielding percentage and fewest errors by a shortstop (.996, with only 3 errors
in the season).

But you need a strong work ethic, too, and Ripken got that from his father, a
baseball man through and through who, as his son said, "not only taught me the
fundamentals of the game of baseball but how to play the game right."

That includes playing hurt and playing tired and playing with dignity. He showed
this as early as 1981, when, still in the minor leagues, he played in all 33
innings of the longest game in professional baseball history.

And you have to keep your focus. During the last few weeks of the streak, Ripken
was subject to continuous, overwhelming distraction. Yet he never let his head
be turned or his eye wander. He ought to give lessons to Bill Clinton, he of the
famously short attention span.

Ripken is no goody-goody. He argues with umpires, he goofs around in the
clubhouse. But there is a rare grace about the man. On several occasions in the
last two months, he stayed on the field into the small hours of the morning,
patiently signing autographs. He answered the same questions from reporters
hundreds of times, always willingly. He chose to have his children throw out the
first balls on Wednesday night, not the President, the Vice President, the
governor, the mayor or even Joe DiMaggio, who were all there.

He saw to it that extra seats were built on the field and sold for $5,000 each,
with the receipts going for research on Lou Gehrig's Disease. And he not only
took a lap of honor around the ballpark when his teammates insisted, he took
time to greet the ball girl and the clubhouse boy, to hug several of the
visiting California Angels, and to high-five kids hanging over the wall.

Perfect pitch, they call that in politics. Not many have it.


LOAD-DATE: September 10, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Cal Ripken Jr. at his big moment, after breaking Lou Gehrig's
record for consecutive games played. (Barton Silverman/The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              253 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 10, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THE NATION;
It's Not a Monumental Time in America. Is It?

BYLINE: By KAREN W. ARENSON

SECTION: Section 4;   Page 4;   Column 1;   Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1209 words


THE late 19th century -- America's gilded age -- was a period of immense poverty
and corruption, but also a time when tycoons channeled fortunes into great
public institutions like the Metropolitan Museum, Carnegie Hall, the New York
Botanical Garden, the New York Public Library and the Metropolitan Opera.

"It was a Protean time, a period of great vitality," said David McCullough,
author of "The Great Bridge" (Simon & Schuster 1972), about the building of the
Brooklyn Bridge, another great public monument of that period. "It was a great
American story. We should sing hymns."

But as America celebrates the 100th anniversaries of these and other American
monuments, a nagging question arises: Where are the majestic works of the late
20th century?

Centuries of Tourists

Every era has its monuments, major works that will continue to be celebrated
through the ages, lasting symbols of bygone cultures. Tourists still flock to
the pyramids, the Parthenon, the aqueducts of Rome -- even the Eiffel Tower and
the Arc de Triomphe.

But the great, lasting monuments of the current age are harder to come by. It
has seen nothing like the institution-building of a century ago, said Neil
Harris, a professor of history at the University of Chicago and author of
"Cultural Excursions" (University of Chicago Press 1990). "Once you establish
some of these basic institutions, you're not going to keep recreating them," he
said.

Yet there has certainly been no dearth of construction. There are, for example,
many new museums -- even significant museums like the J. Paul Getty Museum in
Malibu, Calif., and the United States Holocaust Museum in Washington. In fact,
three-quarters of all museums built in America were built after 1950, and many
of them have drawn acclaim, although most of the biggest were founded many
decades ago.

Likewise, there are new libraries and gardens and concert halls, as well as
spectacles of the modern age like Disneyland or and the United Airlines terminal
at O'Hare Airport. Some of them may even have the staying power of the
Metropolitan Museum or the New York Public Library.

Nor is there a dearth either of philanthropic dollars or of civic spirit. Even
though the modern income tax, imposed in 1913, and the estate tax, imposed in
1916, put a brake on the accumulation of personal wealth, great fortunes are
still being made by the likes of Bill Gates, George Soros and Warren Buffett.
And, encouraged in part by tax deductions for charity, many of the wealthy still
think philanthropically.

They do think differently, though. The magnates of yesteryear thought in terms
of building and endowing new institutions; John D. Rockefeller, for example,
established the University of Chicago and Rockefeller University. But many of
today's capitalists think in terms of solving contemporary problems, like crime
or poverty. Walter Annenberg is pouring half a billion dollars into troubled
inner-city school systems.

Philanthropy today often comes in smaller, more modest bites. "I would think
there would be a natural impulse to leave a monument or a marker in this century
-- something that would really make a difference," said Waldemar A. Nielsen, a
consultant on foundations and philanthropy. "But that impulse doesn't seem to
exist. There seems to be a disjuncture between the magnitude of the wealth and
the pettiness of the vision."

A century ago, there was a different philosophy. "People did things for the good
of the world, for mankind, for the soul," said Edward Skloot, executive director
of the Surdna Foundation in New York. "They had a sense of things that would
last forever, that you could do things for the long term. Today, people don't
think anything will last more than a month and a half."

This is also an era when the answers of yesterday appear to many as inadequate.

"Can you go down a list of societal problems and say that there are
institutional solutions to such needs?" Professor Harris asked. "Is there an
institutional answer to the collapse of family life? Do you hear anyone talking
about endowing a prison? The annual dinners would not have the same panache."

If anything, bigness today is often taken as a sign of ineptitude. Big
Government is being slashed. And many Americans are convinced that the answers
of yesterday were wrong.

"We live in an age of of debunking, and that makes it a tough time for
monuments," said Richard Rhodes, author of the newly published "Dark Sun: The
Making of the Hydrogen Bomb" (Simon & Schuster).

He suggests, for example, that 100 years ago, the Biosphere in Arizona would
have been celebrated as a great human achievement. Instead, he said, "it's being
battered because someone added extra oxygen."

Tunnel Vision

Another candidate for history, he suggests, is the tunnel under the English
Channel linking Britain and France. "It is an extraordinary piece of
engineering, a work that rivals the Panama Canal," he said. "And what does it
get but grief?"

Finally, he said, there has been a proliferation of monuments to commemorate
wars. One that has attracted the most attention -- and visitors -- is the
Vietnam Veterans Memorial in Washington, built in 1982, which has been both
artistically celebrated and highly controversial. "By listing all the names of
the dead and by being black," Mr. Rhodes said, "it implies that the individuals
were victims rather than heroes, and that it is a monument to their deaths, not
to their glory."

But even less controversial public works like bridges and dams that were once
seen as symbols of competence and enterprise -- as well as aesthetic triumphs --
now run head on into neighborhood opposition, environmental hurdles and budget
problems.

"Now, no matter what anyone wants to do anywhere, there is a group that opposes
it," said Samuel C. Florman, an engineer with Kreisler Borg Florman Construction
Company and author of "The Existential Pleasures of Engineering" (1994). "It's
partly a reflection of a disenchantment with technology and also a little bit of
the notion that small is beautiful. The more we know both scientifically and
politically, the more reasons there are to be frozen in our tracks."

That kind of opposition does not necessarily mean, however, that current
civilization will leave no memorials.

Some of the great achievements of the 18th century were political institutions,
captured in the Declaration of Independence or the Constitution, for example.
And it may well be that 100 years from now, what Americans will celebrate about
the current age will be its technological achievements: television, rocketry,
computers -- even the Internet.

"The progression," said Kathleen McCarthy, a historian and director of the
Center for the Study of Philanthropy at City University of New York, "may be
Thomas Jefferson, John D. Rockefeller, Bill Gates."

And some people are even optimistic about another wave. "The social turmoil of
the late 19th century led up to the creation of the 19th century institutions,"
said Virginia Hodgkinson, director of research at Independent Sector, an
association of nonprofit organizations. "The social turmoil in America today may
play the same role. I'm not sure we're close enough to a crisis point."


LOAD-DATE: September 10, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: The grand scale: the Metropolitan Museum in its centennial
year, 1970; The new scale: monument at Disneyland. (Damian Dovarganes for The
New York Times)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              254 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 10, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Look, Cars! Rare Species Sighted in Laos

BYLINE: By HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Section 1;   Page 10;   Column 3;   Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 560 words

DATELINE: BOTEN, Laos


The road into this remote Laotian village of thatched huts and wooden shacks
cuts through mountains that are home to many of Southeast Asia's tigers and
elephants.

This is a region where few people move on wheels, bicycles included, where it is
not uncommon to see elephants transporting people or goods, even in the
one-street provincial capital. Luang Namtha Province is one of the poorest in a
country classified by the United Nations as one of the world's least developed.
Electricity is available only in the capital, also named Luang Namtha, for two
hours a day on good days.

The province's 130,000 inhabitants are splintered into 32 ethnic minority groups
that share one trait: they are largely illiterate and hardly take part in the
money economy.

So Boten would not seem to be a place for lots filled with new and used cars for
sale. Yet it has the largest, perhaps the only, car market in a region that
embraces some of the most remote parts of Laos, China, Myanmar and Vietnam.

On a recent visit, lots containing several hundred cars were seen stretching for
more than 10 miles along the curving, rutted road from a Laotian customs office
to the Chinese border village of Bohan, which begins where Boten ends. At one
lot, two teen-agers guarded a few dozen new South Korean and Japanese cars.
Carrying air rifles, which they hoped would deter bandits, not unknown in these
mountains, the two lamented that business was slow.

Laotian salesmen and customs officials said the Chinese authorities seemed to be
getting tough on the freewheeling trade. The only customers are the newly rich
of southern China, who can afford to pay $20,000 to $40,000 in American dollars
or Chinese yuan for a car -- still in short supply in China -- plus $1,000 to
$2,000 to Chinese customs officials, a Laotian seller said.

He pleaded ignorance about whether the customs payment was official duty or a
bribe, but a better customs deal is thought to be one of the attractions of the
local car mart.

The dealer explained the circuitous route that the cars take. They originate in
many places, including the United States, which produces Japanese cars with
left-hand steering, suitable for China.

They are all shipped to Bangkok and are driven across Thailand to Vientiane, the
Laotian capital. For a transit fee of about $1,360, the cars are admitted into
Laos, bearing no license plates. The most difficult trek is over this country's
wretched roads to Boten, a two-day, one-night haul that costs the seller about
$130 and a few dollars for a plane ticket back to Vientiane for the driver.

The border trade became possible only after the Soviet Union, in its decline,
relaxed its stern hold over this weak country. Now the border is open with
virtually no formalities for Chinese and Laotians. Bohan, which barely existed a
decade ago, has become a booming place of shops offering a wide range of cheap
Chinese consumer goods to Laotians, whose country produces few items of daily
necessity.

The village resembles a construction site, with a long row of shops newly built
and another row nearing completion. So relaxed is life on the border that
Laotian officials had no difficulty persuading the Chinese border police to
waive their strict regulations and let an American accompanying them spend the
day in China even though he had no visa.

LOAD-DATE: September 10, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Map of Laos showing location of Boten.

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              255 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 10, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

U.S. Has Evolved Beyond Tribal Conflicts

SECTION: Section 4;   Page 16;   Column 4;   Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 363 words


To the Editor:

Re "Ethnic Cleansing Didn't Start in Bosnia" by Kenneth C. Davis (Week in
Review, Sept. 3):

As a matter of historiography, I have always understood that a definitive work
cannot draw solely from the chronicles of one side. Yet this is what Mr. Davis
does.

Granted, the American Indian nations did not have a written history, but there
has to be a story to tell. Did the Indians slaughter, dispossess, commit
genocide against other Indian nations? Were they blameless in all respects? Is
it sobering and useful for Native Americans to remember that as well?

Mr. Davis concludes, "It is easy to rail against ethnic cleansing when 'they'
are doing it, but sobering to recall 'we' did it too." Therefore -- what? We are
to forgive? Mr. Davis offers no other lesson in his article except the implied
suggestion that perhaps we should not condemn the Serbs, Bosnians and Croatians
for their indiscriminate slaughter of innocents because well over 100 years ago
our forefathers engaged in the same bestiality.

Let me supply what Mr. Davis omits to say. We have evolved. The ethnic groups of
the former Yugoslavia have not. In a slow, but consistent manner over a
(historically speaking) short period of time, Americans have come to accept that
it is evil to slaughter blacks, Indians and Asians because of their trivial
physical differences from Anglo-Saxons.

The conviction of First Lieut. William L. Calley Jr. for the My Lai massacre of
1968, albeit inadequate, was a milestone in our history. I know of no other
country where a soldier has been convicted by his peers of murder equivalent to
ethnic cleansing.

The abandonment of overt anti-Semitism, the disappearance of lynching, the civil
rights acts (which exist in no other jurisdiction), are all critical steps in
this century toward a civilized society.

We are far from blameless, but compared with the obscurantist savages engaged in
a 1,000-year Balkan war, we can congratulate ourselves and continue to condemn
their inhumanity. Ours is indeed a more humane society today than that of the
Balkans -- and most other countries of the world.

ELWOOD A. RICKLESS
London, Sept. 4, 1995

LOAD-DATE: September 10, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              256 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 10, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

ENCOUNTERS;
Long After '65, Still Fighting to Overcome

BYLINE: By ERIKA DUNCAN;    Erika Duncan is an essayist and novelist who lives
in Sag Harbor.

SECTION: Section 13LI;   Page 17;   Column 1;   Long Island Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 2467 words


THERE were two Tom Levins on that day, maybe more; I could feel that.

The room was low-ceilinged and old-fashioned. If you opened the door of this
house that was built by a sailor two centuries ago, you were barely three yards
away from the modern-day traffic of Greenport.

On the video screen tiny children with dark faces were clapping; they were
singing. Tiny children in very formal coats, buttoned up to their necks,
carefully, over the clothing of poverty, were marching on Washington.

The Tom Levin of 1965 merged with the Tom Levin of now, who at 71 looked back on
the history of Mississippi's Head Start program he directed. I could see Fanny
Lou Hamer of Mississippi's Freedom Democratic Party. I could see Sergeant
Shriver, the head of the Office of Economic Opportunity that funded Head Start
nationwide. I could see Senator John Stennis, Mississippi's most die-hard
segregationist.

"I happen to like Senator Stennis as a man," Tom Levin was saying.  "He was a
gentleman of a culture that was passing. But I fought him as loud and as dirty
as any politician."

Tom Levin, a psychoanalyst and liaison officer for a world organization at the
United Nations for the rights of the severely mentally ill, was smiling at his
younger and older selves speaking, as his presence wove in and out of the Public
Broadcasting Company special he was showing to me.

When President Johnson declared his "War on Poverty," and the Office of Economic
Opportunity allocated $96 million for a program for pre-schoolers that had to be
up and running in 12 weeks, the response was immediate, nationwide. Only from
the state of Mississippi, the poorest of the 50 states, were applications
remarkably absent.

On the video screen were the signs, "Colored admitted on Tuesdays only," "No
coloreds allowed here"-- a voice: "We are not going to do a program for our
darkies. This is Mississippi. The strings attached require us to mix the races
at a very early age."

Other voices: "If you find a building, get some children, you can keep and teach
your own. That was the answer to a prayer. . .

"When you start telling little 5-year-olds they are equal to little white kids,
they grow up believing it."

There were many poor white people in the state of Mississippi as well, their
photographs intermingled with the photographs of poor black people on the video
screen. Once the program was enacted, very few would send their children, who
equally needed the exposure to learning, free lunches and medical care. Those
who did would receive threats.

Men and women who earned between $10 and $15 as sharecroppers and domestics
would be able to earn between $50 and $75 a week taking care of their own.

The spirituals mix with the country music, the photographs of children with
insects on them and parasites inside them, malnutrition, anemia. They are
playing with garbage outside shacks. Later, children with a butterfly net,
catching butterflies in the Head Start preschools, people building their own
schools, an investigation begun by Senator Stennis only eight days into the
program about the supposed misuse of funds.

On the walls, old-style oil portraits of Benjamin Disraeli's father and Tom's
wife's grandparents intermingle with paintings of ships, as every so often Tom
pushes the mute button, coming forward in time to explain it to me.

"Ain't gonna let nobody turn me round, turn me round, turn me round," little
children are singing, as the Ku Klux Klan gathers and threats of arson mount.

Little children having medical and dental examinations for the first time in
their lives, looking wonderingly up at the doctors.

They are working with crayons, and then suddenly they are "voting," on what
color they should use -- red or blue. For always they are given a chance to
vote, to teach them not to be afraid to register and vote.

"So that they could teach their parents not to be afraid. I remember each one of
those kids," Tom was saying, "and the parents who started to say, 'Better my
child die fighting for freedom, than grow up unable to be a man.' "

"Those were the sexist days," Tom adds apologetically.

In Tom's eyes -- and this would eventually cost him his job; he would eventually
be forbidden to work below the Mason-Dixon line -- Head Start was never just
about the children. Rather it was a way of bringing control over economic
resources and dignity and respect to poor and black people.

Though after a mere eight days of the program's being in operation, the State of
Mississippi and Senator Stennis were trying to break the back of its link to the
civil rights movement. Mississippi now has more black politicians, senators and
public officials than any other state, a direct result of the people who were
politicized in those days.

In a climate of growing suspicion, why was Tom Levin the one who was chosen to
mediate between government agencies and civil rights activists?

Tom Levin started out as a child analyst, because in the early 1950's there were
almost no men working psychoanalytically with children. He spent an entire year
working with just one autistic child.

He was concerned that competition between "good mother" therapists and "bad"
actual mothers was weakening bonds that were already shaky. As a man, he had
felt that he would be less likely to go into competition with mothers.

Ultimately he was to reject child analysis entirely, out of a feeling that it
violated children's boundaries at a time in their lives when they were too
vulnerable to experience a real reciprocity.

But there was also another side to Tom Levin. As a street kid growing up in the
Bronx he had seen the Depression break the pride of his father, a hat blocker
who could barely read or write. He "saw mothers and fathers losing touch with
who they were," he explained, which was why what he encountered in Mississippi
would move him so much.

From the time Tom was 6 until he was able to leave home at 15, the family lived
in 14 different houses, moving constantly.

"I still cry in a movie if I see a father who is unemployed," Tom says to me.

Tom himself only went through the first three grades of high school, and always
on probation. He did bit work from the age of 9, and by the time he was 15 was
"a kid union organizer."

He took a job as a "nailer," running a pneumatic nailing machine. "I stood up on
a carton. And I told them: 'Stop working! Don't give in!' "

As he tells me how he signed himself onto a ship, I think of his sailboat on a
pier only a half block away from the old pillared house with its floor to
ceiling historic American flag, its few stars arranged in an arc.

He joined the Navy and when the war broke out he was sent to Japan, a situation
he calls "a very important transcultural experience."

"In Okinawa, at the time of the invasion, I heard American marines and sailors
bragging about raping grandmothers, taking prisoners and knocking their teeth
out for gold." And that too formed his consciousness.

He had wanted to be a doctor, and when he came home he worked for a while as a
practical nurse. Eventually he was led into the study of psychoanalysis. But
almost from the beginning he was uneasy about ignoring issues of class and
culture in the focus on individual "adjustment." He didn't want to help patients
adjust to what is unjust in our society.

It was during the march on Birmingham, when he was working for the New York
Clinic for Mental Health, doing volunteer group therapy, that he turned on the
radio and heard about the hoses and the dogs.  He said to himself "This has to
stop."

He called up the Southern Christian Leadership headquarters, and quickly became
involved in organizing health workers to support the civil rights workers.

This became first the Committee of Conscience and then the Medical Committee for
Human Rights, with Tom Levin the founding coordinator.

In the winter of 1963, when the three civil rights workers, James Chaney and
Andrew Goodman and Michael Schwerner, were killed, Tom received a call from
James Foreman who had organized the Freedom Summer Mississippi Voter
Registration Drive, saying: "We need emergency triage. We need doctors."

"It was on June 23, my birthday, I remember," Tom Levin was saying.  "We
organized 200 medical people to come down.

A letter had come from two leading human rights doctors warning the new recruits
that it would be dangerous to try to work in Mississippi.

"I was introduced to Archie Gray, the health director for the State of
Mississippi, who said: The only help we need is in sterilizing the 'nigras' and
curing their venereal diseases," Tom Levin said.

"Archie Gray turned to the black doctor who had brought me to meet him and said:
'Remember, I'm head of licensing for this state. If you keep this up you know
what will happen to you.' "

Tom would show me the clipping from The New Republic which told of an armed
attack on his headquarters in which 8 gunshots had been fired, and a globe had
exploded inches over his head.

During the summer of 1963 Tom had visited the Freedom Schools and talked to the
black high school students, who said: "We were quite happy when we were growing
up, playing on the porch, and the family around. We felt loved and cared about.
Then, when we got to be 6 years old, we would go to school. And our parents
would tell us 'Do what the teacher says,' even though the teachers were treating
them very badly and teaching them to be meek."

There was a memory of trust for their parents that the students said was broken
by this.

In February 1964, as part of the strategy of the Kennedy/Johnson branch of
Democrats to try to break the back of the Southern Dixiecrats within their
party, Tom Levin received a telephone call from Polly Greenberg of the Office of
Economic Opportunity asking if he would like to write a grant proposal. He
finished the proposal that April.

His new organization, CDGM, the Child Development Group of Mississippi, was
awarded $1.4 million for a program to start that July.

That was a time when there was a deep suspicion of Government interference among
civil rights workers, so Tom said to Polly Greenberg, "The people have to have
their own voice. They have to make their own decisions."

"That's what the Office of Economic Opportunity wants," Polly Greenberg replied.

"We decided that no center would be funded unless it was run by a community
committee," Tom continues. "By the time the program started in July, already 80
communities had signed up."

Eight days into its operation, Senator Stennis called an investigation into the
misuse of funds. "They wanted receipts," the Tom on the screen continues, his
voice intermingled with the voice of the real Tom of Greenport and now.

"But the only people whom we could deal with were the small black merchants who
wrote their receipts on the back of a paper bag. How can you have 83 centers
organized in two weeks, with a million and a third dollars to be spent in eight
weeks time without some mix-up?"

As the CDGM staff and the children settled into their new life, seven CDGM
project trainees were arrested in a civil rights demonstration.  Tom Levin
advanced them their bail; he defended the action as a salary advance.

It was unheard of that those who before were afraid to vote or defend their
rights, for fear of losing their jobs, would now be able to do whatever they
wanted after hours.

Simultaneously the war in Vietnam escalated. Senator Stennis was the head of the
Senate Armed Services Appropriation Committee.  There was talk both in Congress
and in places behind the scenes about the need for the poverty program to take a
back seat, to release more funding for Vietnam.

Four weeks into an eight week program, an official decree arrived from the
Office of Economic Opportunity that the Child Development Group of Mississippi
must move from the church camp at Mount Beulah, seen by the government as the
home of the civil rights movement.

CDGM's board, frightened of losing its funding, agreed. The staff, led by Tom
Levin, refused. It was Tom Levin's last fight. Both sides asked Tom Levin to
resign in order to try to preserve the coalition between the group and the
government.

Eventually, another child-development coalition, sanitized and freed from civil
rights connections, was formed by Senator Stennis and his associates, as a
substitute recipient for the Head Start funds, to try to keep the organization
out.

I watch Tom's face. He has not faltered at all in his talking to me.  Now I ask
him: Have you any regrets?

"I only regret that I did not have more time," he says. "It was not possible for
me to continue my work without getting into conflict with the early childhood
educational group. I had to have trouble."

When Tom Levin returned from Mississippi he was invited to join the staff of
Lincoln Hospital Community Mental Health Center, where he worked on developing
career ladders for poor people to enter the health professions.

In the early 70s, he became interested in alternate family styles -- communes,
communal families and same gender families. It was during that time that he met
his wife Ronny, a family therapist working with the problems of parents of
children of artificial insemination.

Then, about 10 years ago, he became involved in the World Association for
Psycho-Social Rehabilitation, a group dedicated to the protection of the human,
political and health needs of the severely mentally ill, devoted to helping them
live in communities and doing away with excessive hospitalization.

Very much an Eriksonian, in terms of his belief in ages and stages, 90 percent
of his present day patients are "cases of re-analysis," those with whom others
have failed, for to him "it seems right that those who are older among us take
on the more difficult cases, drawing on the full range of our experience."

Still as interested as ever in uses and misuses of power in the
psychotherapeutic situation, he works to train psychiatrists in transcultural
work with groups, so that a therapist coming from Iran, let us say, will be able
to understand Hispanics in the Bronx.

"Social change is like Pandora's box," Tom is saying on the screen, as the video
nears its conclusion. "You can't control what comes out of it.  The government
wanted to control Pandora's box and they couldn't.  What came out of it was
social change beyond what they intended."

As, a little bit later, we stand by his sailboat, labeled, perhaps
mischievously, Red, the water buoying us from under the dock all asway, I see
from the video still in my mind children singing "Good morning, good morning,"
even after all their funding is cut.

I see a little girl who hasn't spoken at all in the first three weeks since she
came to the center.

She speaks.

LOAD-DATE: September 10, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Tom Levin on the dock in Greenport where he keeps his sailboat,
which he named Red. (Maxine Hicks for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              257 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 10, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

South of Kilimanjaro

BYLINE: By Tony Eprile;    Tony Eprile, the author of "Temporary Sojourner: And
Other South African Stories," is working on a novel.

SECTION: Section 7;   Page 32;   Column 2;   Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1023 words



THE SMELL OF APPLES
By Mark Behr.
200 pp. New York:
St. Martin's Press.
$21.95.

ONE of the many incipient revolutions that began in South Africa in the
mid-1980's has been in the fiction of a new generation of Afrikaans writers,
among them Etienne van Heerden, Koos Prinsloo and now Mark Behr. These young and
talented dissidents have sought to reveal not only the inequities of apartheid
but the myths behind the official version of Afrikaner identity. A particular
challenge for Afrikaans writers in the late 20th century is the issue of who is
responsible for creating and upholding apartheid. They do not have the luxury of
pointing the finger at some other group; any honest self-exploration leads to
the answer: "We did it. We -- our loved ones, family, friends -- created the
monster," which leads to the still more difficult question: "Why did we go along
with it?" Mark Behr's debut novel -- first published in South Africa in 1993 and
translated by the author -- meets this challenge beautifully and serves as a
fine introduction to a vibrant new literature that has been slow to reach these
shores.

"The Smell of Apples" focuses on a family named Erasmus that unambiguously
supports the system in a time, the early 1970's, when apartheid is at its apex.
The Erasmuses are Afrikaners who fled from East Africa to Cape Town at the
prospect of black independence, leaving behind hard-won wealth and often barely
getting out with their lives. (They belong to a group notorious for taking a
hard-line, "backs to the sea" attitude; as the family's sarcastic black-sheep
aunt, Sanna Koerant -- the name means "Annie Gossip" -- puts it, they are now
"as south as south of Kilimanjaro would ever be.") The story is narrated by
Marnus, the youngest child and only son, who is an alert and vigilant but
innocent observer. Mr. Behr captures the child's voice and thinking perfectly,
using the rift between what Marnus observes and what he is capable of
comprehending to marvelous ironic effect. Through his trusting and unjudging
eyes, we see the constant indoctrination of Afrikaner society, its internal
contradictions, its weird normality. "A Volk that forgets its history is like a
man without a memory," his father tells him. "That man is useless." But when
Marnus's best friend tells his history class the story of how his
great-grandfather used to charge a fee to hunters who came to shoot Bushmen on
his farm in the Cedarberg, the teacher insists that "it wasn't the Boers that
killed off all the Bushmen, it was the Xhosas." When his sister accurately
describes their meal as Malay in origin, his mother corrects her, saying that
bobotie is the food the white Voortrekkers ate. Despite Marnus's fond encounters
with people of mixed race in his own life -- the servant Doreen, who secretly
makes him special treats for lunch; the fisherman Jan Bandjies, who tells him
tales of the "colored" whalers in the early days of the Cape -- he
unquestioningly repeats the bigoted truisms of white society: the "coloreds" are
"mostly alcoholics who booze up all their wages over weekends. More often than
not, they're criminals who won't ever get to see heaven. St. Peter, who stands
at the portals of eternity, will pass out stone-cold when he smells their
breath."

The insidious poison of racism stands out in all the more relief because
Marnus's voice is for the most part such an appealing one, and he is an
eminently likable child. His is an idyllic existence in the manner of all happy
childhoods: getting into mischief with his best friend, Frikkie Delport; being
taught to shave in the same bathroom where his grandfather taught his father;
riding his bicycle around the beautiful seaside neighborhood of False Bay. (The
location itself -- named because sailors coming in from the east mistook it for
Table Bay -- is yet another clue that all is not what it seems.)

A driving force behind Mr. Behr's generation's disaffection was its having
served as cannon fodder in a series of often undeclared border wars as
emotionally divisive in South Africa as Vietnam was here. The militarization of
South African life is a particular target of Mr. Behr's subtly acerbic pen.
Marnus's father endeavors to be a kind and loving if strict dad; as a general in
the South African Army, he displays a brutality that increasingly thwarts his
humanity. (Toward the end of the book he shows slides of his travels that
include gruesome scenes of his butchering unarmed black revolutionaries in
Rhodesia.) A guest who stays with the Erasmuses and whose admiration Marnus
innocently seeks is a Chilean general visiting South Africa to share military
information and, the reader will shudder to learn, to advise the South Africans
in the ways Chile deals with its dissidents. Marnus himself is fascinated by
soldiers' uniforms and wins a prize for his essay on the local war museum; one
shares his joy at winning the prize while being horrified at the essay's
jingoistic content. The novel makes clear that this militarism ultimately takes
over his life: the child's narration is broken up by occasional interpolations
from Marnus 15 years later as a career army lieutenant fighting in Angola. These
vignettes lack the perfect pitch of the child's voice, but they provide a
necessary link in the historical perspective. Marnus remembers how, from their
base 200 kilometers inside Angola, he and the other soldiers laughed to hear his
father assuring the world on the Voice of America that there was not a single
South African soldier inside Angola. Now, outflanked by superior numbers of
Cuban soldiers, he and his troops are the ones about to pay the price for the
generals' secret war.

Although I found the novel's shocking ending less than credible, the gradual
uncovering of the enormous pressures on this Afrikaans family gives "The Smell
of Apples" a brooding tension. Mr. Behr has created a lyrical and memorable
child narrator, along with a story that will fill in the gap for American
readers as to why many young Afrikaners came to help tear down the edifice their
forebears had devoted their lives to building.

LOAD-DATE: September 10, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              258 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 11, 1995, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Black Film Makers Are Looking Beyond Ghetto Violence

BYLINE: By BERNARD WEINRAUB

SECTION: Section C;   Page 11;   Column 1;   Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1511 words

DATELINE: HOLLYWOOD, Sept. 10


Black film makers, who have focused largely in recent years on the bleak and
corrosive experiences of ghetto youths, are moving toward more expansive and
mainstream themes with far greater appeal to wider audiences.

Like just about everything else in Hollywood, the change is driven mostly by
economics. And to some degree, black directors also yearn to explore new themes.
Film makers and studio executives say that the novelty of movies about young
people killing each other in the slums has been exhausted and that audiences for
such productions are dwindling.

More significantly, many black film makers and actors have grown uneasy about,
are even embarrassed by, films centered on the ghetto, saying that these movies
offer only a narrow portrait of African-American life.

"I would assume studios are just accepting of the fact that there's a greater
diversity to our lives than kids in the 'hood, than the drug and violence
stories," said the actor Samuel L. Jackson Jr., "and we are taking a prominent
place in our society and our films are reflecting that."

Among the coming high-profile films that break the pattern:

"Devil in a Blue Dress," based on Walter Mosley's 1990 novel, which opens on
Sept. 29. The film, directed by Carl Franklin, depicts black aspirations and
life in postwar Los Angeles and stars Denzel Washington as a private eye who
becomes involved in a political and racial scandal in 1948.

"White Man's Burden," a dramatic fantasy starring John Travolta and Harry
Belafonte, about an America where blacks are the majority and whites are the
minority. The film is to open on Dec. 1.

"Waiting to Exhale," based on Terry McMillan's novel about four middle-class
black women yearning for happiness, scheduled for release around Christmas.

To a degree, "Dead Presidents" also falls into this category. Produced and
directed by Albert and Allen Hughes, fraternal 22-year-old twins who made the
highly praised film "Menace II Society" in 1993, "Dead Presidents" is the saga
of young men in the South Bronx who enlist in the Marine Corps during the
Vietnam War and their grim return to the streets. It is to open Oct. 4.

While "Clockers," Spike Lee's latest movie, deals with drugs and the ghetto, he
has gleefully expressed hope that it will be the final movie of its sort for a
while. "It was our intention to be the final nail in the coffin," he said,
referring to the category of violent, urban black films. Mr. Lee reluctantly
took over the direction of "Clockers" after Martin Scorsese dropped out.

"It's dead! It's over! Move on!" he said. "I loved 'Boyz N the Hood' and 'Menace
II Society,' but those other films, I don't know. The genre is at its end now.
It's up to African-American film makers to open our vision. If you don't expand
and grow, you'll die."

Mr. Lee's next films are "Girl 6," a comedy about an actress in Los Angeles
earning a living in the phone-sex business, and "The Jackie Robinson Story,"
about the first black baseball player in the major leagues.

Stacy Snider, president of production at Tri-Star Studios, which made "Devil in
a Blue Dress," suggested that "three or four movies by black film makers this
fall are the next evolution."

"The challenge for studios when you do commercials and TV spots for these
films," she said, "is to grab the white audiences and say, 'Hey this is
different, this is a great story, this does not just appeal to a niche
audience.' "

Ms. Snider, who is white, added, "I have far more in common with 'Waiting to
Exhale' than 'Die Hard.' "

Younger black film makers, while struggling to find financing for their movies,
are almost uniformly reaching beyond drugs and death for their subject matter.
Melissa Maxwell, the writer and director of "The Fire This Time," a modest film
about the Los Angeles riots, is set to make "Tomboys," about an interracial
group of young women in Los Angeles struggling to make a living. Darnell Martin,
whose 1994 movie, "I Like It Like That" was about a spirited young Bronx woman,
is set to make "Listening to the Dead," a psychological horror film about a
racially mixed family, also set in the Bronx.

Leslie Harris, whose "Just Another Girl on the IRT," was a hit at the 1993
Sundance Film Festival, is planning "Royalties, Rhythm and Blues," a thriller
about a black female executive in the record industry.

"The problem is financing, of course, and many executives you talk to still
expect you to do a 'hood movie," Ms. Harris said. "That's the stigma that's put
upon us. But look, the typical black story is not from the 'hood anymore. We are
very much entrenched in American society, which means we are starting to deal
more and more with the politics, money and job pressures, which are what the
American dream is all about."

Studios have sought to attract black audiences, especially teen-agers, since the
1970's, when the so-called black exploitation movies drew unexpectedly large
numbers of urban viewers. Those films followed a period in which Sidney Poitier
had become the nation's first black movie star with crossover appeal. Mr.
Poitier, whose persona in films like "Lilies of the Field," "To Sir, With Love"
and "Guess Whose Coming to Dinner" embodied middle-class values and
accommodation, fell out of fashion in the turbulent 70's.

"When the civil rights movement and the assasinations happened, there was
another cycle of black films, the exploitation films like 'Super Fly' and
'Shaft,' in which the despair comes forth," said Thomas Cripps, a professor at
Morgan State University in Baltimore and an authority on black films. "It was
almost like the return of the ghetto as an ideal."

These "blaxploitation" movies had a strong appeal for budding young black film
makers, among them Mr. Lee and John Singleton, and led in turn to more gritty
and realistic depictions of black urban life in which there were few heroes and
much violence. Mr. Singleton's "Boyz N the Hood" (1991), caught the attention
not only of the critics, who praised its somber look at life in South-Central
Los Angeles, but also of the studios, which were impressed by its earnings. The
film cost $6 million and has grossed more than $56 million, according to the
Exhibitor Relations Company, which monitors movie earnings.

There has since been an almost constant stream of variations on that theme,
among them "Menace II Society," "Juice," "Jason's Lyric," "Fresh," "Sugar Hill"
and "Above the Rim." Because so many of these films were relatively inexpensive
to produce, most were profitable. But black film makers have begun turning away
from them, and the audiences have waned, too.

"People were trying to imitate the success of 'Boyz N the Hood' without the
heart of it," said Mr. Singleton, who made the film when he was only 22. "This
was an extremely personal film. It wasn't created and engineered to make a lot
of money. It was, like, autobiographical. I wrote and directed it to get a lot
of things in my life off my back. My film came out and there were all these
imitations. It was like after 'Jaws' came out; there were films like 'The Great
White Death,' and 'Piranha.'

Every studio is aware that black teen-agers are the most frequent moviegoers,
and it has become obvious that it doesn't take a steady diet of violence to lure
them. "Bad Boys," a comedy about a pair of black policemen, has grossed an
unexpected $65 million, and "Dangerous Minds," starring Michelle Pfeiffer as an
unlikely teacher in a tough high school, has brought in more than $46 million.
(The soundtracks are major hits and contributed to each film's success.)

For serious black film makers, though, making forthright, personal movies
remains a struggle in the face of demands by studios. "It's all a little tough,
and it's always about economics," said Forest Whitaker, the actor and director
who finished shooting "Waiting to Exhale" in May. "With black films, everything
becomes a test case. If one explores a new genre and it doesn't do well, that's
it. But if someone makes a baseball film and it doesn't work, there'll be
another baseball film."

But film makers like Mr. Whitaker, Mr. Singleton and Carl Franklin remain
hopeful that a new genre of black films, depicting relationships and themes that
have not been explored in the past, will take hold among moviegoers, black and
white.

"A lot of people, especially a lot of young blacks, thought that you were not
really black unless you were from the 'hood, and there was a pressure somehow to
identify with that experience," said Mr. Franklin, who also directed the highly
praised low-budget thriller "One False Move." "But I look at Berry Gordy of
Motown, who took black music and fused it with a lot of elements of classical
music, strings and French horns, and created a sound that the world never heard
before."

"And that's what we should do," he said. "People should realize that black
people are not just urban, not just confined to the urban experience, that we
are more international, more cosmopolitan and certainly more unpredictable than
that."


LOAD-DATE: September 11, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: New movies with black themes: John Travolta, left, and Harry
Belafonte in "White Man's Burden" (above) (Bob Marshak/Rysher Entertainment);
from left, Whitney Houston, Loretta Devine, Lela Rochon and Angela Bassett in
"Waiting to Exhale" (top right) (20th Century Fox); and Denzel Washington in
"Devil in a Blue Dress" (top left) (D. Stevens/Tri-Star Pictures) (pg. C11);
"Dead Presidents," a film starring Larenz Tate, left, Freddy Rodriguez, center,
and Chris Tucker, is one of several new movies by black directors that go beyond
narrow portraits of ghetto youths. (Hollywood Pictures) (pg. C14)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              259 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 11, 1995, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Golden Lions Awarded at Venice Festival

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section C;   Page 14;   Column 3;   Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 261 words

DATELINE: VENICE, Sept. 10


"Cyclo," the hard-luck tale of a young rickshaw driver in Ho Chi Minh City
(formerly Saigon) by the director Anh Hung Tran, has won the Golden Lion, the
top award at the Venice Film Festival.

The jury's special prize in the awards ceremony on Saturday was shared by "A
Comedia de Deus," by Joao Cesar Monteiro of Portugal, the twisted story of a man
who collects pubic hairs, and "Starman," directed by Giuseppe Tornatore of
Italy, a documentarylike chronicle of a dishonest talent scout in Sicily in the
1950's.

Mr. Tran's first film, "Scent of Green Papaya" in 1993, won the Cannes Film
Festival's award for best first-time director and was nominated for an Academy
Award for best foreign-language film.

Gotz Georg, a German, won the prize for best leading actor for his role in "The
Deathmaker." The award for best leading actress went to the French actresses
Isabelle Huppert and Sandrine Bonnaire for their shared role in Claude Chabrol's
"Judgment in Stone."

The best supporting actor and actress prizes went to Ian Hart for Thaddeus
O'Sullivan's "Nothing Personal" and Isabella Ferrari for Ettore Scola's "Tale of
a Poor Youth."

Though they did not win or were out of the competition for any major awards, a
record five American films made their world debut in Venice: Spike Lee's
"Clockers," Sean Penn's "Crossing Guard," Woody Allen's "Mighty Aphrodite,"
Kathryn Bigelow's "Strange Days" and William Friedkin's "Jade."

Mr. Allen, Martin Scorsese and the French director Alain Renais were awarded
Golden Lions for their lifetime achievements.

LOAD-DATE: September 11, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              260 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 13, 1995, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

U.S. Envoy Highlights Fine Print on Bosnia

BYLINE: By ELAINE SCIOLINO

SECTION: Section A;  Page 10;  Column 4;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1010 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 12


Despite last week's agreement among the adversaries in Bosnia and an ongoing
NATO bombing campaign, the chief American negotiator said today that the most
basic issues of power sharing and territory are unresolved and that there is no
guarantee any settlement will hold.

In an hourlong interview before flying to the Balkans for a new round of talks,
the envoy, Richard C. Holbrooke, sought to dispel the optimism created by the
agreement among the Bosnians, Croats and Serbs to create a Serbian republic
within Bosnia and to accept the legal existence of the Bosnian state.

Mr. Holbrooke seemed to be trying to lower expectations for his new mission. But
his comments provided the clearest insight yet into the American strategy at the
negotiating table, which is based on bringing pressure on each of the parties to
make small compromises in private and locking them in in public.

In the interview, Mr. Holbrooke also praised President Slobodan Milosevic of
Serbia, laid out the mine fields on the road to peace in Bosnia and dangled the
prospect of billions of dollars in economic aid from the West if a peace is
achieved. Indeed, President Clinton began consulting leading members of Congress
today about an initial $500 million aid package for a postwar Bosnia.

Compared with his mood last week, when Mr. Holbrooke was showing to friends in
Europe an article in the French daily Le Figaro touting him as, "Le Kissinger
des Balkans," this week he was signaling that at any moment the process could
blow up in his face.

"Nothing is agreed upon until everything is agreed upon," Mr. Holbrooke said.
"It's the way the parties avoid committing themselves to individual parts of the
agreement. They can all at any time renege on anything they've agreed to."

Specifically, he said, negotiators were unable to work out the relationship
between the Bosnian state and the Serbian republic to be contained within it.

"We couldn't get it," he said. "The differences were too great. And who controls
the presidency? Who controls foreign policy? Is there a single overarching
Parliament? How do you adjudicate issues?"

Even harder, Mr. Holbrooke admitted, are the vast divides among the parties over
what the future map of Bosnia will look like, particularly the status of the
capital of Sarajevo, which the Serbs want a piece of and which the Bosnian
Government insists must remain undivided and under its control.

"It's like Jerusalem," Mr. Holbrooke said. "There's a mystical tie to it and
it's the toughest single issue. We have almost completely incompatible positions
right now."

Perhaps nothing illustrates the illusory nature of negotiating peace in Bosnia
than the case of eastern Slavonia, Mr. Holbrooke said.

On the eve of last Friday's announcement, all three sides had agreed to work
toward a peaceful resolution of the status of the oil-rich piece of Croatia
captured by the Serbs in 1991.

But then the Croats suggested publicly that their country reserved the right to
invade. The Serbs wanted to insert a rebuttal into the statement but bar the
Croats from doing the same. The Americans said no. In the end, like so many
other peace plans and statements that litter the last 41 months of war, the
paper was discarded.

Mr. Holbrooke's praise for Mr. Milosevic underscored the extent to which the
United States has tried to transform the image of the Serbian leader from that
of a potentially indictable war criminal into that of a peacemaker.

"Milosevic appears to have abandoned -- at least for the time being -- the goal
of annexing part of Bosnia," Mr. Holbrooke said. "He doesn't want it. He talks
openly about needing peace, economic development and international legitimacy
for Serbia and of not wanting to be burdened by the Bosnian Serbs."

Mr. Holbrooke described the Serb leader as a "good English speaker" who boasts
about his close ties to prominent American bankers on Wall Street. It is a far
different portrayal than one offered in a recent article in Foreign Affairs
magazine by Warren Zimmermann, a former American Ambassador to Yugoslavia, who
called Mr. Milosevic a habitual liar who condoned and organized "unspeakable
atrocities."

Mr. Milosevic's success in persuading the Bosnian Serbs to give him the written
authority to negotiate on their behalf was "the breakthrough" in the
negotiations, Mr. Holbrooke said. When the Serbian leader presented the American
negotiating team with the paper empowering him to negotiate, Mr. Holbrooke said:
"All of our hearts skipped a beat. He did in fact deliver."

But just in case Mr. Milosevic is lying, as he has done in the past, Mr.
Holbrooke did not rule out the possibility that the Serbian President will break
his word and seize the part of Bosnia that makes up the entity of the Serb
republic.

"I'm a student of Vietnam," said Mr. Holbrooke, who served there as a young
Foreign Service officer, "and I don't forget that Henry Kissinger negotiated an
agreement for two Vietnams and in the end it collapsed by force of arms and the
North Vietnamese used force to annex the country.

"If you ask me my greatest nightmare, it would be just this."

Mr. Holbrooke insisted that he gave Mr. Milosevic no promises to pardon the
Bosnian Serb leader, Radovan Karadzic, and military commander, Ratko Mladic, who
have been indicted by an international tribunal as war criminals. "Au contraire,
ma chere," he said. "We have made it absolutely clear to Milosevic that the
peace negotiations cannot include the war tribunal."

And Mr. Holbrooke acknowledged that Mr. Milosevic does not control the Bosnian
Serbs on the battlefield, as evidenced by their refusal to withdraw their heavy
weapons from Sarajevo in the face of intense NATO bombing.

As for the Bosnian Government, Mr. Holbrooke praised President Alija Izetbegovic
for his statements published on Monday that signaled his willingness to make
compromises for peace.

"We did not sell out the Bosnian Muslims," Mr. Holbrooke insisted. "They wanted
this agreement. They knew this was a good deal."


LOAD-DATE: September 18, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              261 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 14, 1995, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

On Vietnam, Kennedy White House Flew Blind

SECTION: Section A;   Page 26;   Column 4;   Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 539 words


To the Editor:

Re "McNamara's War, and Mine" by Louis G. Sarris (Op-Ed, Sept. 5):

(1) On page 32 of "In Retrospect" I wrote: "When the Berlin crisis occurred in
1961, and during the Cuban missile crisis in 1962, President Kennedy was able to
turn to senior people like Llewellyn Thompson, Charles Bohlen and George Kennan,
who knew the Soviets intimately. There were no senior officials in the Pentagon
or State Department with comparable knowledge of Southeast Asia."

Mr. Sarris writes, "This statement is untrue." But it is he who is incorrect.

Mr. Thompson, Mr. Bohlen and Mr. Kennan had studied Soviet history, culture and
politics for decades, and had associated socially and professionally with the
top Russian leaders, including Nikita S. Khrushchev. We had no counterparts with
respect to South Vietnam, North Vietnam or China. As a result, during the period
just before and after the overthrow of President Ngo Dinh Diem of South Vietnam,
we were flying blind.

The erroneous decisions were ours, and we must accept the responsibility for
them, but the absence of experienced senior advisers helps explain the errors.

(2) Mr. Sarris states: "The basic problem was the unwillingness of McNamara and
other top policy makers to accept the relevance of information with which they
personally disagreed."

I don't believe the record supports that judgment. On the contrary, the
President, Dean Rusk, McGeorge Bundy, Bill Bundy, the Assistant Secretary of
Defense for International Security Affairs, and I were all skeptical of much of
the information we received, not because we questioned the integrity of the
originators of the reports, but because we doubted their ability to penetrate
and understand the complex political, economic, social and military environment
and actions they were reporting.

(3) Mr. Sarris states that just before the assassination of President Kennedy,
"the groundwork was being laid for our tragic escalation of the war."

I believe the record shows that far from planning an escalation, President
Kennedy had decided -- and publicly announced on Oct. 2, 1963 -- that the United
States would plan to withdraw its military forces by the end of 1965 and would
start by withdrawing 1,000 (of our 16,000 men) by the end of 1963.

I state on page 79 that the debate in the National Security Council "reflected a
total lack of consensus over where we stood in meeting our objectives." But the
President nonetheless authorized the beginning of withdrawal, believing that
either our training and logistical support led to the progress claimed or, if it
had not, additional training would not change the situation and, in either case,
we should plan to withdraw.

(4) With respect to the coup that overthrew President Diem, Mr. Sarris appears
to be saying that some Pentagon officials fixed responsibility on the State
Department and, in particular, on his analysis. That may have been the view of
some Defense officials, but it was not and is not mine. I believe that United
States support of the overthrow of President Diem was a mistake, but I hold the
senior officials -- the President, Dean Rusk and me -- responsible, not Mr.
Sarris.

ROBERT S. McNAMARA
Washington, Sept. 12, 1995

LOAD-DATE: September 14, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              262 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 15, 1995, Friday, Late Edition - Final

COLLEGE FOOTBALL;
The Latest Craze on Campus: Learning to Do the McNamara

BYLINE: By ROBERT LIPSYTE

SECTION: Section B;  Page 13;  Column 4;  Sports Desk

LENGTH: 906 words


You don't need felons carrying the ball for an exciting football season, not
when the Lions are ready to begin a tradition tomorrow, when the male and female
athletes of Brown have been pitched against each other and when the former
dictator of the National Collegiate Athletic Association is doing the McNamara.

You can start this story at least a century ago when football was promoted as an
antidote to the feminizing of American men, but it didn't really get serious
until the N.C.A.A.'s original executive director, Walter Byers, made a Faustian
bargain with television and created an enforcement system so erratic and
whimsical that it consolidated his power; the N.C.A.A. rarely punished football
programs that accepted his stewardship of the status quo. In any case, it was
individuals rather than institutions who took the hardest falls. Generations of
athletes -- and of coaches, to be sure -- were trapped in what turned out to be
a gold-plated meat grinder.

The current spate of major college scandals is a direct outgrowth of the
high-stakes game the N.C.A.A. pretended to regulate. Most of the recent national
champions seem to have got to the top with the help of recruiting violations,
money washers and blue-chip players who should be in jail, not college. At the
moment, three Nebraska players are in serious trouble. Watch the university
distance itself from them. Listen to Coach Tom Osborne pontificate on.

And read Byers, eight years retired, whose new book is titled, incredibly,
"Unsportsmanlike Conduct: Exploiting College Athletes" (University of Michigan
Press).

As Drake Withan and Douglas Lederman point out in this week's The Chronicle of
Higher Education, Byers's late mea culpa seems the sports version of the former
Defense Secretary Robert S. McNamara's "about-face" on the Vietnam War.

Byers's "sorry about that" is a hollow document; he was, after all, an architect
of a corrupt, commercialized, sexist and racist football system that spawned a
gladiator class and littered the landscape with stadiums that have mortgaged the
soul of higher education. He now calls for the end of the restrictions that make
athletes laborers without benefits on a "plantation." This would include freedom
to jump schools, to endorse products, to hire agents and to auction services.

"It sounds like a deathbed confession in the extreme," Sheldon E. Steinbach told
The Chronicle. He is general counsel to the American Council on Education, one
of the groups whose push for reform was consistently stymied by Byers.

Holding Byers culpable for everything that stinks in college sport is as useless
as blaming McNamara for our post-Vietnam tristesse. Both were working for larger
interests. Nevertheless, the lack of compliance with Title IX, which translates
into the lack of equal athletic opportunities for women, is another side effect
of the N.C.A.A. big-ticket program. Football, with its enormous expenses and
swollen rosters, has always been a protected species to the detriment of other
sports. Brown University is polarized right now by a bruising Title IX lawsuit
that is headed for appeal. Last month, a district court rejected Brown's
compliance plan.

The key issue -- giving women a fair deal -- has been obscured. President Vartan
Gregorian's posturing for institutional autonomy against a bullying government
smells like a politically trendy way of sucking around the moneyed classes and
keeping the good old boy network in place.

Meanwhile, male athletes and their coaches, particularly in wrestling, tennis
and track and field, are understandably concerned about cutbacks and the loss of
player slots. They are blaming female athletes, who are in turn made to feel
guilty.

"There's no law that says you have to have intercollegiate sports," said a woman
in the Brown sports program, "but there is a law that says if you do have it you
have to have equality. If you had two kids, wouldn't you split the money down
the middle?"

But there are three kids here, male, female and football. With its new and
improved lower entrance requirement for athletes, Ivy League football is hot
again -- even at Columbia, which lost 44 straight games during the 80's.

"Eight or ten years from now," said Coach Ray Tellier, "everyone will have
forgotten the streak." This was at a kind of booster lunch at the Columbia Club
on Tuesday, one of the few places in America where "the streak" has nothing to
do with Cal Ripken Jr.

Last season, for the first time since 1971, Columbia had a winning season,
5-4-1. Tomorrow, the Lions open against Harvard. Tellier, in his seventh season,
seems engaging and jut-jawed enough for a Division I job. He extolled his
fullback as "a big load" and cautioned the boosters not to expect too much; the
team was talented but young and "paper thin." A few key injuries on the new
artificial turf could dump the Lions back into the losing pool. But a winning
1995 season, he said, would be the start of a winning tradition. The Lions have
not had two consecutive winning seasons since 1962.

As an alumnus, I've never been bothered by losing seasons (the only kind I
remember); in fact, there was a certain reverse snobbery, an irrational sense
that a losing team not only meant higher academic standards but athletes who
played for the process, not the outcome.

This is silly; winning is a lot better than losing. But at what cost? Ask
Defense Secretary Byers.

LOAD-DATE: September 15, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              263 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 15, 1995, Friday, Late Edition - Final

BOOKS OF THE TIMES;
Brilliant Strategist or Just Lucky?

BYLINE: By MICHIKO KAKUTANI

SECTION: Section C;  Page 33;  Column 2;  Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1479 words



MY AMERICAN JOURNEY
By Colin Powell
With Joseph E. Persico
643 pages. Random House. $25.95.

For months now, Gen. Colin L. Powell has been America's favorite phantom
candidate, racking up points in Presidential polls, even as he has primed the
market for his much-ballyhooed book. Given General Powell's reticence about
specific issues, his popularity has been based almost entirely on his character
and his life experience: his image as a strong, no-nonsense leader during the
Persian Gulf war, and his Horatio Algeresque rise from the not-so-mean streets
of New York to the meaner streets of Washington.

Those same qualities are emphasized in his new book, "My American Journey," a
book (written with the veteran author Joseph E. Persico) that does appreciably
little to flesh out General Powell's political record with tangible ideas or
stands, but instead tells the up-by-the-Army-bootstraps "story of a black kid of
no early promise from an immigrant family of limited means who was raised in the
South Bronx and somehow rose to become the National Security Adviser to the
President of the United States and then Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff."
That "somehow" perfectly captures the coy tone of this book, which presents
General Powell's brilliantly executed climb to political and military prominence
with studied nonchalance.

"My American Journey" is, at once, one of those inspirational success stories so
often recounted at the sort of motivational seminars General Powell has spent
the last two years doing (it comes complete with "Colin Powell's Rules," a list
of 13 maxims like "Get mad, then get over it" and "It can be done!"), and a
glossily packaged trial balloon that floats his life story as a campaign
platform. It represents perhaps the apotheosis of the current phenomenon of
political-salesmanship-by-book.

What do we learn about General Powell from this smooth, personable book? Well,
we learn that he admires Dwight D. Eisenhower (the general turned President, to
whom General Powell is frequently compared) and Thomas Jefferson. We learn that
General Powell voted for John F. Kennedy, Lyndon B. Johnson, Jimmy Carter,
Ronald Reagan and George Bush. And we learn that he prefers the music of Aretha
Franklin and Andrew Lloyd Webber to hard rock and rap.

The self-portrait that emerges from this book is that of a man who discovered
his sense of self in the Army, a man who found in the military the same sense of
"organization, tradition, hierarchy, pageantry, purpose" that he loved as a
child in church. It is this love of order that would later make General Powell
such a high-powered administrator, and this love of order that would make him
see his job as National Security Adviser as making the National Security Council
"trains run," a far cry, certainly, from the grandiose role of policy-maker once
envisioned by Henry Kissinger in the same job.

Indeed, a reading of "My American Journey" suggests that were Colin Powell to
win elected office, he would probably be more of a problem-solver than a
visionary: a hard-working bureaucrat, in his former boss Frank C. Carlucci's
words, who knows how to "impose order and procedure."

Though just what ideas he might try to instate remain more of a question. In
this book, as in his speeches, General Powell's remarks on domestic issues tend
to be safely generic and vague: he is for free enterprise, against higher taxes,
for public education and against racial polarization. He describes himself as "a
fiscal conservative with a social conscience," but adds that his philosophy is
still "evolving."

Despite General Powell's lengthy resume of civilian posts and despite his status
as a consummate political insider, he repeatedly tries to purvey an image of
himself as a simple soldier, wary of the ambiguities of politics, a canny stand,
certainly, for anyone remotely interested in running for President in these
anti-Washington times. "There was a comparison with working on cars," he writes.
"You could fix things more easily under the military hood than in the messier
gear-boxes of politics."

Army life, too, had its share of frustrations. But in much the same way that
General Powell dealt with early experiences of racism by gritting his teeth and
vowing to work harder ("If I was to be confined to one end of the playing field,
then I was going to be a star on that part of the field"), so he tended to cope
with military foul-ups by keeping his head down and soldiering on. He was, he
writes, "a soldier schooled in obedience."

Although the nightmare of Vietnam would play a formative role in shaping the
cautious approach to foreign policy evinced by General Powell on Bosnia and
during the Persian Gulf war, the general observes that for many years he allowed
himself to process the Vietnam War only through "the career lobe of my brain."
With the passage of time, he says, his perspective enlarged, but "it all made
sense in those days." After all, as a young officer, he "had been conditioned to
believe in the wisdom of my superiors, and to obey." "I had no qualms about what
we were doing," he writes.

On the matter of the My Lai massacre -- which involved members of the Americal
division, a division that the then Major Powell later helped to oversee and was
in a position to investigate -- he says little, save that it was "an appalling
example of much that had gone wrong in Vietnam."

All political and military memoirs, of course, are motivated, in part, by their
authors' desire to lay out -- for the record -- their own view of events, and
"My American Journey" is no exception. General Powell writes that he and
Secretary of Defense Caspar W. Weinberger initially thought the Reagan
Administration's arms deal with Iran (which later grew into the Iran-contra
affair) "would die of its own foolishness."

Although he and Mr. Weinberger carried out orders to transfer TOW missiles to
the Central Intelligence Agency (which was then to transfer the missiles to
Iran) under President Reagan's "Finding of Necessity," he says they treated the
transfer as "garbage to be gotten out of the house quickly." He adds that
"Weinberger, as well as the rest of us at Defense, had no knowledge of the most
illegal aspect of the affair, the diversion of Iranian arms sales profits to the
contras."

As for the Persian Gulf war and charges that the job was left unfinished,
leaving President Saddam Hussein of Iraq still in power, General Powell argues
that the Allied forces had fulfilled the United Nations mandate to liberate
Kuwait, and that continuing television coverage "was starting to make it look as
if we were engaged in slaughter for slaughter's sake." "We presently held the
moral high ground," he writes, high ground that could be lost by fighting past
the point of "rational calculation."

What makes "My American Journey" far livelier than your run-of-the-mill
political memoir is General Powell's ability to fold his explanations and
rationalizations into an easygoing, conversational narrative filled with lots of
details and informative, if boastful, asides. General Powell says he had
"reservations about the amorphous way" the Clinton Administration handled
foreign policy, and at the same time lets it drop that President Clinton asked
him if he would be interested in replacing Warren Christopher as Secretary of
State.

He writes that he was the one to initially suggest to President Bush that he
"think about laying down a line in the sand concerning Saudi Arabia." And he
takes credit for erasing right-wing fingerprints on an early draft of President
Bush's speech about Rodney King and the Los Angeles riots.

General Powell's portraits of the people he worked with are colorful and acute.
Mr. Christopher is depicted as "lawyerlike," simply waiting "for his client
group to decide what position he was to defend," while President Clinton is
described as "a good listener." General Powell notes that Gen. H. Norman
Schwarzkopf was given to shouting matches filled with barracks profanity, and
writes that John H. Sununu, President Bush's Chief of Staff, "did not suffer
fools gladly, or smart folks either, for that matter."

As General Powell's account of his preparations for one Gulf war news conference
attests (he relates how the statement "We are going to cut off the Iraqi Army
and neutralize it" evolved into the much quoted "First, we're going to cut it
off, and then we're going to kill it"), he is a man with a keen grasp of how
language can be used for dramatic effect.

His book may not persuade readers that he would make a good President, but it
should convince them that he has a bright future indeed as a motivational
speaker and raconteur.

No doubt he will at least succeed in selling a lot of books. As one of his
favorite maxims goes: "Perpetual optimism is a force multiplier."


LOAD-DATE: September 15, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Colin Powell. (Associated Press)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              264 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 16, 1995, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Here She Is, Miss America, Whose Ideal?

BYLINE: By FRANK BRUNI

SECTION: Section 1;   Page 1;   Column 2;   Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1244 words

DATELINE: ATLANTIC CITY, Sept. 15


To win the Miss America pageant here, it is not enough to look good. A
contestant must also do good, identifying a social issue, or "platform," she
plans to embrace.

Miss Hawaii's is "aging with dignity." Never mind that she is competing in a
contest with an age limit of 24 and an evident prohibition on wrinkles.

Miss Wyoming's is "eating disorders." Never mind that the contest is sure to
start more than a few female viewers on crash diets come Monday morning.

Miss California's is "sexual abstinence." Never mind that the pageant requires
participants to parade in swimsuits for millions of television viewers.

That, as most everyone knows by now, could change during the telecast Saturday
night. Viewers will be able to call in and decide the fate of the swimsuit
segment, for this year and future ones, before it takes place.

The swimsuit referendum demonstrates a willingness by pageant officials to move
Miss America further away from the simple, quaint beauty contest it has often
been perceived to be.

But what are they moving it toward?

"I'm not sure," said Leonard C. Horn, the president of the Miss America
Organization, as he sat in a trailer beside the pageant stage earlier this week.
Nor is he sure, he said, "how far to go before you throw out the baby with the
bath water."

As it celebrates its 75th anniversary, the Miss America pageant seems to find
itself in the grip of a potent identity crisis that gives rise to a host of
contradictions small, large and positively surreal. Its very confusion, however,
may put it closer in step with the times than it has ever been.

In a country in conflict over what roles and rights women should have, pageant
officials and contestants are merely grappling with the same uncertainty.
Consider the mutual embrace this year between the pageant, a lighting rod for
complaints from feminists, and Hillary Rodham Clinton, the First Lady, a
lightning rod for complaints about feminists.

Mrs. Clinton will appear in a taped segment of the telecast this year that shows
Heather Whitestone, the reigning Miss America, presenting her with a women's
achievement award. It is the first time a First Lady has appeared on a pageant
telecast while still in the White House.

At a news conference on Wednesday, Miss Whitestone chatted by telephone with
Mrs. Clinton, in a conversation made audible to dozens of reporters. Miss
Whitestone said she hoped Mrs. Clinton would watch the pageant. "I don't think
I've ever missed it, since I was a very young girl," Mrs. Clinton said.

Miss Whitestone mentioned Mrs. Clinton's role in the show. "This is the only way
I would ever, ever appear on a Miss America contest," Mrs. Clinton said in a
tone clearly striving to be warm and self-effacing. "It's one of those dreams
deferred, but it's finally coming true."

It was a curious moment, but no more curious than many others during a week of
preliminary competitions and rehearsals leading up to the pageant itself. The
evening gown preliminaries afforded contestants a minute or so to wax political,
and Miss Michigan mentioned "industrial development" while clad in black silk
beaming with rhinestones.

Miss Delaware, a graduate of Duke University, pondered "the changing
demographics of American society" from atop spiked heels. Miss Ohio uttered the
phrase "government-subsidized health care" in an off-the-shoulder gown with a
sweetheart neckline.

Miss New York, Helen L. Goldsby, a graduate of Howard University and the
Juilliard School, stood tall in a black sheath and proclaimed herself a survivor
of eight years of sexual abuse. Her platform is child sexual molestation.

Although Ms. Goldsby (she prefers Ms. to Miss) resides in Brooklyn, she got here
via the the Miss Orange County pageant, taking advantage of its open residency
rules after failing to win Miss Greater New York. Her victory there outraged
some local residents and contestants, who complained that Ms. Goldsby, a veteran
of many pageants, knew special tricks, such as using hair spray to make her
swimsuit cling.

"Everything that I knew, I shared," said Ms. Goldsby, a 24-year-old
African-American, in an interview Wednesday. "I don't have any of that spray,
because I shared it with all the young ladies in Orange County."

If television viewers, who can call in at the beginning, vote to eliminate
swimsuits this year, the air time for that segment will be filled instead in a
way that pageant organizers insisted on keeping top secret. There will not be a
new phase of competition, although there may be in future years.

The 50 contestants themselves have registered their opinions, voting 42-to-7 in
favor of keeping the swimsuits. Ms. Goldsby abstained.

"I'm comfortable either way," she said. "If they want me to do it, I'm going to
do it. It is a means to an end."

She defined that end as a chance for a national soapbox, but it also includes
instant fame and hundreds of thousands of dollars in income from appearances and
endorsements. Ms. Goldsby's pragmatism is hardly unique.

Talking to some of the contestants, one senses many lifting their fingers to
test the prevailing currents of popular opinion, then carefully positioning
themselves to be all things to all people.

They are victims, victors, underdogs, overachievers, tradition-bearers,
trailblazers. They praise God, but make nods to political correctness. They
assert their independence, but in the most sugary voices imaginable.

And they smile. Always, they smile. In the world of Miss America, life is a bowl
of cherries and a box of chocolates that never leave fat on the thighs or
cavities in the teeth.

That's not to say that all the contestants are gorgeous. Over the years, pageant
organizers have steadily de-emphasized conventional notions of beauty and
refined the pageant accordingly. In 1989, they began requiring contestants to
champion platforms. Last year, they took high heels out of the swimsuit
competition -- contestants are now barefoot -- and discussed it as a measure of
physical fitness.

Susan Alexander, the third runner-up in Miss Maryland, who came here this week
to watch the pageant, said it's easy to look at the photographs of many
contestants and think, "I know 10 women who are prettier than that."

Contestants and organizers said the focus today is scholarship -- the Miss
America organization will give away as much as $29.4 million in academic grants
this year -- and talent. To some extent, this year's field of aspirants backs
them up. It includes a Harvard University undergraduate, a medical school
student and several law school students.

It features singers of impressive power and pianists with true grace.

Even so, the pageant has not fully lost touch with its sometimes campy
sensibility. In the talent preliminaries, Miss Colorado, whose platform is
disability awareness, sang the popular ballad "Can You Feel the Love Tonight?"
to a puppet propped up in a wheelchair.

Miss Montana, enacting the role of a nurse during the Vietnam War, donned
military boots and a drab olive uniform for a dramatic reading that made
reference to "a young man who reeks of rice paddies."

Frank Deford, a sports commentator who wrote a 1971 book on the pageant and
judged it four times, said it has become a "kind of" pageant. "You're kind of
good looking," he said. "You're kind of talented. You're kind of smart. If you
were superior at any of these things, you wouldn't need to bother with this."

LOAD-DATE: September 16, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: The 75th Miss America pageant, grappling with its identity,
still inspires young hopefuls at its parade. (pg. 1); A souvenir stand hawking
pictures of the Miss America contestants caught the eyes of passers-by on the
Boardwalk in Atlantic City yesterday.; The Miss America pageant requires
contestants to adopt and speak out on a social issue, or "platform." The
platform of Miss New York, Helen Goldsby of Brooklyn, is the sexual abuse of
children. Ms. Goldsby, third from right, took part in a preliminary swimsuit
competition last night. (pg. 24) (Photographs by Monica Almeida/The New York
Times)

Graph: "KEEPING TRACK: Ratings Arent't Pretty" shows television ratings for the
Miss America pageant since 1974. (Source: Nielsen Media Research) (pg. 24)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              265 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 17, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

SEPT. 10-16;
Mr. Bush's Asian Tour

BYLINE: By DAVID E. SANGER

SECTION: Section 4;  Page 2;  Column 1;  Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 238 words


President Bush's economic advisers tried to convince him that America's hopes
for future prosperity lay in ties to Asia. Belatedly, Mr. Bush has decided they
were right, and in the last two weeks he has raked in millions of dollars on an
Asian swing that has not exactly been a testament to diplomacy.

In Vietnam Mr. Bush said former Defense Secretary Robert McNamara's confessional
about American mistakes during the war was a "revisionist" history. In Beijing
he seemed to undercut the Clinton Administration's efforts to persuade
authorities to lift their repressive hand on the United Nation's Women's
Conference, saying the forum has not helped Sino-American relations.

The biggest eyebrow-raiser came in Japan, where Mr. Bush is on a six-day tour
sponsored by the Women's Federation for World Peace, founded by Hak Ja Han Moon,
the wife of the Rev. Sun Myung Moon, the head of the Unification Church. Mr.
Bush's speech about family values was picketed in Tokyo by Japanese groups who
accuse the church of coercive fund raising and deceptive recruiting of Japanese
young people. Mrs. Moon's speech credited her husband with bringing Communism's
fall and declared that he must "save" America from "the destruction of the
family and moral decay."

Mr. Bush had four other cities to visit for the same sponsor, which his
spokesman insists has no financial ties to the Unification Church.   DAVID E.
SANGER

LOAD-DATE: September 17, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: George Bush in Tokyo last week. (Associated Press)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              266 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 17, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

With the Country Seeking a Leader, Gen. Powell Explains Who He Is

BYLINE: By ELIZABETH KOLBERT

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 20;  Column 1;  National Desk

LENGTH: 1793 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 16


General Colin L. Powell says he did not spend his whole life waiting for this
moment.

Yet, the moment has clearly arrived. America's yearning for a strong, vivid
leader has met up with one of the most intense book marketing efforts of all
time. And the man who has been effusively hailed as an inspirational leader, a
national hero and a potential savior of the political system is finally going to
be expected to explain who he is, and what he wants.

"I have been this sort of blank screen that people have projected their fondest
image on," the former chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff acknowledged in an
interview.

In person, in mufti, General Powell does reveal some surprising things about
himself:

He listens to Muzak in his office. He has a curious, horsy laugh. He has devised
an elaborate mathematical formula for making decisions, where when P equals 1
you have apparently waited too long.

"Somewhere between .4 and .7 you make your decision," he explained.

His autobiography, "My American Journey," which arrived in bookstores on Friday,
also reveals some surprising things:

Among his favorite movies are "The Producers," "The Lavender Hill Mob" and
"Moonstruck." The dimple on his neck is not a bullet wound, it's a surgical
scar. He enjoys a stiff drink now and then, even though he once had to be
strapped into a jeep to go on an alert because he was so hung over.

But spending time with General Powell, either in his Alexandria, Va., office or
in his book, one is left, quite intentionally, one suspects, still wishing he
would reveal a lot more.

General Powell chooses his words with enormous care, to the point of challenging
reporters on their precise phrasing of his past remarks, and adeptly turns any
question he does not want to answer into one he that does. This same habit
shapes his autobiography, where he sidesteps issues he does not want to
confront. He has studied intently the political landscape, to the point of
becoming well-versed in election law, yet he genuinely seems to be using his
publicity tour to decide whether to run, and if so, what as.

The General describes himself as pro-choice, pro-United Nations, in favor of
some form of affirmative action and gun control, and against organized prayer in
public schools. On the basis of these stands, he would seem to fit in the
moderate wing of the Republican Party or, just as easily, in the
desperately-seeking-center Democratic Party.

But on many other key issues, he appears to be a man very much in the midst of
studying up. He said he received position papers from groups as diverse as the
staunchly conservative Heritage Foundation and the centrist Progressive Policy
Institute and reads them all with equal care.

"Forgive me, but I'm not an expert on these matters yet," he said, referring to
welfare overhaul. Then, using a line that seemed tailor-made for a Powell for
President campaign, he added: "But it seems like the Congress is not expert on
these matters yet, either."

His Caution
A Man Who Keeps Emotions in Check

Although General Powell, who is 58, retired from the military two years ago, he
still seems to be adjusting to life in the civilian world. When he refers to the
military, he uses the pronoun we. Charts of the strength of the American
military are hung in his reception room. His staff is largely retired officers.

In the interview, General Powell was gracious but cautious, and wary. His
lengthy, carefully organized answers to questions about his record suggested
that he took criticism hard and did not easily forgive those who voice it. In
occasional flashes of humor, the General also showed some of the warmth and
spontaneity that he identifies as the dominant traits of his extended, Jamaican
immigrant family.

In his book, General Powell describes how he sometimes makes tough decisions by
listing the pros and cons on paper. Handed a sheet by a reporter pressing him
about his Presidential plans, the General at first was taken aback. Then, with
his best Yiddish accent, he answered: "You should be so lucky."

One of General Powell's rules, from a series of aphorisms that he keeps under
glass on his desk and lists at the back of his book, is: "Perpetual optimism is
a force multiplier." At least as far as his public persona goes, this is a rule
that he lives by. His autobiography, published by Random House, begins, "I have
had a great life," and through 643 pages chronicles his good fortune. Setbacks
do occur, but are almost invariably overcome. Curmudgeonly commanders turn out
to have hearts of gold. Comrades are killed, but things look better in the
morning.

Even when General Powell might be expected to betray bitterness, he does not,
though sometimes a note of defensiveness creeps in. For instance, he was
President Reagan's National Security Adviser during the 1988 Presidential race,
when many Democrats accused the Republicans of running a racist campaign. In his
book, the General agrees with this accusation, and writes, "I wish that Reagan
and Bush had shown more sensitivity on this point." But, he continues, "I took
consolation, nevertheless, in the thought that their confidence in me
represented a commitment to the American ideal of advancement by merit."

Race as a theme runs through the General's book and his public remarks, and to
the extent that he is willing in the interview to engage his potential rivals
for President, it is over racial politics. At several points, he expresses
concern about the tone of political debate in Washington and what he calls the
"demonization" of minorities and the poor.

Speaking about the debate over revamping welfare, for example, General Powell
said: "I get a little bit disturbed by some of the rhetoric that says, We gotta
get these people out of the back of the wagon and let them pull the wagon." This
phrase is often used by Senator Phil Gramm of Texas, a Republican candidate.

On affirmative action, which some Republican Presidential hopefuls have said
they would end, he said: "In our haste to go after those sorts of programs I'm
concerned that we're sending a very harsh message back to minorities, to blacks,
to women, that essentially says: It is a level playing field; it's a color blind
society. We don't have to pay as much attention to this as we did in the past.
And that's wrong."


His Career
Finding a Talent For Leadership

In the summer of 1957, General Powell made his first venture down South for six
weeks of R.O.T.C. training camp. It was there that the New York City native got
his first taste of racism: a white sergeant informed him he had been denied the
camp's highest honor because of his color. It was also there that General
Powell, who had been drifting amiably but aimlessly through City College,
discovered an area where he excelled.

"I had found something that I did well," he writes. "I could lead."

General Powell's self-confessed leadership qualities, which he details at some
length in his autobiography, are the heart of his appeal as a possible
President. But by the General's own account, military and civilian leadership
require distinctly different talents. Indeed, one of the General's legacies to
the military is the so-called Powell Doctrine that political leaders must
clearly state their aims before asking military leaders to carry them out.

The General's views on the distinct roles of military and civilian leaders were
forged by his experience in Vietnam, where he did two tours of duty. In his
description of the conflict, he largely exonerates the military for prolonging
the conflict, blaming almost entirely the politicians who he said did not have a
coherent set of goals.

"Politicians start wars," he writes. "Soldiers fight and die in them."

As he rose from job to job in Washington, General Powell repeatedly worried that
civilian officials were pushing the military into open-ended, Vietnam-like
commitments. His concerns about a reprise of Vietnam have had a strong influence
on American military policy in recent years, shaping the country's response to
Iraq's invasion of Kuwait and later to Serbian aggression in the former
Yugoslavia. In both cases, the General's policies have been criticized by some
analysts who have charged that he is always fighting the last war. In fact, on
Friday, the day his book hit the stores, the airport in Sarajevo reopened and
the first convoys to the city traversed long-closed roads after a sustained NATO
bombing campaign appears to have hammered the Bosnian Serbs into agreeing to end
their siege of the city. This is the strategy General Powell opposed on Bosnia
-- using air power only -- that worked as he said it would not.

The General is clearly sensitive to criticism of his decisions. Asked about
charges that he ended the Gulf War too early, allowing Saddam Hussein to remain
in power, he has a practiced, multipart rebuttal.

"It would have been a much more pleasant existence for the last four years if he
hadn't survived, but look at what we did accomplish," he said.  "The Iraqi Army
is not in Kuwait. Remember, that's what we went there for. Two, the legitimate
regime of Kuwait is in Kuwait. Three, the Iraqi Army is about 35 to 40 percent
of its original size. Fourth, we have put together some superb security
arrangements with friends in the region, so there will not be a repeat of an
invasion of that kind."

In his autobiography, General Powell describes himself confronted with
increasingly regularity with job offers he never sought. Some offers he accepted
after jotting down the pros and cons on a piece of paper.  Some, including an
offer from President Clinton to become Secretary of State, he turned down.

In the interview, General Powell depicted a Presidential candidacy as
essentially another job offer that had come to him unsolicited.

"I have to think about it," he said of a possible run. "I care very deeply about
this country and over the last two years a large number of people have spoken me
as I've traveled around the country and asked me to consider it. So, I am
considering it."

"I didn't spend my whole life waiting for this moment," he continued. "I
congratulate those in politicians who have seen this as the culminating point of
their professional career. To me, I had the culminating point in my real
professional career a couple of years ago."

At some point in the next several weeks, General Powell said, he would sit down,
talk to friends and family, and decide whether or not to run. But even at that
point, he said, he would not share his decision-making process with the public.

"At the end of the day," he said, "that'll be a private yea or nay in my own
mind, a piece of foolscap which I will then put in my shredder."

LOAD-DATE: September 17, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              267 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 17, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

For Destitute Veterans, Voluntary Boot Camp

BYLINE: By NEIL MacFARQUHAR

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 46;  Column 1;  Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 930 words

DATELINE: EDISON, N.J., Sept. 16


Jamiyl A. Shareef did not want to miss the rehabilitation camp for homeless
veterans held here this weekend. To make sure he stayed awake for the 5 A.M.
bus, he said, he spent the night in a Newark housing project smoking crack.

His mushrooming addiction in the last four months costs him $150 a day. It also
cost Mr. Shareef, 36, his ties to his wife, his cheerleader daughter and three
other teen-age children still living in his four-bedroom brick house in suburban
Rockville, Md.

Mr. Shareef grinned today as he tottered on slightly shaky legs and marveled
that his brain was still functioning enough for him to seek a detoxification
program.

He was one of more than 200 veterans gathered from around northern New Jersey
for two days at the special campsite assembled in Roosevelt Park here by a host
of Federal, state and local veterans' organizations. It is a sort of voluntary
boot camp to help destitute veterans find a route off the streets.

First started in San Diego in 1988, there are now 90 such events around the
nation annually, pushed by the fact that about one-quarter of all homeless are
believed to be veterans, organizers said. Sometimes the camps work wonders.
Melinda Knapp, the director of the project here for Middlesex County, said that
last year the benefits office found a man who was owed $50,000 for 13 years of
unclaimed disability payments.

The camp does not pretend to have all the answers. After consulting with the
doctors, the dentists, the housing assistance program, the counselors for
problems like post-traumatic stress disorder and the benefits advisers, the men
and women often end up back among the homeless. But it does seem to defuse some
widespread anger and frustration.

"These are the people you would have to worry about because they would be mad,"
said Mr. Shareef, who graduated from Rutgers University in 1983 with a degree in
political science and became a computer specialist with a transportation unit in
Germany during his service from 1983 until 1987.

"Look at that guy who blew up the Federal building in Oklahoma," he said. "These
are the ones that think 'I gave something to this country and I got nothing
back.' You think you should get something back."

For the weekend at least, the Army gently nudges the veterans to find a way out
of their problems by reminding them what a decent life feels like. There is a
shower tent with 14 spigots connected to a fire hydrant. There are mountains of
free clothing and three square meals a day. A barber is on hand and a would-be
radio station pipes music through loudspeakers connected to the trees.

Since most of the men are Vietnam-era veterans, the music has a strong 60's
streak through it, with tunes like "Devil with a Blue Dress On" by Mitch Ryder
and the Detroit Wheels or "Last Train to Clarksville" by the Monkees.

On this weekend, some of the music was sung by five men in an impromptu doo-wop
group called the Stand Downs, after the name of the camp. Stand Down is the same
name used by the Army for wartime rest camps away from combat lines.

With its lines of cots inside green tents, reservists running around in
camouflage uniforms, the chaplains' tent marked "Sky Pilots" and instructions
barked over the loudspeakers, the tenor is distinctly military. It is tonic for
most, and they laugh a bit when they find themselves reverting to type.

"I asked them up there at the shower tent if shaving was mandatory and then I
caught myself," said Charles D. Young, 31, who was in the Army and then the
Marines from 1982 to 1989.

Some veterans brought their children. Matthew Lund, 6, lives with his family in
two motel rooms on the Jersey Shore. On his first trip to the snack bar, he
discovered the candy was free and emerged with just two packs of spearmint gum
and a roll of Life Savers. Within 15 minutes, he was running around with both
hands grasping the bottom of his T-shirt to form a pouch stuffed with everything
he could grab.

His father, Leslie L. Lund, hoped bringing his four children to the camp would
help teach them the effects of war.

"I wanted them to see the despair, the guys coming off the street, the
vagabonds," Mr. Lund said.

Indeed, some of the veterans seem to have intractable problems. A few wander
around the camp muttering to themselves, picking up bits of loose paper from the
trash cans or sitting alone in front of tents, inhaling deeply on endless
cigarettes through sunken cheeks. Some fall down on already scabby faces and are
patched together in the medical tent. Some bring in alcohol or drugs and are
expelled.

The women are kept in a separate, fenced-in tent area to try to avoid clashes
between the men. Most are wives or other dependents, but women veterans said
about eight showed up.

Maria B. Rodriquez fell and hurt her back in Saudi Arabia right after the
Persian Gulf War, ending an 18-year career as an administrator with a medical
evacuation unit.

"It is frustrating because you talk to the services and they say, 'You put in a
claim already, what else do you want us to do?' " Mrs. Rodriquez said.
"Everything is so slow."

It is a common complaint by veterans emerging from sessions with the various
counselors working in eight small cabins. (For the rest of the year, it is a
shelter for abused children, which organizers said was about the only kind of
place that would accept them.)

"Uncle Sam hasn't helped me yet," said Mr. Young, hoping to find a program to
break his alcohol addiction. "I have been all around the world and I am still
stuck in the same ghetto."

LOAD-DATE: September 17, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: At a special weekend campsite in Roosevelt Park, in Edison,
N.J., more than 200 impoverished veterans and their families sought help. A
group gathered in front of their tent Friday night before dinner.; Matthew Lund,
6, a veteran's child, undergoing a physical at the camp. Maj. Harold J. Sleavin
of the National Guard wielded the stethoscope. (Photographs by Dith Pran/The New
York Times)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              268 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 17, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

SUNDAY: ADVENTURE TRAVEL;
Bang For the Buck

SECTION: Section 6;  Page 24;  Column 2;  Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 181 words


Private enterprise has once again leapfrogged over government. Instead of
considering war an expense, a Nashua, N.H., company has found an unusual way to
make money on armed conflict: tourism.

David Booth, president of War Tours Ltd., promises clients front-line battle
exposure, including being shot at and viewing the effects of heavy artillery.
For about $6,000, the war traveler receives a package tour of several danger
spots. The price includes boots and body armor, which may be kept as souvenirs.

"Our guides are combat-experienced veterans," Booth says. But the tourists do
not get to carry weapons. For that you have to enlist in a real army. And there
is no guarantee of personal safety.

Nor do tourists get to choose their destinations. Booth says trips have included
parts of the former Soviet Union (he won't say where) and spots on the Indian
Ocean.

Who goes on such trips? "Many of these are individuals who somehow missed
serving in Vietnam," Booth says. "War has always been considered a rite of
passage, and we're ready to provide that experience."

LOAD-DATE: September 17, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              269 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 17, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Japan, a Superpower Among Superheroes

BYLINE: By ANDREW POLLACK

SECTION: Section 2;  Page 32;  Column 1;  Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1958 words

DATELINE: TOKYO


HAYAO MIYAZAKI COULD teach Walt Disney a thing or two. Every year, Mr. Miyazaki
and his collaborators produce an animated movie that is breathtaking for its
lush, detailed scenery and its subtle use of colors. Almost every year, the
movie is among the top hits in Japan. And every time a Miyazaki film goes head
to head with a Disney animated feature at the box office in Japan, the Miyazaki
film wins.

For all his success in Japan, however, Mr. Miyazaki is barely known to audiences
elsewhere. But that probably won't be for long. Japanese animation is starting
to sweep through the world, becoming the nation's first big pop culture export.

Animation, which is known in Japan as anime (pronounced AH-nee-may), is diverse.
At one extreme is Mr. Miyazaki, who thinks that even Disney movies lack
"decency." He produces sugary stories like "My Neighbor Totoro," about two young
girls who are befriended by a mythical creature who flies around on a living bus
shaped like a cat. About 450,000 copies of the video have been distributed in
the United States since July 1994, marking Mr. Miyazaki's first success with
American audiences.

At the other extreme might be "Urotsuki Doji: Legend of the Overfiend," an
adults-only cartoon that was a popular midnight movie in places like the
Angelika Theater in New York. It features grotesque monsters from another world
forcing bizarre sex on cute teen-age earthlings.

In between is a whole panoply of space warriors, saucy goddesses, hard-nosed
athletes, klutzy teen-agers who are transformed into superheroes and a martial
arts master who changes into a woman when splashed with cold water. And robots
-- oh, so many gigantic, fighting robots!

For all the success of Japan as an exporter of cars and camcorders, its music,
movies, television shows and books, with a few exceptions, do not sell well
abroad.

But in cartoons, and in the closely related comic books, Japan is a superpower.
Consider this: Last year, more than half of the box-office revenues of Japan's
movie industry came from animation. More than 10 percent of all the books and
magazines published in Japan are comics. And according to one survey, more than
60 percent of the hours of television programming exported from Japan are
cartoons.

Japanese cartoons like Dragon Ball Z are hits in Europe, especially in France
and Spain. In Vietnam, children line up every Friday to buy the latest
installment of the comic book Doraemon, about a robotic cat who draws magical
devices from his kangaroolike pouch to help a hapless schoolboy.

Even in the United States, where there is more local competition, Japanese
animation, or Japanimation, has developed a cult following that is growing.

While there have been some Japanese cartoons on American television since the
early 1960's, like Astro Boy, Speed Racer and Star Blazers, the recent
popularity of anime results from video, which has allowed Japan's prolific
studios to reach viewers directly.

NUMEROUS American colleges have anime clubs, and there are conventions for
American fans. But the place fanatics really meet is on the Internet computer
network. For instance, Hitoshi Doi's Anime Page (http://
www.tcp.com/doi/anime2.html) offers synopses of almost every episode of many
cartoon series.

On television, too, there is a new interest in Japanese cartoons, generated by
the phenomenal success of the Japanese-derived "Mighty Morphin Power Rangers."
The show, while not actually a cartoon, is very cartoonlike.

Last Monday, a half-hour cartoon show called "Sailor Moon" made its debut on
American television (in New York on Channel 11 at 6:30 A.M., Mondays through
Fridays). It is about a clumsy crybaby of a junior high school girl who is
transformed into a leggy superheroine. The program has been a hit in France. In
Japan, it has set off a merchandising mania of dolls, scepters and other
paraphernalia far in excess of anything generated here by the Power Rangers.

Japanese comics, known as manga, are also appearing in English in the United
States. Studio Proteus, a San Francisco manga importer and translator, reports
that the most popular include "Oh My Goddess," about a college student living
with three goddesses, and "Domu (A Child's Dream)," about psychic warfare
between an evil man and a young girl.

To be sure, Mickey Mouse need not start quaking in his shoes just yet. Disney
can sell more than 20 million videotapes of one of its hit movies. With anime,
"to sell 20,000 makes it a best seller," said John O'Donnell, managing director
of Central Park Media, a New York-based anime distributor.

The spread of Japanese cartoons and comics is not always welcome. Critics say
they contain too much sex and violence or are crassly aimed at selling toys.
Many featured shapely yet innocent-looking teen-age girls, the object of many
Japanese men's fantasies. In Spain, some Japanese cartoons were taken off the
air after protests about their violence. Central Park Media voluntarily rates
its videos.

In Japan, the police occasionally report crimes that were influenced by comics
and cartoons, and some comics cannot be sold to minors. But the overall crime
rate here is extremely low, so there has not been that much protest. Still, even
Japan has its limits. A manga called "Rape Man," featuring a hero who commits
rape for hire, was discontinued after protests from women's groups.

One reason Japanese comics and animation get away with sex and violence is that
they are not just for children. Some of the same blue-suited businessmen who
have made Japan into an economic superpower commute to work on the subways
reading comic books, some as thick as telephone books and many sexually
explicit.

Comics are a mainstream form of communication here, sold in most bookstores and
dealing with more than superheroes. Just how fertile a genre it is can be seen
by visiting Comic Station Shibuya, a manga specialty store in Tokyo that
contains 120,000 comic books and magazines, almost all wrapped in cellophane to
keep them clean and prevent reading without paying.

Among the store's recent best sellers are "Mind Assassin," about a psychiatrist
who uses ESP to cure people, and "Gallery Fake," about a dealer in fake
antiques. Popular among women are manga featuring love and sex between
homosexual men.

The most successful manga artists, like Rumiko Takahashi, can become fabulously
wealthy. Some publish their first drawings as teen-agers and, despite their
tender age, are referred to as "sensei," meaning "master" or "teacher."

The productive comic industry provides the grist for most animations. If comics
fulfill part of the role played by novels in the United States, animation is the
counterpart of American movies. Young animators here say they are influenced by
movies like "Blade Runner" and "Terminator 2" more than by American cartoons.

Japan's anemic movie industry could not keep up with Hollywood's big-budget
special-effects films, said Masahiro Haraguchi, a contributing editor of Animage
magazine. "So they increasingly turned to animation, where anything is
possible," he said.

Admirers say the stories in manga and anime are more complex than in American
comics and cartoons. In Japan, superheroes have frailties and major characters
can die.

Technology is a big theme, portrayed both positively and negatively. Life after
a nuclear holocaust is a common theme, as exemplified by Katsuhiro Otomo's
cyberpunk "Akira," probably the best known anime outside Japan.

The scenery in anime sometimes looks as realistic as a photograph, exhibiting
the kind of attention to detail found in other Japanese arts like flower
arranging. The exception to the realism is in the characters' faces, with their
oversize eyes. In American cartoons, facial expressions and mouth movements are
fluid. In Japan, partly to save money, there is less focus on faces, resulting
in jerkier movements.

"I've seen shots where you look at a glass with ice cubes while the two
characters talk," said Lenord Robinson, director of animation for Warner
Brothers. "But we in the U.S. are in a hurry to get to the action."

Japan has had a long tradition of drawing pictures. Wood block prints, now
considered fine art, were actually used for storytelling several hundred years
ago. But the modern form of comics and animation was created in the two decades
after World War II by Osamu Tezuka, who is known as the Walt Disney of Japan.
Mr. Tezuka pioneered novel-like stories in manga and created Astro Boy, among
other characters.

Mr. Tezuka, who died in 1989, is so revered here that a museum was built in his
honor. More than 40 Japanese cartoonists signed a letter of protest to Disney
last year complaining that "The Lion King" seemed to borrow from Tezuka's
"Jungle Emperor," which was shown on American television in 1966 as "Kimba, the
White Lion."

In both stories the father lion is killed and the son is sent into exile and
later returns to recapture the throne. In both stories the lion prince is aided
by a wise baboon and a talkative bird while the evil lion has hyenas as
henchmen. But Disney defended its work as original. And Tezuka Production, the
company that controls the rights to the late author's works, said Mr. Tezuka was
an avid Disney fan who would have been flattered if his work had inspired "The
Lion King."

THE NEW KINGS OF JAPANESE animation are Mr. Miyazaki and his 100-employee
company, Studio Ghibli. "If you had a Top 10 list, they would fill all the
slots," said Emiko Okada, an animation critic.

The son of an aviation company executive, Mr. Miyazaki started his career at
Toei Animation, but chafed at life in the big company. He left for a smaller
company and then, in 1985, founded Ghibli.

His movies are often simple and heartwarming. His latest movie, "Whisper of the
Heart," is a love story about a bookwormish teen-age girl and a boy who wants to
be a violin maker. "I don't want to depict the world as someplace not worth
living in," Mr. Miyazaki said.

At 54, with graying hair, he criticizes most other Japanese animations as being
technically poor or too commercial. He also says that Disney has strayed from
its formerly pure stories. "When I look at 'Beauty and the Beast,' it reminds me
of a psychiatric patient and his counselor," he said.

By the same token, however, some people say that Mr. Miyazaki's stories lack a
certain grittiness found in other animations. "His worlds have become just too
nostalgic," said Mamoru Oshii, 44, who is considered a leader of the next
generation of animators. His best-known work is "Patlabor," about a robot police
force in the future.

Despite what looks like the animation industry's vibrant success, there are
signs of trouble. A recent edition of Comic Box, a magazine about the manga
business, featured the headline "Manga Is Dead?" Many animations are made on a
shoestring budget, and underpaid animators are defecting to the more lucrative
video-game industry.

One solution is financing from abroad. Mr. Oshii's newest production, "Ghost in
the Shell," is receiving money from Manga Entertainment, a distributor of manga
and anime, and will be released simultaneously in English and Japanese late this
year.

One can only guess what it is about. The advertising poster shows a naked,
gun-toting woman with wires attached to her. "People love machines in 2029
A.D.," the poster says. "Who are you? Who slips into my robot body and whispers
to my ghost?"

One thing is clear. Even if the manga and anime industries are slowing down,
there is a huge reservoir of material still to be exploited overseas. The
invasion of the giant robots, sex-crazed demons and voluptuous yet vulnerable
co-eds is just beginning.

LOAD-DATE: September 17, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawings

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              270 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 17, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

A Corner, A Kingdom, In Vermont

BYLINE: By BARRY ESTABROOK;   BARRY ESTABROOK lives in Vermont. His latest
mystery, "Whirlpool," has just been published by St. Martin's Press.

SECTION: Section 5;  Page 14;  Column 1;  Travel Desk

LENGTH: 2539 words


ALTHOUGH he may be best remembered for suggesting that the United States should
declare victory and then get out of Vietnam, it was during a 1949 speech made to
his constituents in the small Vermont town of Lyndonville that Senator George
Aiken observed: "You know, this is such beautiful country up here. It ought to
be called the Northeast Kingdom of Vermont."

Senator Aiken, who died in 1984, was referring to the state's three
northeasternmost counties, Orleans, Essex and Caledonia, which form a crude
triangle wedged between the Connecticut River and Canadian border. The name
stuck. It evokes the region's beauty, mystery, remoteness and even the quirky
independence that caused its residents to help send Mr. Aiken down to Washington
for more than three decades. The Northeast Kingdom is what the rest of Vermont
used to be before it made a self-conscious effort to appeal to tourists.

Visitors are more likely to encounter a lumber mill than a craft shop.
Mud-coated Holstein cows behind strands of wire are more common than sleek
Morgan horses gazing over white rail fences. Trailers and frame farmhouses
outnumber nicely restored Federalist houses. A patchwork of hay fields and
sugarbushes and wide expanses of undeveloped forest run up and over hillsides.
Narrow roads twist through valleys and lead to little country towns with white
church steeples. And everywhere, summits and ridges too numerous to identify
roll off to the horizon like waves.

During my rambles in the Northeast Kingdom last month, I lost myself on back
roads surrounded with views of tranquil farms and soaring, distant mountains. I
fell asleep under down comforters in quiet inns. I rubbed elbows with local
people over a hearty breakfast at a small-town diner. I visited an outstanding
gallery of 19th-century American landscape art. I even established a personal
relationship with a llama.

One of the most striking natural features of the region is Lake Willoughby, in
the north-central part of the Kingdom, with its fjord-like setting. The cliffs
of Mount Hor and Mount Pisgah soar more than 1,000 feet from either side of the
glacially carved lake.  Of the hiking trails here, the one up Mount Pisgah is
the most popular. The trail, 1.7 miles each way, is wide and clear, and the
views from the summit extend across the entire Northeast Kingdom.

To reach the trail head, I pulled off to a parking area half a mile south of the
lake. At first, I wasn't certain I had come to the right place. The Northeast
Kingdom has a curious love/hate relationship with signs, either belaboring the
obvious or being fiendishly secretive. While looking for the trail head to Mount
Hor, I parked in the wrong place and, clad in full hiking regalia -- boots,
thick socks, fanny pack -- strode out of the forest right onto the local nude
beach.

The correct trail head was a half-mile farther south. I encountered no one on
the Mount Pisgah trail as I crossed a swampy area, skirted a pond and began to
climb a series of switchbacks on the side of the mountain. The going was
strenuous but manageable, requiring no special training or gear beyond a decent
pair of running shoes. I stopped to take in the view halfway up at Pulpit Rock,
which sticks out over a sheer cliff like a theater box, minus the rail, 550 feet
above Lake Willoughby.

After Pulpit Rock, the trail becomes steep, cutting through the forest like a
natural staircase, and eventually opens up to a summit 1,450 feet above the
lake. The views -- the Green Mountains to the north and west and the White
mountains to the east -- more than compensate for the rigors of the climb. For
those who wish to avoid such effort, the same views can be had from the top of
nearby Burke Mountain, which has a $3 toll road leading to the summit.

I had a view of the lake through picture windows that night during dinner at
Willough Vale Inn in Westmore. There, watching the sunset paint Pisgah lava
orange, I had an appetizer of steamed mussels, followed by baked blue cod and,
for dessert, fresh wild blackberries in cream.

After dinner, I drove about 15 miles north to Coventry, near the Canadian
border. In the farm country beyond the village, I came to Heermansmith Farm Inn,
owned by the same family since 1807. I was shown to a room at the back, where I
had my own bathroom, a quilt-covered bed and total quiet that assured a long,
deep sleep.

The Groton State Forest, at the opposite end of the Northeast Kingdom from
Coventry, is an easy 45 minutes' drive on Interstate 91, but I spent a pleasant
half-day instead on the network of state highways and secondary roads that span
the high country west of the interstate.

I meandered down to Barton and took the back road to Irasburg, a detour made
worthwhile by the view of the Green Mountains. I then headed south on Route 16,
being sure to turn into Craftsbury Common, a small village set around a large
square, where every house is clapboard and painted one color -- white. The quiet
was almost disconcerting.

Craftsbury Common and nearby Greensboro are especially enjoyable in foliage
season for the views -- both panoramic and pastoral -- from the back roads and
lanes that crisscross the high country, a mixture of mountain wilderness and
farms, ponds and rivers, fields and forests. Almost any of the unmarked gravel
roads out of the village of Greensboro guarantees a memorable drive.

A local landmark is Willey's Store in Greensboro, one of the state's biggest and
most "general" general stores. On Willey's crowded shelves, Northeast Kingdom
residents can find just about anything they need without having to travel to the
city, be it a bathing suit or a pair of tall rubber barn boots, a circular saw
or a Barbie doll, a bottle of vintage Burgundy or a pane of custom-cut glass.

From Greensboro, I took the gravel road through the village of Stannard to South
Wheelock, where I turned south toward Danville and Groton State Forest. The
state forest, 25,000 acres of unspoiled, rugged scenery, has a network of hiking
trails radiating out from the parking lot at the New Discovery Camp Ground off
Route 232. From there it's an easy mile-and-a-half hike to Big Deer Mountain's
summit. Trail maps are available at the gatehouse.

An alternative is to see Groton State Forest in the company of a llama. With
headquarters on property that borders the state forest, Northeast Kingdom Llama
Expeditions offers hikers guided excursions, with llamas carrying a rather
elaborate picnic lunch and other gear at the same time as they provide company
and set a leisurely pace.

The outfitter is based on a farm off Route 302 west of the town of Groton. The
farm consists of a white house with a barn beside it and a pasture out back --
typical Northeast Kingdom, were it not for the llamas tethered in front.

I was introduced to Yin and handed his lead, and we set off. Our party for the
four-hour hike consisted of Gale Birutta, our guide, four hikers and four
llamas. True to his billing, Yin was a pleasant walking companion, much like a
well-trained dog, only taller. Looking like a shaggy white-tailed deer with a
giraffe's neck and a camel's slightly goofy face, he padded along behind me up
through a Robert Frost landscape of moss-covered rock walls bordering narrow,
leaf-littered lanes, ancient gnarled maples and gone-wild apple orchards. The
llamas came into their own when Ms. Birutta led us into a clearing where she
proceeded to remove folding camp tables, tablecloth, dishware, cutlery and the
makings for a full sit-down lunch from the animals' packs.

WITH all the outdoor appeal of the Northeast Kingdom, it's easy to forget that
there's more to it than hiking trails and vistas. But the Kingdom has its ways
of coaxing visitors inside. Clouds obscured the peaks, fog clung to the
mountainsides, and rain played a beat on the car roof the first time I visited
the Fairbanks Museum and Planetarium in St. Johnsbury, the unofficial capital of
the Northeast Kingdom, a town with some 8,000 inhabitants.

The collection was amassed by Franklin Fairbanks, a 19th-century industrialist
from St. Johnsbury's most prominent family. He started the collection when, in
his own words, he was "a little barefoot boy roaming these hills." By 1890,
Fairbanks's roaming had resulted in enough curios and artifacts to fill a red
sandstone building with one of the quirkiest collections imaginable. In fact,
the whole place can be viewed as a giant museum piece in and of itself, paying
tribute to the insatiable curiosity of gentlemen explorers of the last century.

Beneath a vaulted ceiling, the building houses over 3,000 stuffed animals,
including tiny hummingbirds, a massive polar bear clutching a ringed seal in its
jaw, a wild boar, a flock of feeding flamingos and even an aardvark. Of all
these wonders, none surpasses the bug art by John Hampson (1836-1923), an
engineer and entomologist who took three to four years to create a single work
such as the one depicting Abraham Lincoln, using nothing but moths and beetles
as a medium.

More serious art is to be found in the St. Johnsbury Athenaeum. Another
perfectly preserved bit of the 19th century, the Athenaeum houses 100 oil
paintings. Both the building and the collection within have remained largely
unaltered since being given to the city in 1873 by Horace Fairbanks, another of
the St. Johnsbury Fairbankses. The pride of the sky-lighted gallery is the
13-by-15-foot "Domes of Yosemite," by Albert Bierstadt.

My last stop took me back to the Lake Willoughby area, to Route 122 just south
of the center of the town of Glover, where a psychedelic school bus marked
"Cheap Art" stands across the road from the Bread and Puppet Theater Museum, a
shrine to the values of the 1960's counterculture. Haunting and grotesque
puppets -- some with faces as large as Volkswagen Beetles -- occupy the barn.
They are used in the annual Domestic Resurrection Circus each August, a series
of modern-day morality plays staged in an amphitheater that is actually an
abandoned quarry.

As the giant, contorted faces stared down on me from the gloomy rafters, I
wondered what Franklin Fairbanks would have thought of this bizarre theater
troupe and its fantastic creations in "these hills" of his. Or llamas, for that
matter. A true son of the Northeast Kingdom, Fairbanks probably would have been
slightly bemused -- and then angled for a way to add one or two to his own
collection.

A guide to Orleans, Essex and Caledonia Counties

 For more information about travel in the Northeast Kingdom contact the
Northeast Kingdom Travel and Tourist Association, 30 Western Avenue, St.
Johnsbury, Vt. 05819; (800) 639-6379 or (802) 748-3678.

Burlington International Airport is about 90 minutes' drive from the Northeast
Kingdom.

Where to Stay

 Rabbit Hill Inn, (800) 762-8669 or (802) 748-5168, in Lower Waterford, a tiny
Connecticut River village near St. Johnsbury, has 16 rooms and four suites. It
offers down pillows and comforters, deep, crow's-foot bathtubs, antique
furnishings, and fireplaces in some of the spacious rooms. Rates for two range
from $169 to $249, including breakfast and dinner.

The Wildflower Inn, (800) 627-8310 or (802) 626-8310, is in a former 500-acre
farm on an open hilltop. You reach it by driving north out of the town of
Lyndonville, along a two-mile gravel road under a cathedral ceiling of maple
boughs. The inn has 22 rooms in the main house and several outbuildings. It goes
out of its way to welcome children, who have their own play room, special
outdoor play area, petting barn and, if desired, separate dining area. There is
also an organized child-care program. Rate for two in a room with a private bath
(two rooms share a bath) is $99, including a full breakfast.

The Inn on the Common, (800) 521-2233 or (802) 586-9619, with 16 rooms occupies
three stately houses with white picket fences in the village of Craftsbury
Common. The inn sits on a ridge with views of the Green Mountains from
landscaped grounds of English-style gardens, perennial borders, a gazebo to
meditate in and a private nature trail. Rates for two, including five-course
dinner and full breakfast, range from $200 to $270.

The Craftsbury Inn, (800) 336-2848 or (802) 586-2848, in Craftsbury was built as
a home in 1850 by a local merchant. It has a large, comfortable common room with
the original bird's-eye maple woodwork and embossed tin ceilings. The inn has 10
guest rooms, six with private bathrooms. Rates for bed and breakfast run from
$64 to $112 for two, and from $110 to $160 with breakfast and dinner.

Heermansmith Farm Inn, (802) 754-8866, is up a small gravel road in the farmland
outside the village of Coventry. It has been in the same family since 1807, and
today the Smiths offer guests six rooms, all with private baths. Nothing is
fancy at Heerman smith, but the former farmhouse is snug and comfortable. Rate
for two, including breakfast, is $60.


Where to Eat

Many of the Northeast Kingdom's better dining places are at inns. Reservations
for outside diners are a must.

Rabbit Hill Inn's candle-lighted dining room offers appetizers such as grilled
chicken and pheasant sausage with foie gras and minted swordfish ceviche. A main
course might be pan-roasted beef tenderloin or steamed salmon in a sunflower
macadamia nut crust served with kiwi coconut sauce and saffron linguine for
about $80 for two, including a bottle of wine.

The Willough Vale Inn, (802) 525-4123, in Westmore sits at the end of Lake
Willoughby. The fare may include such appetizers as Vermont chevre with
bruschetta and strawberry vinaigrette or fillet of trout with horseradish cream.
Rack of lamb with herb crust, and pan-seared trout with pecan butter are among
the main courses. Dinner for two with a bottle of wine is $70 to $80.

The food served around the brick fireplace on the ground floor of the Heerman
smith Farm Inn is solid and dependable: roast duck Heermansmith and baked
stuffed shrimp with lobster and crab filling are among the choices. Dinner for
two with a bottle of wine is about $75.

The Miss Lyndonville Diner, just south of the town of Lyndonville on Route 5, is
a local landmark where $7 will buy two eggs, an enormous maple-smoked ham steak
heaped on a pile of home fries, two thick slabs of buttered bread and coffee.
Another specialty is strawberry or blueberry-filled pancakes.


Things to Do

Northeast Kingdom Llama Expeditions, 152 Heath Brook Road, Groton, Vt. 05046;
(802) 584-3198. Rate for a half-day excursion with lunch is $45.

Fairbanks Museum and Planetarium, Main and Prospect Streets, St. Johnsbury, Vt.
05819; (802) 748-2372. Open 10 A.M. to 4 P.M. daily and 1 P.M. to 5 P.M. Sunday.
Planetarium shows are at 1:30 Saturday and Sunday. Admission is $4.

St. Johnsbury Athenaeum, 30 Main Street, St. Johnsbury, Vt. 05819, (802)
748-8291, is open to the public at no charge from 10 A.M. to 8 P.M. on Monday
and Wednesday, from 10 A.M. to 5:30 P.M. on Tuesday, Thursday and Friday, and
from 9:30 A.M. to 4 P.M. on Saturday.

The pocket-sized "Day Hiker's Guide to Vermont," published by the Green Mountain
Club, can be obtained in bookstores and at most outfitters for $9.95.

LOAD-DATE: September 17, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Enjoying the view from the top of Burke Mountain, reached by a
toll road.; Church in the village of Stannard along Stannard Road.; Bread and
Puppet Theater Museum in Glover, a shrine to the 1960's counterculture.; A house
in Albany, Vt., near Craftsbury.; The Heermansmith Farm Inn, outside Coventry.
(pg. 14); Llamas carry lunches and set the pace through Groton State Forest.
(pg. 16) (Photographs by Paul O. Boisvert for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              271 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 17, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Vidal and Buckley, Calley and My Lai

SECTION: Section 7;  Page 4;  Column 6;  Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 342 words


To the Editor:

Timothy Foote doesn't get it. In his review of "It Wasn't Pretty, Folks, but
Didn't We Have Fun?" he suggests that Esquire's publication of my "Confessions
of Lt. Calley" was silly and shameful, an instance of shaky judgment by
Esquire's editor, Harold Hayes. Carol Polsgrove is much more perceptive in her
book. She reports that when Lieut. William Calley arrived in Quang Ngai Province
in Vietnam, 85 percent of the place had already been destroyed, and she quotes
from the Backstage column in Esquire: "Calley had all the guidance an ungrateful
nation, which includes you and us, could lend him. . . . Nothing in Calley is
alien to us."

It has been 25 years since Lieutenant Calley's nostra culpa. How many more
Vietnam veterans will have to confess to doing roughly what he did for Mr. Foote
to understand that William Calley was guilty only of being an American soldier
in the wall-to-wall atrocity that was the Vietnam War? This summer I was at 22
Army and Air Force bases in the United States. I never met a veteran who was
critical of Lieutenant Calley, but I met dozens who called him the fall guy, the
scapegoat, the bad-luck bear of Vietnam. One old sergeant who'd been a guard at
the court-martial told me he'd told a general: "Sir, this is wrong. If you
convict him, you convict me too." The sergeant, with tears in his eyes, gave me
the date, the site and the names of other participants in a massacre that was
worse than Lieutenant Calley's.

The publication of the "Confessions" was a deeply responsible act by Harold
Hayes. Twenty-five years before the confessions of Robert McNamara, what Hayes
and Lieutenant Calley and I were essentially telling America was "We are wrong,
we are terribly wrong," and I can't agree with Mr. Foote that this was silly or
shameful to do. One other thing. William Calley and I are indeed friends, who
had dinner together only a month ago. But the man who negotiated the "expensive
package" with Esquire and Viking Press was his agent, not I.

JOHN SACK
Ketchum, Idaho

LOAD-DATE: September 17, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              272 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 17, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

BOOKS IN BRIEF: NONFICTION

BYLINE: By MICHAEL LICHTENSTEIN

SECTION: Section 7;  Page 24;  Column 4;  Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 157 words



THE HOUSE OF PURPLE HEARTS
Stories of Vietnam Vets
Who Find Their Way Back.
By Paul Solotaroff.
HarperCollins, $22.

Twenty years after the fall of Saigon, many Vietnam veterans still find the
peace a greater danger than the war ever was. In his first book, "The House of
Purple Hearts," Paul Solotaroff movingly chronicles the creation and operation
of the New England Shelter for Homeless Veterans, a treatment center founded in
1989 to care for veterans whose psychological problems had led them to drug
abuse and homelessness. The numbers were staggering. The Veterans Administration
was generally unable to help them, the author writes, but the New England
Shelter, with its mix of counseling, therapy and job training, has been able to
restore scores of veterans to working lives. Mr. Solotaroff has deftly combined
the terrifying recollections of battle-shocked men with an inspiring story of
hope.   MICHAEL LICHTENSTEIN

LOAD-DATE: September 17, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              273 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 17, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

CONNECTICUT GUIDE

BYLINE: By ELEANOR CHARLES

SECTION: Section 13CN;  Page 17;  Column 1;  Connecticut Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 932 words



WRITERS IN SPEECH

Madeleine L'Engle, author of "A Wrinkle in Time" and some 40 additional books,
will be the first speaker in UConn-Torrington's Litchfield County Writers
Project series.

Ms. L'Engle's output has been directed at all ages, but her popularity with
young readers derived in large measure by creating central characters rarely
found in children's books. They are flawed, problematic, misunderstood and
temperamental. "A Wrinkle in Time" was rejected by several major publishers as
too strange and difficult for children until Farrar, Straus & Giroux took it in
1962 and a year later it won the Newbery Medal.

Ms. L'Engle will appear on Friday at 7:30 P.M. in the lecture hall of the campus
off Route 4. Admission is free, but reservations should be made by calling
482-7635.

SWIFT SYMPOSIUM

The 250th anniversary of Jonathan Swift's death will be marked at the Yale
Center for British Art with a symposium on Friday and Saturday.

Friday's events, from 2 to 6 P.M., include talks by scholars from the Australian
National University, Oxford University, Johns Hopkins and Yale. Titles include
"Killing No Murder: Jonathan Swift and Assassins," "Literary Criticism and the
War of Spanish Succession," "Putting Out the Fire in Her Imperial Majesty's
Apartment: Swift, Hogarth, and the Walpole Opposition" and "Gulliver, Yahoos and
Other People."

Swift in love, Swift's female readers then and now and Swift's knack for rhyme
are some of the subjects to be explored on Saturday from 10 A.M. to 5 P.M. by
scholars from Rutgers, Syracuse, Notre Dame, Oxford and Cambridge Universities.

A satirist, poet and Irish patriot, Swift died in 1745 at the age of 78, ending
a career that went well beyond his most famous work, "Gulliver's Travels." He
was an Anglican priest who became Dean of St. Patrick's Cathedral in Dublin,
writing inflammatory tracts against English exploitation of Ireland and at the
same time railing against the destructive habits of his own Anglo-Irish
community.

The symposium is open to the public free of charge and reservations are not
necessary. The center is at 1080 Chapel Street in New Haven.

DARK MOMENTS

The murder of Emmet Till, the bombing of Hiroshima, the assassination of John F.
Kennedy, the My Lai massacre and the killing of Kent State students by National
Guardsmen are the ingredients of a sculpture exhibition by Chris Burden, on view
at the Yale Art Gallery through Sunday, and called "America's Darker Moments."

The featured event of a weeklong forum on the exhibition is to take place on
Saturday at 1:30 in the gallery's lecture hall. Because so many younger people
today are unfamiliar with the tragedies they depict, the forum was organized to
provide some illumination. Among the speakers is Robin D. G. Kelley, author of
"Race Rebels: Culture, Politics and the Black Working Class," who will talk
about the Emmet Till case.

Earlier in the week, on Monday at 2 P.M., Mary L. Kordak will present a gallery
talk about the exhibition, to be repeated on Thursday at 1 P.M. On Wednesday at
12:20 Jacqueline Goldsby will will talk about the Emmet Till section of the
piece. Admission to special programs and the gallery at Chapel and York Streets
in New Haven is free. Call 432-0600 for more information.

THEATER OF THE DEAF

Two performances of the National Theater of the Deaf's Tony Award-winning
production of "The Italian Straw Hat" will be presented tomorrow and Tuesday at
7:30 P.M. at the Norma Terris Theater in Chester. The show will then embark on a
national tour, beginning at the Sylvia and Danny Kaye Playhouse in Manhattan
from Thursday through Sunday.

Adapted and directed by Ken Albers from a French farce by Marc- Michel and
Eugene Labiche, the play takes on new dimensions when performed by this troupe
of deaf and hearing actors. Tickets, at $15, may be ordered by calling 873-8668.


HERE COMES 'LILLIAN'

David Cale's work-in-progress titled "Lillian" will be presented Thursday
through Saturday at 8 P.M. at Real Art Ways, 56 Arbor Street, in Hartford. In
this first full-length piece that Mr. Cale has attempted, the title character is
a 30's-something, married Englishwoman who has a brief affair with Jimmy, a
reckless young man who is 15 years her junior. Years later, after her divorce,
the two are reunited until Jimmy mysteriously disappears.

Tickets are $10 and may be reserved by calling 232-1006.

FROM THE SMITHSONIAN

The New Haven Free Public Library is one of 30 libraries across the country to
become a venue for the Smithsonian Institution's traveling exhibition, "Beyond
Category: the Musical Genius of Duke Ellington." Comprised of modular panels,
interactive video of soloists who appeared with the orchestra during its 50-year
existence, as well as vintage film clips of Ellington's life and career, the
exhibition will remain through Nov. 2.

An opening reception is scheduled on Friday from 6 to 7 P.M. at the Main
Library, 133 Elm Street. Ellington's music will be played by Bill Brown,
pianist, and John Hasse, author of the book from which the exhibition took it
title and curator of American music at the Smithsonian, will conduct a slide
presentation. At 8 P.M. a septet led by Loren Schoenberg will perform an
Ellington concert at the United Church on the green.

Dr. Frank Tirro, professor of music at Yale, will discuss "Ellington the
Pianist" at the library on Thursday at 7 P.M. and several additional events are
scheduled through Oct. 12 in New Haven and Hamden. Everything is free. For more
information, call 946-8141.   ELEANOR CHARLES

LOAD-DATE: September 17, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              274 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 17, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

A Quiz Show's 'Jeopardy-Like' Format Is a Knowledge of Rye

BYLINE: By DANIEL McGINN;

The answers to questions posed above are:

*The Knapp House is named for Timothy Knapp, born in Watertown in 1632.

*Rye's City Manager is Frank J. Culross.

*The A .& P. has seven checkout counters (including the courtesy desk).

*The memorial at City Hall honors veterans of World War II, Korea, and Vietnam.

SECTION: Section 13WC;  Page 21;  Column 1;  Westchester Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 870 words

DATELINE: Rye


IN the 1940's, Ted Levine listened with rapt attention to radio quiz shows. In
the 1950's, he became enthralled with television quiz shows like "21."

"I loved the idea of people sitting around pitting their minds against each
other," he said.

And in 1995, Mr. Levine gets to be host of a quiz show all his own.

Mr. Levine, a 68-year-old public-relations executive, is the host and producer
of "What's Your Rye-Q?," a 10-month-old quiz show broadcast each month on Rye
Community Television. The show offers viewers a painless way to learn more about
their city by watching two teams answer trivia questions ranging from the
historical to the contemporary to the obscure.

Examples: What landmark in Rye was named for a baby born in Watertown, Mass., in
1632? Who is Rye's city manager? How many checkout counters are in the local A.
&P .?

The show is one of nine regular series broadcast on the community's station,
which is available to 4,000 local cable households. The station's $60,000 yearly
budget is supported by the franchise fee paid by all cable customers. The
station has been operating since 1987.

"Most of what we broadcast are talk shows," said Jim Kenny, coordinator of Rye
Community Television. "This is one of the few shows we have that invites some
audience participation, even if it's just somebody trying to come up with the
answers on their own -- just like 'Jeopardy.' "

In addition to being the on-air talent, Mr. Levine writes the trivia questions
and recruits the two-member teams who compete for the show's grand prize: the
right to wear a lapel button bearing the phrase "High Rye-Q."

The show is taped in a studio at Rye High School every other month by a staff
largely made up of students. Like most local programming, the show has its share
of technical problems, like out-of-focus close-up shots. Although the show is
supposed to last a half hour, Mr. Levine said, "if it's 28 minutes or 32
minutes, it doesn't really matter."

From behind a podium draped with the program's title, Mr. Levine poses questions
to two pairs of contestants. In the show's first episodes, contestants came from
civic organizations like the Rotary or Lion's clubs. More recently, the show has
embraced a "Family Feud" format, pitting two families against each other.

Mr. Levine's toughest task is recruiting contestants. "The fear that your
neighbors will laugh at you" is a powerful disincentive, he said. When he
persuades a contestant to appear, his pre-show advice is simple: "Be on time."

The contestants' tables are equipped with a buzzer system that allows them to
signal when they wish to answer. "It works some of the time, not all of the
time," Mr. Levine said. When it does, the team that buzzes is given a chance to
answer the question. A correct answer is worth 10 points; a team loses 10 points
for giving an incorrect answer. The scoring system is designed to discourage
quick answers and to give the audience at home a chance to think about the
question. "You're not just rewarded for being quick," Mr. Levine said.

The show features former Mayor John Carey as scorekeeper. Mr. Levine recruited
Mr. Carey because several of the first contestants argued over answers or
scoring, and he felt the show would benefit from an objective, legally trained
person who could rule on answers.

The questions have also evolved since the program hit the airwaves last winter.
In the beginning, "either you knew the answer or you didn't," Mr. Levine said.
Since then, he's begun asking more multiple choice questions. Now, he said, "you
should at least have a shot at the questions via common sense."

He has also added questions involving scenes he acts out with Mr. Carey. In a
recent show, Mr. Carey dressed in a shower cap and drapery and spoke in a
falsetto voice to portray the mother of the 18th-century Chief Justice of the
United States, John Jay, who fled Rye during the Revolutionary War.

The show's current champions are Beth Jamison, a homemaker, and her
father-in-law, Bert Jamison, a former Rye City Councilman. They won their match,
which airs through late September, on the last question: "A landmark in downtown
Rye memorializes the veterans of which three wars?"

"We weren't in it for the win," Mrs. Jamison said, though she looks forward to
defending her title. Her only complaint is that she didn't get to take the "High
Rye-Q" lapel pin home with her.

There's no precise measurement of how many viewers watch the show, but Mr.
Levine said he has been recognized by strangers at the grocery store and while
hitch-hiking to the train station.

The show's supporters say Mr. Levine is providing a worthy community service.
"It's a way to teach the old-fashioned subjects of civics and government and
make it fun for everyone involved," said Lila Bumstead, president of Friends of
Rye Community Television and a former junior high school teacher.

For Mr. Levine, "What's Your Rye-Q?" not only provides a way to teach the public
more about the community but also allows him to live out a lifelong fantasy.

"I've always wanted to be a quiz master, ever since I was a little kid," he
said. "That's what community television offers -- the chance to live out your
dreams."

LOAD-DATE: September 17, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Delores and Bob Martin, above, and Trina and Kellogg Wong,
right, on "What's Your Rye-Q?" Ted Levine, host, with ex-Mayor John Carey, top
right.

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              275 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 17, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Running Argument

BYLINE: By Thomas Powers;   Thomas Powers is the author of several books,
including "The War at Home: Vietnam and the American People" and "Heisenberg's
War: The Secret History of the German Bomb."

SECTION: Section 7;  Page 36;  Column 2;  Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1544 words



TELLTALE HEARTS
The Origins and Impact of the
Vietnam Antiwar Movement.
By Adam Garfinkle.
370 pp. New York:
St. Martin's Press. $24.95.

IN the minds of millions of Americans somewhere back in the mid- to late 1970's,
after the war in Vietnam had really and truly come to an end, there arose the
heartfelt vow, part entreaty, part prayer of thanks, "Never again! No more
arguing about Vietnam!"

The war of words, just like the war itself, seemed to go on forever, from the
first faint misgivings around 1962, when the term "quagmire" began to turn up in
news stories, through the fall and winter of 1967-68, when the voices grew
hoarse and the country seemed on the verge of a nervous breakdown and the
generals were talking about turning the tide at the very moment any reasonably
attentive watcher of television news was beginning to conclude that there were
zillions of Vietcong out there and they were never going to stop fighting.
Endless war and endless argument seemed our fate.

But something changed on the night of March 31, 1968. President Lyndon Baines
Johnson quit. He stopped the bombing (more or less), he opened the door to
negotiations (although much time passed before anyone entered), he rejected
military pleas for vast numbers of new troops (a fact that was not immediately
shared with the public) and, above all, he promised not to run again for
President. Coming as it did after a humiliatingly feeble "victory" over the
antiwar candidate Eugene McCarthy in the New Hampshire primary, Johnson's
abdication seemed less a selfless act of public service than a demonstration of
his panicked recognition that he was on the road to being whipped.

What changed when Johnson quit, what made him do it and what followed as direct
and indirect consequences are the subject of Adam Garfinkle's absorbing book,
part history and part speculative sociological essay, on America's family
quarrel over Vietnam. "Telltale Hearts: The Origins and Impact of the Vietnam
Antiwar Movement" is vigorously argued and brings a new and unexpected point of
view to a subject that seemed to have been exhausted years ago by arguments that
grew ever coarser as they grew louder. But Mr. Gar finkle's greatest
contribution to understanding Vietnam is his gut sense that the subject has been
abandoned too long. The heart quails at plunging back into this sucking swamp of
ancient emotion, yet Mr. Garfinkle is surely right in thinking that the mythos
of Vietnam can be dangerous if ignored.

Mr. Garfinkle, a resident scholar at the Foreign Policy Research Institute in
Philadelphia, was a little young when the war was at its height. When he was in
high school he donned a black armband of protest following President Richard
Nixon's election in 1968, but he escaped the full impact of Vietnam on those who
felt forced to abandon one way of looking at the world -- generally complacent,
sure of the national virtue -- for another, darker view. By the mid-1980's Mr.
Garfinkle seems to have found himself to be a bit of a foreign policy hawk, and
he began to wonder if he had misread the war in his youth. The death of the "
Vietnam syndrome" announced by President George Bush after the Persian Gulf war
struck Mr. Garfinkle as premature, and "Telltale Hearts" followed in due course.

Mr. Garfinkle's study of the argument over the war has convinced him of three
things -- that the opposition not only failed to stop the war but actually
prolonged it; that the true origins of the antiwar movement are to be found deep
in American history; and that its broad effects on the way we think about
politics and the American role in the world have subtly but profoundly altered
every aspect of American life. Like the telltale heart of the Edgar Allan Poe
story, the war is not dead and buried but haunting its survivors with its
persistent throb.

Readers of American history should not have been surprised by the style and
thinking of those who opposed the war in Vietnam, Mr. Garfinkle suggests.
Pacifist refusal to fight in the world wars, leftism spawned by the Great
Depression, the denunciations by Mark Twain and others of the American imperial
adventure in the Philippines, and above all the bloody and bitter wrangle over
the abolition of chattel slavery leading up to the Civil War were all
forerunners of the college students who shouted "Hell no, we won't go!" in 1965.
This rhetoric escalated in tandem with the war itself -- to "Hey! Hey! L.B.J.!
How many kids did you kill today?" and "Smash the glass of the ruling class!"
and "You don't need a weatherman to know which way the wind blows." If you don't
immediately recognize these slogans, or have forgotten where they fit into the
argument over the war, you need to read Mr. Garfinkle's book.

Vietnam came at a fatal or an opportune moment, depending on your point of view
-- just as the bloodied veterans of the civil rights movement in the American
South were beginning to switch the focus of their attention from segregated
lunch counters to the economic and social structure of American capitalism
itself. Johnson wanted to fight the war in Vietnam with draftees, but the young
men called up for shaved heads and training as infantry grunts for the most part
did not want to go. Mr. Garfinkle explains that traditional pacifists, idealist
student reformers, Socialists, revolutionary Marxist-Leninists, even frowsty
old-line Communists all saw the war as a heaven-sent opportunity to pursue their
own agendas.

If there was a fatal flaw in Johnson's policy it was that the American military
had to win, and to win quickly. Every year the war dragged on lent force to the
radical critique of American society. A genuine left-wing political revolution
was never in the cards, but a cultural revolution of "sex, drugs and
rock-and-roll" swept aside traditional restraints, frightening American parents,
alarming the establishment and infuriating the blue-collar America that supplied
the overwhelming majority of the boys given the chance to die for their country
in the jungles of Vietnam.

Writing a book about a popular movement is no simple task; there is too much
going on simultaneously for any clear narrative line. The inevitable result is
that a great many passages in "Telltale Hearts" read like this one: "Operation
Pursestrings was SANE's idea . . . for the liberal and left-liberal right wing
of the antiwar movement to move back onto campus in the wake of the demise of
S.D.S. and the Student Mobe."

In his determination to tell the whole story Mr. Garfinkle quotes an immense
range of sources, including an early book of my own. We disagree on one central
point. Mr. Garfinkle thinks the antiwar movement angered middle America from the
beginning, generated a backlash of support for the President every time it took
to the streets, deflected the attention of the public from failure in Vietnam to
the anarchy on the streets of home and weakened the opposition by getting it
tarred as anti-American. These observations all strike me as true, but it also
seems to me that the chaos and pain and shrill vituperation of the war in the
streets and, thanks to television, in American living rooms, imposed a price for
continuing the war that Johnson and Nixon were ultimately unwilling to pay.

BY the same token, Mr. Garfinkle seems blind to the war's deeper fatality --
that our early support for the French in Indochina meant we were bound to fight
it, that it was bound to divide us and that we were bound to tire of a struggle
that cost so much, made so little progress and promised so paltry a reward at
the end. I would argue that it was the antiwar movement that opened the way for
Allard Lowenstein and the Dump Johnson campaign to work a near miracle in New
Hampshire in March 1968, just as it was the antiwar movement that brought
American tempers to the boil and beyond, persuading Johnson's senior advisers to
reject Gen. William Westmoreland's request for a vast new commitment of troops
in the wake of the Vietcong's Tet offensive. This was the moment when Johnson
quit and the United States began the long and painful process of getting out of
Vietnam.

I think the point is an important one. No democratic people can remain
indifferent when its sons are fighting a bloody war. If there had been no
antiwar movement I suspect the public ground would have been taken over by cries
of "Why not win?" Down that road unknown perils lay.

But this is a difference of opinion, not a flaw in Mr. Garfinkle's book. He has
ample reason to think what he thinks, argues it well and is moved by a serious
purpose -- the desire to understand the deeper origins of the political factions
battling for the American soul and future in Newt Gingrich's Congress. The
arguments over abortion, women's rights, affirmative action, protection of the
environment, what to do in Bosnia, human rights in China, reducing the capital
gains tax and welfare reform can all be traced back to the extraordinary years
when Americans felt the national soul was being won or lost in Vietnam.

It was a miserable time to live through. But Mr. Garfinkle is persuasive: If we
want to understand how we have reached our present impasse, we must go back to
the war and sort it all out.

LOAD-DATE: September 17, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: A protest against the Vietnam War on Fifth Avenue in Manhattan,
1967. (THE NEW YORK TIMES)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              276 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 17, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Will He or Won't He?

BYLINE: By Ronald Steel;   Ronald Steel is this year's Shapiro Professor of
International Affairs at George Washington University. He is the author of
"Walter Lippmann and the American Century" and, most recently, "Temptations of a
Superpower."

SECTION: Section 7;  Page 16;  Column 1;  Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 2562 words



MY AMERICAN JOURNEY
By Colin L. Powell
with Joseph E. Persico.
Illustrated. 643 pp. New York:
Random House. $25.95.

HEROES come along when you need them. After the debacle of Vietnam, the fiasco
of the Iran hostage rescue mission and the fizzling out of the cold war without
so much as a celebratory parade, Americans definitely needed a hero. George Bush
should have been a hero, for he gave us victories over two bad guys who were
once our good guys: Manuel Noriega and Saddam Hussein. But Presidents, alas, are
expected to provide bread as well as circuses. So Mr. Bush's hero quotient soon
took a nose dive, and suddenly he was gone.

Yet the need was still there, and the news media, ever responsive to what the
public thinks it wants, found a hero in the handsome man with the mean baton at
the televised gulf war briefings. Thus was Colin L. Powell born -- at least as a
media figure, a public personality and, such is our need, a potential
Presidential candidate. Suddenly the name that hardly anyone had heard of was on
everyone's (or at least every journalist's) lips. Will he or won't he? Can he or
can't he? From gray eminence to great white (or, even better, black) hope, Colin
Powell has been injected into our fantasies. Maybe he can pull us all together,
make America work the way it should, bring comfort to our hearts and fear to
those who wish us ill. Maybe he can make politics just go away.

As Colin Powell dances around the edges, tantalizing voters and providing covers
for news magazine editors, he here presents us with what has got to be the
world's longest resume. "My American Journey" is an endearing and well-written
book. It will make you like Colin Powell. Reading this skillful narrative --
written with Joseph E. Persico, the author of several fine biographies -- you
will cheer Mr. Powell on as he shoots up the Army's career pole, accumulating
medals and stars all along the way: first one star that made him, at 42, the
Army's youngest brigadier general; then four years later, in 1983, a second
star; then a third in 1986; and finally his fourth in 1989, the year that he hit
the jackpot by becoming the youngest Chairman ever of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.

It's a great American success story, and Hollywood couldn't have scripted it
better: the son of hard-working black immigrants from Jamaica who was born in
Harlem in 1937 and grew up in a racially integrated neighborhood in the South
Bronx; who went to the City College of New York, where he joined the R.O.T.C.
and discovered "the discipline, the structure, the camaraderie, the sense of
belonging" that he craved; who found a career in what is probably the most
integrated institution in American life; who won his spurs in Korea, Vietnam and
Germany, but made his most important marks in the Pentagon bureaucracy; and who
cultivated the civilian and military contacts that advanced him above his
colleagues on an express ride through the ranks. Mr. Powell truly has, as he
says of himself, "lived the American dream."

Mr. Powell's appeal rests partly on what we know about him: his personal
attractiveness, his reassuring air of command, his average-guy persona, his
charm as a public speaker and his unthreatening ethnicity. He is the kind of
black man whom whites feel good about themselves for supporting. His appeal also
rests on what we think we know about him but don't. We think of him as a
no-nonsense soldier who chews up bureaucrats for breakfast, someone un sullied
by the grime of Washington politics, a clean-hands outsider who looks on the
Beltway as treacherous enemy territory. Here we are wrong.

What this book makes clear, disclaimers aside, is that Mr. Powell is the
ultimate insider. For much of the past 25 years he has been, in his uniform,
deep in the Washington power game. Before becoming Chairman of the Joint Chiefs
he was Ronald Reagan's national security adviser, the military assistant to
Defense Secretary Caspar Weinberger and a key link between the armed forces and
the civilians in the Pentagon. Although Mr. Powell has done his time in the
field, it is as a bureaucratic player that he has excelled, leapfrogging --
through a combination of charm, savvy, judicious timing and carefully cultivated
contacts -- from the outer rings of the Pentagon to the inner core of military
political power.

Mr. Powell's introduction to the capital came in 1969 when, at the age of 32, he
was sent by the Army to George Washington University to earn a master's degree
in business administration. From there he landed a Pentagon assignment and then,
in a crucial move, he gained admission to a select fraternity, the White House
Fellows -- upwardly mobile midcareer lawyers, executives, military officers and
politicos chosen to spend a one-year internship in high levels of the
bureaucracy. An astute Mr. Powell elected to work at the Office of Management
and Budget because it had, in his words, "its hands on every department's
jugular." There he met Frank Carlucci, the deputy to O.M.B. director Caspar
Weinberger. Although he was exposed only briefly to them at the time, they were,
as he notes, "going to change my life."

Before that happened, Mr. Carlucci was replaced as deputy director by Fred
Malek, who had interviewed Mr. Powell for the White House Fellowship program.
Mr. Powell sensed an opportunity. "I dropped Fred a note and congratulated him
on his appointment, told him that I was working in the bowels of O.M.B. as a
White House Fellow and asked that he let me know if I could be of any
assistance," he explains in a revealing insight into the method that propelled
his advancement. "I was soon installed as his special assistant . . . and became
his gatekeeper. If you wanted to see Malek you had to see Powell first."

As a result of this critical opportunity Mr. Powell became a Washington player:
in 1975 he went to the National War College, a finishing school for military and
civilian brass slated for fast promotion; in 1977 to the Pentagon's front
office; in 1981, back to the field until 1983, when he returned to the Pentagon
as chief military assistant to Defense Secretary Weinberger; and in 1986 to the
National Security Council as deputy to its new director and his old mentor, Mr.
Carlucci. A year later, Mr. Carlucci moved to the Pentagon to assume Mr.
Weinberger's post, and Mr. Powell, in the wake of the Iran-contra scandal and a
series of forced resignations, made a giant career leap by becoming Ronald
Reagan's sixth national security adviser.

THE ascent was dazzling, but it also left Mr. Powell short on field credentials,
and with a fear that he might be "branded permanently as a military dilettante."
Periodically he would rejoin the troops -- a year each in Korea, Kentucky and
Kansas, five months in Germany -- but not for long. Washington always called.
His book is replete with complaints about the desk jobs he was always taking. "I
was . . . hoping against hope that I could escape the Beltway vortex and stay
with the division," he writes of his thoughts before accepting an N.S.C. staff
job in 1977. "Here was my chance to escape the front office and go back to the
Army," he says of a Cabinet shake-up in the Carter Administration two years
later, yet he felt he "had no choice but to accept" when his Pentagon civilian
boss took him over to the Department of Energy. Later in 1979 his hopes for a
return to the Army were "torpedoed" when he was invited back to the Pentagon. At
times the general doth protest too much.

Despite these complaints, it is clear that Mr. Powell loved the action inside
the Beltway: dealing on a chummy basis with the journalists, politicians and
bureaucrats -- not to mention the high military brass -- who make up the
Washington power elite and who advanced his career. He played the game with the
best of them, which is why he rose as fast as he did. His salutes to Mr.
Carlucci, Mr. Weinberger, Mr. Reagan and Mr. Bush reflect the stunning advances
he made under Republicans. But the Democrats also wanted him. Mr. Powell states
that he was sounded out to be Bill Clinton's running mate in 1992, and was twice
asked to be Secretary of State.

Despite being so involved in political decisions, he has emerged largely
untouched by the controversies of the Administrations he served. The three major
ones were the Iran-contra scandal, the fracas over homosexuals in the military
and the decision to halt the gulf war before the Iraqi Army was destroyed. On
Iran-contra, Mr. Powell, as Mr. Weinberger's military assistant, issued the
secret order -- legal because Mr. Reagan had approved it -- to transfer 4,000
antitank missiles from the Army to the C.I.A. for transshipment to Iran. During
the later Congressional investigation, the independent counsel, Lawrence Walsh,
accused Mr. Powell of being "privy to detailed information regarding arms
shipments to Iran" as early as 1985 -- before Mr. Reagan had officially approved
them. Mr. Powell energetically denies this, as well as the charge that he had
not told investigators Mr. Weinberger had kept a diary during this period.

WITH regard to the ending of discrimination against homosexuals in the armed
forces, Mr. Powell and the Joint Chiefs he led have been widely viewed, in the
words of an editorial in The New York Times, as "defiantly opposed, almost to
the point of insubordination." On this issue, as on others, Mr. Powell showed
his reluctance to go against the consensus even where a matter of principle was
concerned -- in short, to stick his neck out. To those who argue that he, as a
black man, should be particularly sensitive to issues of discrimination, he
replies that "requiring people of different color to live together in intimate
situations is far different from requiring people of different sexual
orientation to do so."

On the gulf war, Mr. Powell was widely reported at the time to have been among
those, like Senator Sam Nunn and Adm. William Crowe, who favored sanctions
against Iraq over an invasion to liberate Kuwait. He denies that he was a
"reluctant warrior" and insists that Mr. Bush's "instincts had been right from
the start. . . . Sanctions would not work." As for the accusation that he ended
the war too quickly, allowing the bulk of Saddam Hussein's army to escape, Mr.
Powell argues that "it would not contribute to the stability we want in the
Middle East to have Iraq fragmented into separate Sunni, Shia and Kurd political
entities."

In this argument one can see the dark shadow of Vietnam. That war, and its
humiliating aftermath, left a generation of military officers, particularly in
the Army, seething with resentment. Mr. Powell, who served in Vietnam in 1963
and again in 1968, gives vent to that resentment in one of his rare angry
outbursts -- against those who chose to "squander courage and lives without
clear purpose, without the country's backing and without full commitment" in
pursuit of a "bankrupt" policy.

Vietnam almost certainly explains his reluctance to go to war in Kuwait without
strong public support, his cautionary tests for deciding when American forces
should be committed to a foreign conflict, his resistance to any American
military intervention in the Yugoslav civil war and his salute to Mr. Reagan and
Mr. Weinberger for making possible "the resurgence of the United States as a
respected and credible military power" and for ending "the long estrangement
between the American people and their defenders."

Mr. Powell represents much that is admirable about the United States armed
forces: their racial integration, their professionalism, their opportunities for
individual advancement without regard to social class, their deference to
civilian authority. Aside from the Vietnam War, which provided a system for
deferment and angles for escaping fighting that Mr. Powell rightly condemns as
"an antidemocratic disgrace," the American military has been, perhaps, our most
successful public institution. It is not surprising, as Mr. Powell proudly
writes, that after the gulf war, in a country "hungry for victory . . . the
American people fell in love again with their armed forces."

BUT will they still love the media-proclaimed hero of that war if he turns
politician? In the final pages of this long book, Mr. Powell pops the question
himself. "Am I going to run for President?" he asks. In reply he declares that
although he does not yet hear the "calling," nonetheless "I do not unequivocally
rule out a political future." What would he stand for? Free enterprise, lower
taxes (though he assures us that he is not "knee-jerk antigovernment"), equal
opportunity but no special treatment for minorities -- all the things, in short,
that befit "a fiscal conservative with a social conscience."

So is he a donkey or an elephant? Perhaps neither, since he declares that he is
as put off by "those on the extreme right who seem to claim divine wisdom on
political as well as spiritual matters" as he is by "patronizing liberals who
claim to know what is best for society but devote little thought to who will
eventually pay the bills." Perhaps, he suggests coyly, "the time may be at hand
for a third major party." And who would lead it? No one else but a man who, once
he had heard the calling (and presumably the call from the polls as well, not to
mention from the donors who would fill the campaign coffers), "would fight for
the right to lead," because he "had a vision for this country."

For the moment that vision remains a bit cloudy. In his prescriptions, as in his
public speeches, Mr. Powell's preferred style of discourse seems to be the
commencement address. "How do we find our way again?" he asks. "We have to start
thinking of America as a family. We have to stop screeching at each other, stop
hurting each other, and instead start caring for, sacrificing for and sharing
with each other." Who knows? Maybe we can all learn just to get along. But will
this play as well with the voters as the man who shook his briefing stick at
Saddam Hussein and vowed into the television cameras: "Our strategy in going
after this army is very simple. First we are going to cut it off, and then we
are going to kill it"?

Colin Powell is not a killer, but a tinkerer and a conciliator. A man of decent
instincts unlikely to shake up anything, he comes to us as Eisenhower reborn, as
a replica of that supreme smoothie for whom Mr. Powell understandably expresses
"a special affinity," that general-turned-politician who initially thought maybe
he could be nominated by acclaim by both parties, that likable guy with the big
grin who charmed his superiors and captivated a hero-hungry public. What Mr.
Powell offers us is an escape from politics, which seems to be what we want.
Genial and moderate, he remains, even after more than 600 pages, maddeningly
elusive. As with Peer Gynt's onion, one can peel and peel and peel and never
find the core. He is, as Walter Lippmann wrote about Ike before he won the
Republican nomination in 1952, "not a real figure in our public life, but a kind
of dream boy embodying all the unsatisfied wishes of all the people who are
discontented with things as they are." As such, he is the perfect candidate, a
nice guy who would never challenge the conventional wisdom, and who would like
to lead us if only we would be so kind as to tell him where we want to go.

LOAD-DATE: September 17, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Gen. Colin L. Powell at the dedication of a monument to the
Buffalo Soldiers--black units created by Congress in 1866 to patrol the West--at
Fort Leavenworth, Kan., 1992. (ASSOCIATED PRESS) (pg. 16); Gen. Colin L. Powell,
Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, 1989. (PAUL CONKLIN) (pg. 19)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              277 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 17, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

BOOKS IN BRIEF: FICTION

BYLINE: By WENDY SMITH

SECTION: Section 7;  Page 25;  Column 2;  Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 198 words



SHIFTING LOYALTIES
By Daniel Cano.
Arte Publico, paper, $9.95.

Initially, Daniel Cano's second novel seems to offer a fresh fictional
perspective on the Vietnam War as it explores the disillusionment of several
Mexican-American men who find their experiences totally at odds with their
fathers' gung-ho stories of patriotism and machismo in action during World War
II. Unfortunately, good ideas are sabotaged here by clunky prose and clumsy
execution. Although the book opens with David Almas's letter to the parents of
his dead comrade, Wayne Podleski, and closes with David visiting Wayne's grave,
the narrative in between is rambling and unfocused. The cast of characters seems
too large, and so does a time frame that jerks the reader from Southeast Asia to
pre- and post-Vietnam America, as well as Spain in the 1970's and Mexico in the
1980's. The author's political insights, intelligent though they often are, lose
credibility when crammed into the mouths of people who have previously shown no
signs of being terribly introspective. "Shifting Loyalties" seems to be the
product of intellectual conviction rather than deep emotional identification.
WENDY SMITH

LOAD-DATE: September 17, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              278 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 18, 1995, Monday, Late Edition - Final

For Next Generation, New Kunstlers

BYLINE: By JAN HOFFMAN

SECTION: Section B;   Page 1;   Column 3;   Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1659 words


Like many of his classmates, Randolph Scott-McLaughlin (Harvard Law School '78)
headed straight to New York after graduation. But instead of following his
friends down the centuries-old crimson brick road to Wall Street, he took a
detour at Union Square to confront one of the founding lawyers of an unusual law
center.

"I went right up to him and said, 'Bill, you're the best trial lawyer in the
country, and you owe me the obligation to teach me what you know,' " Mr.
Scott-McLaughlin announced to William M. Kunstler. Never one to overlook an
accolade, Mr. Kunstler laughed and took him under his wing.

And for the next nine years, Mr. Scott-McLaughlin, as a fledgling lawyer for the
Center for Constitutional Rights, went on a wild legal ride. He helped Mr.
Kunstler win the acquittal of two American Indian Movement supporters who faced
the death penalty in a Nebraska murder trial. They represented a former Black
Panther charged with murdering a police officer. They sued Bernhard H. Goetz on
behalf of one of the men he shot in the subway.

Mr. Kunstler, who died on Labor Day at 76, was the country's best-known and most
reviled radical lawyer, but he neither worked in a vacuum nor left one behind.
No individual practitioner is expected to play the idiosyncratic, oversized role
he inhabited for 35 years. But scores of lawyers have been doing similar, less
visible work all along. Scores more are standing in the wings. For both directly
and indirectly, Mr. Kunstler inspired generations to take up public interest
work and to defend clients whom most other lawyers would shun.

And so it came to pass that Mr. Kunstler begat Ronald L. Kuby, 39, his foremost
disciple for the last 13 years, to whom he taught his skills as a trial lawyer
and master media manipulator.

And through his association with the Center for Constitutional Rights, which
presses Federal and international human rights lawsuits, Mr. Kunstler also begat
successors like Mr. Scott-McLaughlin, 42, who became a civil rights law
professor at Pace University. There, Mr. Scott-McLaughlin in turn begat the
Social Justice Center, where his students, the so-called Randy's Raiders, work
on cases involving racial violence and voting rights discrimination.

And so the next generation is being groomed to make headlines in the 21st
century. One former Randy's Raider, for example, specializes in pursuing police
brutality lawsuits in Federal court. And a former intern of Mr. Kunstler so
fervently believes, as he did, in fighting racism through criminal defense work
that she has already helped represent rapists and batterers.

But though Mr. Kunstler's offspring and near relatives in the law are numerous,
their survival is far more difficult than his.

True, civil rights litigators can more readily make their cases on a vast
foundation of law that has evolved in areas like criminal defense, housing,
immigration, welfare and sex discrimination, where virtually none existed in the
1950's and 60's, when Mr. Kunstler was beginning to make his way.

But times are economically grim for young lawyers. Burdened with $100,000 law
school debts, they cannot afford to set up their own shops, as in Mr. Kunstler's
mold. And there are almost no jobs at institutions like Legal Aid and Legal
Services, which are trembling on the brink of extinction.

And for lawyers of a liberal to radical left persuasion, the political climate
is overcast by hostility from both Congress and the electorate. In the combative
days of Mr. Kunstler's forays into the Deep South and at the Chicago Seven
trial, he, at least, was borne aloft by thousands of students and civil rights
supporters -- scarcely the faintest echo of whom can be heard by lawyers in the
90's.

But a relative handful of lawyers serving poor communities and unpopular clients
soldier on. "And they're even more energized now: they think the work is really
on their shoulders because there's no more Bill," said Haywood Burns, a
professor at the City University of New York Law School, which was established
13 years ago to train lawyers for public interest work.

In contrast to the private lawyers who will pick up one or two "good deed" cases
along the way, there are dozens of lawyers in the New York region alone -- many
associated with special-interest law centers -- whose practice regularly
consists of standing up for despised criminal defendants or pressing civil
rights cases. In criminal defense, the more frequently mentioned names include
Leonard Weinglass, Lynne Stewart, Michael Warren, Ramsey Clark, Mr. Kuby, and
now Kevin Doyle, the new chief of New York's Capital Defender Office, which
coordinates the representation of death penalty defendants.

Among the prominent civil rights litigators are Steven Banks, Juan Figueroa,
Ellen Yaroshevsky, Michael Ratner, Janet Benshoof, Margaret Fung, Beatrice Dohrn
and Mr. Scott-McLaughlin.

Then there is James Michael Lenahan. Who? A White Plains practitioner and
one-time Randy's Raider, class of '92, Mr. Lenahan has already addressed Mr.
Scott-McLaughlin's students about how it is possible to set up your own law
office, work 18 hours a day, make no money and catch catnaps with a smile on
your face, knowing you have caught the Government in another compromising
position. "I know I'm going to Heaven, but if I have to put a dime in the gate,
I'm in trouble," Mr. Lenahan said.

The civil rights cases Mr. Lenahan pursues in state and Federal court have made
him an outcast, if not an outright pariah, in his own family.  Generations of
his relatives have been police officers, and Mr. Lenahan was expected to become
a prosecutor. Instead, Mr. Lenahan became a general practitioner who specializes
in pressing police brutality lawsuits. He came to law school after a 12-year
career as a captain in the Army, where he specialized in integrated weapons
systems.

Although he still holds some conservative views, Mr. Lenahan, 40, considers his
work with Mr. Scott-McLaughlin to have been an eye-opener. "I ran into a number
of police officers who downright lied and it made me furious, because as a
commissioned officer, I had sworn the same oath they did to uphold the
Constitution. But I meant it then, and I do now."

Ablaze with his not-so-youthful idealism, Mr. Lenahan says he feels that he is
uniquely qualified to fight injustice: "I'd been a part of the establishment for
so long I know how it works."

The financial barricades to maintaining such an ideal-focused practice are
almost insurmountable, particularly as the lawyer develops family
responsibilities. Mr. Lenahan says that although he grosses $100,000, his
overhead -- secretary, paralegal, partner, rent, library -- annually leaves him
with a net of $10,000.

Mr. Kuby, who is continuing the now one-man firm of Kunstler & Kuby, said
bluntly: "In this climate, you can't do good and do well at the same time."

David Tykulsker, a highly regarded labor lawyer in Newark, says he tries to
support himself by seeking a mixture of cases, including workers' compensation
claims and union work. With that foundation, he pursues class action suits on
labor and environmental issues without pay, hoping that a favorable decision
years down the road will yield him a fee.

To survive, many lawyers may have to let economics drive their political
sensibilities, Mr. Tykulsker said. "If you look through civil rights reports,
you'll see a preponderance of age discrimination cases," he said. "Does this
mean age discrimination is a more serious problem than sex or race
discrimination? Of course not. But older managers, who are usually white and
male, can afford lawyers."

Nonetheless, in recent years, New York University and Rutgers, among other
schools, have established programs in public interest law. Even New York City's
corporate launching center has had a change of heart. "Columbia Law School used
to be the Darth Vader of law schools," said Franklin Siegel, a civil liberties
litigator. "But now it's become so much more humanitarian." All Columbia law
students must perform 40 hours of community service legal work.

Still, law students worry about finances. Daniella Korotzer, 27, who expects to
be sworn in as a member of the New York bar today, half expects the creditors to
start breaking her legs any minute: $2,000 student loan bills are arriving
monthly, and she has taken a job paying $31,000 a year with Stephen A.
Somerstein, a criminal defense lawyer in the Kunstler mode.

But the way Ms. Korotzer sees things, she was born to this work: the first time
she went to jail was as a fetus, when her pregnant mother was arrested during a
demonstration against the Vietnam War. She majored in women's studies while
working her way through the State University at Albany, where she threw herself
into a bevy of issues and, yes, got herself arrested.

Although she can rattle off a list of political causes dear to her heart, she
prefers criminal defense work to civil litigation, because of its comparatively
faster pace. That decision has already led to some dark nights of the soul, for
she, a feminist, has helped defend men accused of rape and domestic violence.

During her last year at Northeastern University School of Law, she was an intern
with Kunstler & Kuby. Mr. Kunstler was one of the bravest men she had ever met,
she said: "I've seen him go to court, knowing he was facing a contempt citation,
with a toothbrush stuck in his suit pocket -- for all the world to see, of
course."

He ignited a powerful flame. During her job interview with him, she recalled:
"Bill assumed that your legal skills were up to par and he had no interest in
looking at my writing sample. He simply asked if I had the heart and courage to
take the types of cases he takes. I said yes. And that's all he needed to know."

She paused and started laughing. "And then he yelled out to Ron, 'Do you think
she's of high enough moral character to work in this office?' "

NAME: Randolph Scott-McLaughlin; Daniella Korotzer; Ronald L. Kuby; James M.
Lenahan

LOAD-DATE: September 18, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: William M. Kunstler was the country's best-known and most
reviled radical lawyer, but he neither worked in a vacuum nor left one behind.
(Fred R. Conrad/The New York Times)

Chart: "A Look at Four Disciples: In Kunstler's Footsteps"


Ronald L. Kuby/Kunstler's Foremost Disciple
Age: 39
Specialty: Criminal Defense
Quote: "There are people willing to do this kind of work, but we have lost a
giant and there's no getting around that."

Daniella Korotzer/Was Intern at Firm of Kunstler & Kuby
Age: 27
Specialty: Criminal Defense
Quote: "Bill taught me never to bow to a judge, a prosecutor or another attorney
but to stand by your client. And that was a way of doing justice."

Randolph Scott McLaughlin/Worked With Kunstler for Nine Years
Age: 42
Specialty: Professor, practitioner of civil rights litigation
Quote: "Bill said, 'Never believe your press. When you go home, put out the
garbage. You can't exist 24 hours a day as this famous lawyer type.' "

James Michael Lenahan/Studied Law With McLaughlin After Army Career
Age: 40
Specialty: Civil rights litigator
Quote: "Randy taught me that the people who can't afford lawyers are those who
need them the most."

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              279 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 19, 1995, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Richmond Official Quits After Drug Charges

BYLINE: By The New York Times

SECTION: Section A;  Page 14;  Column 4;  National Desk

LENGTH: 530 words

DATELINE: RICHMOND, Sept. 18


A black city councilman who was re-elected four times after being convicted of
drug possession resigned today after the authorities said he had been videotaped
selling heroin in a Richmond suburb.

The councilman, Henry W. (Chuck) Richardson, was a hero to many blacks despite
almost annual brushes with the law. He lent money to constituents and elicited
contributions from developers who nonetheless saw him as a disgrace.

"The last dinosaur is gone," Mayor Leonidas B. Young, a Baptist minister, said.

But Mr. Richardson's power was still apparent at City Hall, where many wondered
who would get his support to succeed him. Some constituents said they viewed the
videotaping and subsequent charges as revenge by the establishment.

"He was our Robin Hood," said Karen A. Williams, 30, a single mother of three
who receives public assistance. "It must be a setup. They don't want a good man
to help us."

But James B. Hughes, 29, a chef who said he had voted for Mr. Richardson at
least three times, said: "He stepped into the trap. He messed up for himself and
for the whole black race."

Toby Vick, the chief prosecutor in suburban Henrico County, said Mr. Richardson
was charged on Sunday night with possession of heroin, distribution of heroin
and conspiracy. Mr. Vick said the councilman had been under investigation for
several months and was arrested after a transaction that was videotaped at 10:30
P.M. Sunday at a private home in the county. The authorities said he sold the
drugs to an undercover informer.

Mayor Young said Mr. Richardson, who was released on bond, would enter drug
treatment immediately. Mr. Richardson's lawyer, James E. Sheffield, said he had
no comment on the charges.

Mr. Richardson, 47, was the city's longest serving councilman. He took office in
1977, when he was part of an election mandated by the Justice Department that
gave Richmond its first black mayor and first council with a black majority.

He called himself a public relations consultant and real estate agent, but has
recently had no known clients or sales. The Federal Bureau of Investigation once
looked into how he could support his admitted drug habit without a full-time
job, but reached no conclusion. The job on the council was part time and paid
$15,000 a year.

In 1988, Mr. Richardson was convicted of possession of dangerous drugs after
being arrested with cocaine and heroin. He said at the time that he had an
addiction that dated back to his service with the Marines in the Vietnam War,
but that to give up his seat "would mean giving up on hope for others" with drug
problems.

At different times, Mr. Richardson was also convicted of assaulting a police
officer, speeding and causing an accident in a city car. He was acquitted of
drunken driving and trespassing at a school after dark.

When some constituents sought a recall of Mr. Richardson in 1994, he compared it
to a lynching, saying, "They're trying to put a rope on me."

After drug treatment in 1988, Mr. Richardson called a news conference to show
off 200 letters of support and said, "For me to use drugs again, I might as well
put a gun to my head and pull the trigger."

NAME: Henry W. (Chuck) Richardson

LOAD-DATE: September 19, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              280 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 19, 1995, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

In the Drink

SECTION: Section B;  Page 5;  Column 3;  Metropolitan Desk

LOAD-DATE: September 19, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: A Vietnam-era Army tank sank to its final resting spot
yesterday, as 1 of 14 tanks that will help form an artificial reef for marine
life, anglers and scuba divers off Moriches, on the south shore of Long Island.
(Associated Press)

TYPE: Caption

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              281 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 20, 1995, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Chinatown, Meet Vietnam

BYLINE: By ELAINE LOUIE

SECTION: Section C;    Page 1;    Column 2;    Living Desk

LENGTH: 1484 words


AT the Pho Bang restaurant at 117 Mott Street in Chinatown, Vu Bang, the chief
cook, has a way with a knife.

He can slice a cucumber so it unfolds like a fan, sliver carrots into threads
and cut chicken so thin that light shines through the pale pink flesh. After
wrapping grilled pork in a ruffled green lettuce leaf and garnishing it with
carrot, cucumber and a mint leaf, he offers it to a visitor as an edible gift.

Mr. Bang is a gracious man who nonetheless remembers a brutal time when a knife
was not so much a culinary tool as his only means of survival. Once a major in
the South Vietnamese Air Force, he was held prisoner by the Communist government
from 1975 to 1985. For four of those years, 1976 to 1979, he and 5,000 other
former South Vietnamese officers were held in the far north, near the Chinese
border.

"We were put in the forest to cut trees to make homes for a prison camp," said
Mr. Bang, who is now 55. "They give you a knife only," Mr. Bang said. For food,
they grew sweet potatoes, manioc and corn. In 1991, after supporting himself in
Vietnam by selling clothing and medicine, Mr. Bang arrived in the United States.

In 1993, there were 12,266 Vietnamese-born people living in the five boroughs
(4,094 in Brooklyn; 3,655 in Queens; 2,703 in the Bronx; 1,707 in Manhattan, and
107 in Staten Island), said Frank Vardy, a demographer with the New York City
Department of Planning. "We may be getting more Vietnamese than what the Census
and immigration figures show," Mr. Vardy said. "These are Vietnamese who settled
originally in California, Minnesota or Arkansas -- and then came here."

Most of those who are opening restaurants are clustering them in Chinatown,
where they put up brightly colored awnings with signs in two languages:
Vietnamese (whose Roman alphabet is given an exotic fillip by tone marks) and
Chinese, in characters and transliteration.  The ingredients of Vietnamese
cuisine are increasingly visible at fruit and vegetable stands: fresh bunches of
mint leaves, stalks of lemon grass, and three-foot lengths of fresh sugar cane
ready for squeezing.

Although Manhattan does not have the largest Vietnamese population in the city,
it does have the largest number of Vietnamese restaurants (at least 11 in
Chinatown), along with at least two supermarkets and at least one bookstore. The
sounds of Vietnamese videos and cassettes waft out of shop doorways along with
Mandarin and Cantonese favorites.

The first of Chinatown's Vietnamese restaurants opened in 1981; two opened this
year alone. And for the growing number of Vietnamese customers, some Chinese
restaurants, like Sun Say Gay, at 220 Canal Street, have added Vietnamese signs.

Bilingual signs often indicate that the owners have a dual background, that they
are Vietnamese by birth, but ethnically Chinese, said Harry Mai, publisher of
The New York Vietnam Business News, a newspaper that appears twice a month; he
is a former professor of physical sciences at Saigon University. Many ethnic
Chinese fled in 1979, when China attacked Vietnam. Some went to Hong Kong and
some to mainland China, Mr. Mai said. Many found their way to the United States.

Despite historical animosity, the Chinese and Vietnamese seem to coexist happily
in Chinatown. They work together. They marry. "Governments may not like each
other, but people, the Chinese and the Vietnamese, can get along," said Mr. Mai,
who is Vietnamese and whose two sons married Chinese women.

When Mr. Bang arrived, in 1991, he called the owners of Pho Bang, a nationwide
chain (there are five in New York City) to look for a job. He eventually became
head cook and a manager-partner at Mott Street.

There are between 150 and 200 dishes in the Vietnamese culinary repertory, says
Marcia Kiesel, a co-author, with Binh Duong, of the "Simple Art of Vietnamese
Cooking" (Prentice Hall Press, 1991). It is a sprightly cuisine, with an
extravagant use of fresh leafy greens -- lettuces, basil and coriander -- played
against hot grilled meats and seafood. It is spiced with ginger, garlic and nuoc
mam, the ubiquitous fish sauce. The food is given a subtle fire with chilies,
and tartness with lime and tamarind. It is as complexly flavored as it is low in
fat -- toothsome yet healthful.

The first dish a Vietnamese learns to cook is perfect rice, followed bythe
centerpiece of Vietnamese cuisine, pho (pronounced FOE), noodles in a
long-simmered beef broth. There are as many variations of pho as there are
edible things in Vietnam.  "We use every part of the beef -- the navel, the
stomach," said Bac Nguyen, the manager at another Pho Bang, at 6 Chatham Square,
in the heart of Chinatown.

Tiny, two-inch-long spring rolls are another Vietnamese delicacy, which Mr. Bang
stuffs with pork, shrimp, chicken, crab, mushrooms and cellophane noodles, then
fries until golden. Unlike the Chinese, who eat their spring rolls plain, the
Vietnamese wrap theirs in green leaf lettuce and dip the packet into a sauce of
nuoc mam spiked with vinegar, lime juice, garlic, chilies and a few bright
strands of carrot.

Although some Vietnamese restaurants serve only Vietnamese food, others, like Bo
Ky, at 80 Bayard Street, are bicultural.

The owner of Bo Ky, David Ngo, moved to New York in 1979 and began selling
vegetables at a store on Canal Street. In 1986, he and his family opened Bo Ky,
a plain restaurant with 40 seats, where napkins are paper, cups are plastic and
customers are legion: the place is mobbed.

Mr. Ngo's family had owned a rice-noodle factory in Saigon. But In 1968, shortly
after the Tet offensive, it was set afire with napalm. "Our concrete house was
the only structure standing in the neighborhood," said Angle, Mr. Ngo's
33-year-old son.

After that, "we sold cigarettes, one by one, then pack by pack, then carton by
carton," said Angle, who remembers hawking them with one of his uncles or his
grandfather from a cyclo, a three-wheeled pedicab.

As the Ngos reinvented themselves, adding snack food to their repertory, their
mode of transportation became a little fancier. "We went from cyclo to a tiny
Honda with an open back," Angle said, with a grin. "Up and up!"

In their restaurant, the Ngos have given a new spin to the soy-sauce duck, a
Chinese dish. They serve it with a dipping sauce of vinegar laced with garlic,
to which Angle adds a dot of red chili paste. The sauce cuts through the
sweet-salty richness of the duck. Each day, Bo Ky's customers go through more
than 60 ducks and at least 200 bowls of pho topped with sliced beef or plump
beef balls.

At Vietnam Restaurant, down a flight of stairs at 11 Doyers Street, Ken Tu, the
19-year-old son of one of the owners, Minh Tu, is half-Chinese and
half-Vietnamese. He speaks both languages, eats the food of both lands, but
dreams of marrying a Chinese woman, not a Vietnamese one. Asked why, he said,
"There's no difference between the Chinese and the Vietnamese, but I communicate
better in Chinese."

His mother, however, cooks primarily Vietnamese food in this small restaurant,
where the smell of incense wafts up the stairs at the entrance. A specialty is a
salad of shredded green papaya tossed with lightly poached shrimp and threads of
chewy beef jerky and dressed with a delicate mixture of vinegar and nuoc mam.

The first Vietnamese restaurant in Chinatown was probably Viet Huong, at 73
Mulberry Street. Chuong Chau, the owner, and his wife, Ly Anh Chau, were among
the first to show Americans how to eat shrimp paste on sugar cane. They wrap the
scallion-flecked shrimp paste around fresh sugar cane and grill it. After
sliding the shrimp paste off with chopsticks, they wrap lettuce around the paste
and dip the leafy bundle into nuoc cham, a sauce of vinegar, nuoc mam and
garlic. (Afterward, some people enjoy a discreet gnaw on the sugar cane.)

They also introduced the traditional hot and sour fish soup into Chinatown --
its broth is spiced with tamarind, chili, fish sauce and lime juice.

Two months ago, the Chaus took their soup and other family recipes uptown to
1425 Third Avenue (81st Street), where Danny Chau, their 29-year-old son, opened
Miss Saigon.  The food is the same, uptown or downtown.

The unifying factor is Mrs. Chau, who each day takes ground beef with roasted
peanuts, garlic, lemon grass, ginger and onions and wraps the hand-prepared
mixture in grape leaves. After that, she blends crab meat, pork and chicken for
the spring rolls.

Three years ago, another son, Bill, graduated from Hunter College with a degree
in computer science. But immediately, he started working as a waiter and host at
the family restaurant. "My parents," said Bill, 26, "they needed me."

Soon, maybe in a year, he will have a new career in computers. But meanwhile, he
is explaining to customers, probably for the thousandth time, how to pull the
shrimp paste off the sugar cane.

LOAD-DATE: September 20, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Each day, the Bo Ky restaurant serves at least 200 bowls of
pho, soup with noodles topped with sliced beef or beef balls. Top left, Michael
Ly and Minh Tu (seated), owners of the Vietnam Restaurant, and her son, Ken. Top
right, hot and sour fish soup from Viet Huong. Above, grilled pork and spring
rolls from Pho Bang. Left, the Vietnam Restaurant's grilled eel with lemon
grass. (Photographs by Fred R. Conrad/The New York Times)(pg. C6); Vu Bang the
chef, above, with his grilled pork and spring rolls; top, as a major in the
South Vietnamese Air Force. Above left, Ly Anh Chau and her husband, Chuong
Chau, owners of the Viet Huong restaurant; behind them are their sons Bill,
left, and Danny. At left, Hai Ngo (left) and Angle Ngo of the Bo Ky restaurant.
Below, some landmarks of Indochinatown. (Photographs by Fred R. Conrad/The New
York Times)(pg. C1)

Map: "A Growing Presence" shows locations of Vietnamese restaurants in the
Manhattan area. (pg. C1)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              282 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 20, 1995, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Vietnamese Cuisine, All Around Town

BYLINE: By FLORENCE FABRICANT

SECTION: Section C;    Page 6;    Column 3;    Living Desk

LENGTH: 914 words


VIETNAMESE cuisine is whetting appetites in New York, and not just in Asian
enclaves.

In the last couple of years, Vietnamese restaurants have opened in midtown, the
Upper East and Upper West Sides, SoHo, Brooklyn Heights and Park Slope. At least
six new establishments have crowds of eager customers willing to stand in line
for tables. More places are on the way.

And many American chefs have begun to add touches of Vietnam -- like the fresh
salad rolls of vegetables, noodles and herbs in fresh rice-paper wrappers -- to
their menus.

An array of Vietnamese dishes -- including steamed grouper fillet with tamarind
sauce, spicy beef and onion with lime vinaigrette, minty sour soup, and the
ubiquitous spring rolls and salad rolls -- will be featured tomorrow through
Saturday in the Peacock Alley restaurant of the Waldorf-Astoria.

Seven-course feasts will be prepared by Dieu Ho, the executive chef of the New
World Hotel in Ho Chi Minh City. It is the first appearance here by a guest chef
from Vietnam. Laurent Manrique, the chef at Peacock Alley, visited Vietnam
earlier this year and was so delighted with the cooking there that he invited
Mr. Ho to New York.

Despite this activity, New York is hardly a trend setter when it comes to
Vietnamese restaurants. Other parts of the country -- California, Texas, the New
Orleans area, Minneapolis and Hartford -- have enjoyed many Vietnamese
restaurants for years.

"In New York, Vietnamese food is the new cuisine," said Viet Tran, the executive
chef of Le Colonial, a stylish Vietnamese restaurant on East 57th Street. "The
Vietnamese who came after the war were not so quick to settle here, maybe
because of the climate, the cold weather."

Mr. Tran, an engineer who left what was then Saigon in 1975, settled first in
Houston, where he found work as a chef in a Vietnamese restaurant. He moved to
New York in 1982 and cooked in French restaurants before becoming the chef of
Indochine, on Lafayette Street, in 1984. He has been at Le Colonial since it
opened, two years ago.

The weather may not have been the only factor. "Some other cities, like Hartford
and Minneapolis, had more active Catholic charities working with the Vietnamese
immigrants, so those are the places that welcomed them," said Nicole Routhier, a
cookbook author who was born in Vietnam and moved to the United States in 1979.
"Immigrants often go into the restaurant business, and you can tell where the
immigrants are by the number of restaurants that open."

Ms. Routhier said the current surge in Vietnamese restaurants may be the work of
a more prosperous second generation of Vietnamese in America taking advantage of
an opportunity.

Beginning in the late 1970's, Manhattan had one or two small, more or less
authentic Vietnamese restaurants, in the Greenwich Village. Cuisine de Saigon on
West 13th Street, which opened in 1975, is enjoying the longest run.

Then came Indochine and Can, a French-Vietnamese restaurant in SoHo, both of
which added more than a soupcon of late-night, downtown Parisian chic to
Southeast Asian cuisine. The French connection, resulting from France's long
occupation of Indochina, keeps some of Manhattan's Vietnamese restaurants, like
Le Colonial, in the social spotlight and attracting a fashionable clientele.

"I've eaten Vietnamese food in France, and I love it," said Lynn Wagenknecht, an
owner of Kiosk and Odeon, who expects to open a Vietnamese restaurant, as yet
unnamed, at 100 West Houston Street, in SoHo, in November.

Certainly, Vietnamese food has all the earmarks of a cuisine that should be
popular with Americans. Many dishes, fragrant with lemon grass, mint and basil,
are steamed and grilled, and fat is kept to a minimum. Though chilies are used,
the flavors are more often sweet than spicy.  "It's actually a cuisine that's a
bit more Westernized than most Asian cuisines," Ms. Routhier said.

At Judson Grill on West 52d Street, John Villa, the chef, serves what he calls
Vietnamese shrimp rolls made with vegetables, fried garlic, cellophane noodles
and shrimp in raw rice-paper wrappers with a dipping sauce. Salad rolls, with a
vegetable filling, and spring rolls stuffed with wild mushrooms, dominate the
dim sum assortment at Match Uptown.

Mr. Tran, at Le Colonial, says he has had to make some adaptations to
traditional dishes. He uses pork instead of chicken in his steamed Vietnamese
ravioli, for example, and has added ingredients like fresh tuna and sea
scallops, which are not used in Vietnamese cooking. And at Indochine, Hui Chi Le
-- who started as a busboy when the restaurant first opened, later became the
chef and bought the restaurant three and a half years ago -- is also using
salmon and tuna.

Now, with diplomatic relations between Vietnam and the United States restored,
these and other Vietnamese chefs are looking forward to a greater supply of
authentic Vietnamese ingredients. Mr. Tran says he has mostly been using Thai
ingredients. "The quality is different," he said. "Thai rice papers are not as
thin or delicate as Vietnamese."

And as more New Yorkers, including chefs, begin traveling to Vietnam, the taste
for the food can only expand.

"I can't wait to see how it is going to evolve," said Mr. Manrique, who insisted
that despite his visit to Vietnam he was not about to start serving foie gras
with lemon grass. "As the country opens up, more chefs will be influenced by
Vietnamese cooking -- but they will mix it up, for sure."

LOAD-DATE: September 20, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Hui Chi Le started as a busboy at Indochine, one of the first
Vietnamese restaurants in New York. He later became the chef, and is now the
owner.

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              283 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 21, 1995, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

In Vietnam Era, U.S. Had Asia Experts

SECTION: Section A;  Page 22;  Column 5;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 216 words


To the Editor:

Robert S. McNamara (letter, Sept. 14) repeats the statement in his book that in
Vietnam there were no "senior officials in the Pentagon or State Department with
comparable knowledge" to those who advised the Kennedy Administration on Russia.

During the latter part of World War II, the Office of Strategic Services
provided support against the Japanese for Indochinese nationalist-Communists,
including Ho Chi Minh. During the 1945-46 period, the O.S.S. recommended that
the United States provide continuing economic support for Ho, because the agency
believed that Ho would develop a breed of national communism more friendly to
the United States.

The O.S.S. recommendation was rejected by the State Department in favor of
support for the return of French colonialism to the country.

If I discovered that in researching my undergraduate college thesis in 1956, it
was certainly available to Mr. McNamara and his colleagues.

Many former O.S.S. officers who served in the China-India-Burma Theater during
the war, who dealt with Ho and who were knowledgeable in East Asian culture,
history and politics, were available, and so were several of the State
Department's most experienced Asian specialists.

ROGER J. FLEISCHMANN
San Francisco, Sept. 14, 1995

LOAD-DATE: September 21, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              284 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 21, 1995, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

In Vietnam Era, U.S. Had Asia Experts

SECTION: Section A;  Page 22;  Column 5;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 185 words


To the Editor:

Robert S. McNamara (letter, Sept. 14) tries to minimize President Kennedy's
responsibility for the Vietnam War. Although commitments to a non-Communist
South Vietnam went back to President Truman, it was J.F.K. who put the prestige
of the United States on the line with his Vietnam policy. As he explained to
John Kenneth Galbraith in 1961:

"There are limits to the number of defeats I can defend in one 12-month period.
I've had the Bay of Pigs and pulling out of Laos, and I can't accept a third"
(quoted in "President Kennedy and Indochina: The 1961 Decisions" by Geoffrey
Warner, International Affairs, Volume 70).

As to the famous 1,000-man withdrawal announced in October 1963, the Pentagon
Papers describes it as having been "essentially an accounting exercise," adding:

"Technically, more than 1,000 U.S. personnel did leave, but many of these were
part of the normal turnover cycle . . . Though the replacement pipeline was
slowed somewhat, year-end total in-country strength nevertheless was close to
16,000."

BERNARD A. HEENEY
Bayonne, N.J., Sept. 14, 1995

LOAD-DATE: September 21, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              285 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 22, 1995, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Encore for Suriname's Ex-Dictator?

BYLINE: By ANTHONY DePALMA

SECTION: Section A;  Page 8;  Column 1;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1222 words

DATELINE: PARAMARIBO, Suriname


Thirteen years after the United States considered sending marines up the muddy
Suriname River to force a left-leaning military dictatorship from power in this
small South American country, the dictator who ran that Government is now
running for President.

The ex-dictator, Desire Bouterse, a 49-year-old career soldier who helped stage
one coup in 1980 and another in 1990, is now chairman of the National Democratic
Party. As he heads into national elections scheduled for next spring, his
popularity is growing.

"You can tell everyone that we're 'coming soon,' just like in the movies," Mr.
Bouterse told a rally of about 1,500 supporters who gathered under a large steel
shed here in the capital one night recently.

As bats flew over their heads, the people in the audience heard Mr. Bouterse
attack his favorite targets -- journalists, human rights campaigners, the
current Government and the Netherlands, Suriname's former colonial ruler.

He also tried to explain his concept of decentralized government and how, if
elected, he would divide Suriname into local districts that would have far
greater self-determination than now. People in the stiff seats yawned.

Political theory is not the reason Surinamese support Mr. Bouterse. The
country's economy is in a shambles. The exchange rate, which used to be seven
Surinamese guildens to the dollar, is now 450 to the dollar. Taxes are higher,
but the streets are filled with potholes.

Mr. Bouterse promises to fix everything, and he freely uses his wealth and
influence to buy support.

"He brought us chainsaws and then he buys the timber from us," Herman Joeroeja,
a Carib Indian who lives in the forest about 50 miles south of Paramaribo, said
of Mr. Bouterse (pronounced BOUGH-ter-seh). "If he does good to me, I have to
call his name good."

As he campaigns, Mr. Bouterse tries to put distance between the image of a
serious politician he now tries to convey and the dark record of killings,
disappearances, arrests and other rights violations that marked his decade in
power.

In an interview at his office at his party headquarters, he said it was "a black
page in our history" when soldiers under his command rounded up 15 opposition
figures and journalists on Dec. 8, 1982, and murdered them at Fort Zeelandia, on
the Suriname River.

"But people fail to realize the different coup attempts that took place under
those 15 people who were killed," he said. "If the central Government hadn't
taken action, we would have had not 15 deaths but 1,500."

While the victims were involved in campaigns to restore democratic government to
Suriname, there has never been any evidence that they were plotting to overthrow
Mr. Bouterse, although there were at least two attempts to oust him from power
in that year.

In 1982, the United States was uneasy about Mr. Bouterse's overtures to Cuba,
Libya and the Soviet Union, fearing he would allow another Communist beachhead
besides Cuba in the Western Hemisphere.

Within a few weeks of the killings, American officials proposed a joint military
operation with the Netherlands in which the Dutch would seize control of
Paramaribo while United States warships insured that Cuba did not intervene.

When the Dutch hesitated, the United States considered other options. In his
1993 autobiography, "Turmoil and Triumph," former Secretary of State George P.
Shultz described President Reagan as willing to send in American troops without
Dutch support.

Later, American policymakers even considered an improbable plan for a force of
up to 175 South Korean commandos to stage a raid on Paramaribo and overthrow Mr.
Bouterse. In his book, Mr. Shultz called the plan "a hare-brained idea," and
said post-Vietnam fears about American troops getting bogged down in a foreign
land kept anything from ever happening.

Now, independent polls show Mr. Bouterse's party far more popular than the
ragged coalition that has ruled since 1991.

"Bouterse may be in a position to be kingmaker in the next elections or even
king himself," said Prof. Gary Brana-Shute, a cultural anthropologist at George
Washington University who specializes in Suriname. "Bouterse and his friends no
longer need military power. They've built a shadow empire of businesses and
investments in Suriname and internationally to make the National Democratic
Party one of the richest groups in Suriname."

The Dutch, who had granted Suriname independence only five years before the 1980
coup, were deeply embarrassed by the turmoil there and cut off hundreds of
millions of dollars in foreign aid after the deaths of the 15 opposition figures
and journalists.

Mr. Bouterse said he tried to line up aid in the United States, Brazil, India
and Venezuela and was rebuffed. Only then, he said, did he turn to the Communist
countries to seek financial assistance. He denied he was ever a Communist.

"Here in Suriname we have had a very strong aversion against so-called
Communism," he said. "Most of the dogs in Suriname were called Castro."

A civil war in the 1980's forced some 10,000 Surinamese to take refuge in
neighboring French Guiana and sent an already stumbling economy into a free
fall. The Netherlands pressed Mr. Bouterse to give up power, and he allowed
elections in 1987. Then, in 1990, he dismissed the Government with a phone call
in a bloodless coup.

A coalition Government was elected in 1991, but Mr. Bouterse's party, which took
12 seats, remained in the opposition. He stepped down as commander of the
military in 1992 and says he devoted himself to building the party and doing
what was necessary to make ends meet.

As it turns out, he made ends meet nicely. His wife drives a white customized
Mercedes-Benz, and he is considered one of wealthiest men in Suriname, with
interests in oil, timber, gold and real estate.

"All those things give you ample opportunity to drive a Mercedes," he said.

A Western diplomat here said that while Mr. Bouterse has supporters, the chance
of his party's winning the three-quarters of the 51-seat Parliament that would
be needed to name him President is "practically zero."

"Besides," the diplomat said, "the simple fact is that the United States would
oppose it and so would the Dutch."

The issue is no longer Mr. Bouterse's Communist sympathies, although his erratic
behavior the last time he was in power makes it impossible to say where he would
stand.

This time, the United States' interest is in supporting a fragile democracy in
Suriname; any retaliation against a Bouterse presidency would likely involve
halting any business investments rather than military intervention.

On Nov. 25, Suriname celebrates the 20th anniversary of independence. Ceremonies
are to be held at the presidential palace, which was used by Dutch governors
during colonial rule, then by Suriname's first elected officials and by Mr.
Bouterse himself before being abandoned because it was so deteriorated that it
could no longer be used.

The palace is now being repaired with $1 million in Dutch aid, an example of
Suriname's continuing dependence on the Netherlands.

"The condition of the palace is the result of eight years without maintenance,"
while the elected Government was in power, he said. "If we win the elections,
you should return in six months and you will see the difference."

NAME: Desire Bouterse

LOAD-DATE: September 22, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Desire Bouterse, chairman of the National Democratic Party in
the small South American nation called Suriname, held a political rally as he
headed into elections for President next spring. His popularity is growing.
(Phillip Diederich for The New York Times)

Map of Suriname showing location of Paramaribo.


TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              286 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 22, 1995, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Also of Note

SECTION: Section C;  Page 31;  Column 1;  Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 297 words


Critics' choices of some other Manhattan art shows:

"VULNERABILITY," the Dahn Gallery, 39 Wooster Street, SoHo (through Sept. 30).
In this group show of Oriental and Occidental artists, the standouts are Kunie
Sugiura's assemblages of X-ray photographs displayed in postcard racks and Ruth
Pastine's square canvases of closely valued colors merging almost imperceptibly
into one another, like melted-down Rothkos (Pepe Karmel).

"VIETNAMESE PROPAGANDA ART," O. K. Harris Gallery, 383 West Broadway, between
Spring and Broome Streets, SoHo (through Oct. 7). How could a small,
impoverished country like North Vietnam have defeated a large, wealthy nation
like the United States? That country's victory seems even more amazing when you
see what drab, uninspiring propaganda posters it had (Karmel).

RON TAYLOR, Richard Anderson Fine Arts, 476 Broome Street, SoHo (through Oct.
14). Ghostly elongated figures on dark grounds with hissing neon highlights:
Pavel Tchelitchev for the 90's (Karmel).

MARILYN MINTER, "Coral Ridge Towers," Postmasters Gallery, 80 Greene Street,
SoHo (through Oct. 8). The black-and-white photographs in this show -- of the
artist's mother, a Florida recluse sustained by drugs and a ruined 1930's
glamour -- date from 1969, just after Ms. Minter had been in contact with Diane
Arbus. They're certainly in the grotesque, darkly comical Arbusian vein, but
infused with a tough empathy (Holland Cotter).

HELEN SOREFF, M-13 Gallery, 72 Greene Street, SoHo (through Sept. 30). For more
than two decades, Ms. Soreff has been producing somber, painterly abstractions
based on the Minimalist grid. This time she's whited or blacked the grid out,
giving the show an interestingly muffled, ghostly, last-minute-decision look
(Cotter).

LOAD-DATE: September 22, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Schedule

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              287 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 22, 1995, Friday, Late Edition - Final

TV WEEKEND;
'Twin Peaks' Meets 'Mayberry'

BYLINE: By JOHN J. O'CONNOR

SECTION: Section D;  Page 17;  Column 1;  Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 712 words


And now for something truly different, at least in the context of the new
season. "American Gothic, created by, of all people, Shaun Cassidy, once one of
the clean-cut "Hardy Boys," looks at small-town America as an eerie place
somewhere between "Mayberry, R.F.D." and "Twin Peaks." Tonight's premiere on CBS
wastes no time in establishing that the local sheriff, Lucas Buck (Gary Cole),
is a malevolent force in the manicured community of Trinity, S.C.

Lucas is a total control freak determined to prove that the American dream is
not a thing of the past. Of course, he adds: "You have to know who's boss. For
those who don't follow my lead, it can be a mighty rough road." As he tells his
cowed deputy, Ben Healy (Nick Searcy), in a conversation about the color of a
gun, "Your idea of gray and my idea of gray might differ: it's all a matter of
perception."

When young Caleb Temple (Lucas Black) begs the sheriff to help his sister,
Merlyn (Sarah Paulson), the boy has no idea what he's unleashing. Finding the
girl unharmed, Lucas simply breaks her neck and then sets out to get custody of
Caleb. The boy finds some protection with Dr. Matt Crower (Jake Weber), a former
alcoholic whose independence clearly enrages the sheriff. Matt is soon joined by
Gail Emory (Paige Turco), Caleb's cousin, a newspaper reporter, who returns to
Trinity when she hears that the sheriff is involved in the lives of her family.
This is not the first time.

Caleb has visions, including those of messages spelled out in blood and
visitations from his dead sister. Lucas methodically wanders about eliminating
those who stand in his way. On one mission of death, he whistles the theme song
from "The Andy Griffith Show." If the sense of menace sometimes threatens to get
a bit campy, that shouldn't come as a surprise in a project on which two of the
executive producers are Sam Raimi and Robert Tapert, the team responsible for
the syndicated sendup shows "Hercules" and "Xena."

'JAG'

NBC, Saturday nights at 8

(Channel 4 in New York)

This new series, created by Donald Bellisario ("Magnum, P.I." and "Quantum
Leap"), gets under way tomorrow as a special two-hour movie. "JAG" stands for
the corps of Judge Advocate General, which consists of military officers trained
as investigators and lawyers to handle crimimal cases within the military. Our
weekly hero will be Navy Lieut. Harmon Rabb Jr. (David James Elliott), who is
determined to honor the memory of his father, who was killed in the early stages
of the Vietnam War. Harm, as he's called, is handsome, charming and sharp. His
regular partner will be Lieut. Meg Austin (Tracey Needham), a corps computer
weapons specialist. Romantic complications are not out of the question.

Tomorrow, Harm is sent with Lieut. Kate Pike (Andrea Parker) to investigate the
drowning death of a female pilot doing super-carrier duty in the Adriatic. Was
it an accident or a suicide? Viewers know early on that it was murder, and with
so many of her fellow officers and mates resenting a woman aboard their
heretofore all-male sanctuary, there are feasible suspects to spare. The
suspense is effectively maintained in this high-seas whodunit.

Especially impressive is the feature-film look of the production. Made entirely
on a Hollywood sound stage and in some California locations, "JAG" uses material
from major movies (like "Top Gun"), archives and military training films to
piece together an astonishing you-are-there sense of place, whether it be an
aircraft carrier or, coming next week, a submarine. Mr. Bellisario's keen sense
of action-adventure is richly enhanced.

AMERICAN GOTHIC
CBS, tonight at 10
(Channel 2 in New York)

Created by Shaun Cassidy. David Eick and Ed Ledding, producers; Judi Ann Mason,
co-producer; Dean Barnes, coordinating producer; Mr. Cassidy, supervising
producer; Ernest Holzman, director of photography; Robert Palm, co-executive
producer. Produced by Gothic Renaissance Pictures; distributed by MCA. Sam Raimi
and Robert Tapert, executive producers.

WITH: Gary Cole (Lucas Buck), Jake Weber (Dr. Matt Crower), Lucas Black (Caleb
Temple), Paige Turco (Gail Emory), Brenda Bakke (Selena Coombs), Sarah Paulson
(Merlyn Temple) and Nick Searcy (Ben Healy).

LOAD-DATE: September 22, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Paige Turco, left, Lucas Black and Gary Cole in "American
Gothic." (Monty Briton/CBS)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              288 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 22, 1995, Friday, Late Edition - Final

BOOKS OF THE TIMES;
Medical Mystery With the Last Chapter to Come

BYLINE: By RICHARD BERNSTEIN

SECTION: Section C;  Page 32;  Column 3;  Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1016 words



Genes, Blood and Courage
A Boy Called Immortal Sword
By David G. Nathan
276 pages. Belknap Press. $24.95.

Anybody who as a young person read Paul De Kruif's "Microbe Hunters" knows just
how exciting a medical detective story can be, more exciting in its way than
conventional detective stories. Medical mysteries, after all, are true stories,
and they involve invisible dangers -- microbes, viruses, genetic accidents --
that kill people like us.

David G. Nathan, the Robert A. Stranahan Professor of Pediatrics at the Harvard
Medical School, is not a science writer like De Kruif. But he is a medical
practitioner and detective himself, one who has spent nearly 30 years treating a
young man named Dayem Saif, who came to him at the age of 6 with what seemed to
be an incurable and fatal disease of the blood. In "Genes, Blood and Courage,"
Dr. Nathan tells Mr. Saif's story. Alongside it, he provides a scientific
history of the efforts to understand, treat and cure the rare blood disease,
known as thalassemia, which in an earlier era would surely have killed Mr. Saif.

Dr. Nathan's book has far less dramatic sweep and power than "Microbe Hunters."
His writing is wooden in places, earnest but a touch schoolmarmish. But if
"Genes, Blood and Courage" lacks literary flair, it is nonetheless an absorbing,
clearly told tale of modern science linked to a moving and morally complex
story: of a real person struggling not just to survive but also to reconcile
that exhausting task with the conflicting yearning for a normal life.

Dr. Nathan begins in 1968, when he first saw Dayem (whose name has been changed
in the doctor's account), brought to Boston from Lisbon by his parents, who were
desperate to save his life. Though he was 6, Dayem, who is of mixed
Syrian-Iranian parentage, had "the stature of an average boy of 2." His labored
breathing could be heard 10 feet away. "His face was terribly misshapen," Dr.
Nathan reports. "An enormous bulging forehead, upper teeth pushed forward by a
swollen upper jaw, and a receding lower jaw gave him the appearance of a highly
cerebral gargoyle."

Dr. Nathan's diagnosed thalassemia, which is an inherited disease of the blood
common around the Mediterranean and in parts of Africa and Asia. It results from
the failure of "a pair of very important hemoglobin genes" to produce the red
cells that carry oxygen to the tissue. The body, struggling frantically to
produce the cells it needs, enlarges the marrow production spaces in the bone,
causing the skeleton to be as fragile as stem crystal and for the body to become
seriously misshapen. In the acute form that it took in Dayem's case, the disease
in 1968 was untreatable and incurable, resulting inevitably in painful childhood
death.

Dr. Nathan tells two linked stories. In one he describes his pioneering
treatment of Dayem, which, from the beginning, involved some difficult choices.
A marrow transplant, if successful, would have cured the disease, but Dr. Nathan
ruled that out in Dayem's case because none of his relatives were sufficiently
compatible to be donors. The other choice was a lifetime program of blood
transfusions that would give Dayem his red cells from the outside. But in 1968,
this course inevitably led to such a heavy concentration of iron in the blood
that the patient was poisoned within a few years by the very effort to save him.

Dr. Nathan's strategy was to keep a half step ahead of Mr. Saif's disease,
keeping him alive long enough for a permanent cure to be developed. This brings
him to the second story he tells: the investigation of the genetic bases of
thalassemia and other diseases of the blood like leukemia. Here he offers the
lay reader a useful short course in genetics and genetic engineering, explaining
various phenomena and processes from protein synthesis to the role of reverse
transcriptase in viral infection. Dr. Nathan's accounts are not always easy to
understand, largely because the matter under discussion is itself technical, but
they should be graspable by most readers endowed with some basic knowledge of
chemistry and biology.

Along the way, Dr. Nathan touches on other subjects, offering judgments on
matters like race relations and the Vietnam War, for which he shows no special
aptitude. But when he deals with medical ethics and the value to science of such
techniques as fetal tissue research and genetic engineering, Dr. Nathan's
opinions, formed as they are by the real battle with real disease, count for a
great deal.

His defense of genetic engineering against the well-intentioned opposition it
has created is especially eloquent. He calmly deals with the fears that
reconfigured genes could "leap out of their incubators and act like an Andromeda
strain" by describing the potential medical benefit to Mr. Saif himself. "I
could," Dr. Nathan writes, "even envisage the creation and insertion of a normal
beta globin gene into young patients with beta thalassemia, to cure their
illness once and for all."

This is not possible yet, which is, most important, a medical disappointment,
but a literary one as well. At one point, Dr. Nathan rather portentously avers:
"If I was to help this young man, and many like him, I would have to be
successful in the second and much slower-moving prong of my pincer attack,"
namely, the development of a genetic therapy to replace Mr. Saif's defective
genes with good ones. Unintentionally, no doubt, he leads the reader to expect
the book to report the development of just such a therapy. But real life is not
a detective story. Mr. Saif, now over 30, still undergoes the painful and
expensive regimen of blood transfusions along with a painful process to
alleviate the iron buildup.

But he is alive, thanks to Dr. Nathan and many others in the microbe-hunter
tradition. Dr. Nathan predicts that after another decade of hard work, gene
transfer therapy will be available to cure inherited diseases like thalassemia.
Meanwhile, "Genes, Blood and Courage" is a fascinating account of the mileposts
on the long journey that have been reached so far.


LOAD-DATE: September 22, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of David G. Nathan. (Geoff Why/Harvard University Press)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              289 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 22, 1995, Friday, Late Edition - Final

$25 and Under

BYLINE: By Eric Asimov

SECTION: Section C;  Page 24;  Column 3;  Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 838 words


There has never been a better time to get to know the fragrant food of Vietnam.
Vietnamese restaurants, hardly seen in New York even five years ago, are
proliferating all over the city, with many new ones spinning off from successful
enterprises.

The appeal is clear. Vietnamese cooks achieve a subtle balance of textures and
colors that, combined with fresh herbs and pungent nuoc mam, a fermented fish
sauce, is healthful and delicious. The food is both lighter than Chinese food
and less fiery than Thai. And fresh vegetables play a role, too. Lettuce leaves
are always a part of Vietnamese meals, used to wrap other foods. Even a fried
spring roll, wrapped in a green leaf with mint and bean sprouts, tastes cool and
refreshing.

Here are three of the newest Vietnamese restaurants in New York.

HUE is owned by two young friends, Billy Bui and Ricky Huot. Mr. Bui's mother
cooks, and his uncle owns Nam Phuong in TriBeCa. The bright lights and the
industrial tile floor seem direct from a school cafeteria, but the brick walls,
wooden chairs and bamboo trimmings soften the room. Many Vietnamese seem to
favor Hue, which is unusual for a restaurant this far from Chinatown.

The food is forcefully flavored, with generous doses of nuoc mam. In
hot-and-sour shrimp soup ($5.95, serves four), for example, the unmistakable
scent of the sauce wafts upward. The blend of fish broth, shrimp, okra and
peppers is beautifully balanced and slightly spicy, set off by chunks of sweet
pineapple. Spring rolls ($3.50 for four) are crisp and greaseless, delicious
dipped in nuoc cham, the fish sauce mixed with vinegar, lime juice and sugar. A
fried whole snapper is slightly dry yet flavorful, served boneless with lime
juice and chili paste ($13.95).

Hue offers some unusual dishes, like cubes of tender beef sauteed in French
butter and dipped in a sauce of lime juice and ground pepper ($7.95), and chunks
of curried chicken, served with potatoes in a fragrant soup over rice noodles
($5.25).

The hosts are friendly and attentive, eager to show you how to wrap a spring
roll, and eager to have you test their karaoke equipment.

MISS SAIGON is a new branch of Viet Huong in Chinatown. Upper East Siders are
clearly happy to have their own Vietnamese restaurant. People line up to get
into Miss Saigon, a small, rectangular room where the bamboo roofing and fake
banana plant do little to disguise the no-frills ambiance.

Nonetheless, the food is fresh and tasty, a good introduction to some classic
Vietnamese dishes. Grilled shrimp paste, served around thick stalks of sugar
cane ($6.95), is best removed from the sugar cane, wrapped in lettuce leaves
with mint, and dipped in nuoc cham. The sugar cane, practically dripping with
sweetness, can be gnawed afterward as a sort of digestif. Piquant green papaya
(not at all sweet) harmonizes with strips of grilled beef in a salad with basil
leaves and a spicy peanut sauce ($7.95). Pho bo ($5.95) is a traditional Hanoi
lunch dish, a rich beef broth with paper-thin slices of beef and rice
vermicelli. Bean sprouts and basil leaves are added, and you can invigorate the
soup by adding hoisin sauce or nuoc mam.

Miss Saigon is less crowded at lunch, when you can get slices of
lemongrass-scented pork with garlic and sesame seeds, served over rice
vermicelli, for $5.50.

NAM in Park Slope, Brooklyn, is an offshoot of Lemongrass Grill, the Park Slope
Thai restaurant that has opened two branches in Manhattan. It sticks to the same
format as the Thai restaurants: plain dining room bounded by an open kitchen.
Here, Vietnam is signified by bamboo light shields and other bamboo motifs.

The menu is basic but includes some standouts, like grilled beef wrapped in
grape leaves ($4.50) and dipped in a spicy sauce. The savory beef is a perfect
contrast to the sweet grape leaves, not at all like the pickled Greek grape
leaves. Green papaya salad ($5.95) is tart and delicious, while pork chops
($7.50) are sliced thin, glazed with honey, garlic and lemon juice, and grilled
until crisp outside. Green beans ($6.50) are stir-fried with garlic, chili and
basil, which gives the beans a pleasant, almost licorice flavor.

Hann Low, the owner of Nam and Lemongrass, is from Malaysia, which he said
accounted for his versatility with the cuisines of Southeast Asia. "We had all
kinds of food," he said, adding that a Malaysian restaurant was his next
project.


New Vietnamese

HUE, 210 East 23d Street, Manhattan, (212) 696-4779. 11 A.M. to 11 P.M. Mondays
through Fridays, noon to 11 P.M. Saturdays and Sundays; all major cards;
everything on one level, restrooms are narrow.

MISS SAIGON, 1425 Third Avenue, near 81st Street, Manhattan, (212) 988-8828;
11:30 A.M. to 11 P.M. daily; all major cards; everything on one level.

NAM, 222 Seventh Avenue, at Third Street, Park Slope, Brooklyn, (718) 788-5036;
noon to 10:30 P.M., Mondays through Thursdays, until 11:30 P.M. Fridays and
Saturdays, 1 to 10:30 P.M. Sundays; Mastercard and Visa, everything on one
level.

LOAD-DATE: September 22, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              290 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 22, 1995, Friday, Late Edition - Final

World News Briefs;
McNamara Plans Visit To Vietnam Next Month

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A;  Page 9;  Column 3;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 174 words

DATELINE: HANOI, Vietnam, Sept. 21


Former Defense Secretary Robert McNamara, who recently said he had been
"terribly wrong" to support the Vietnam War, plans to visit Vietnam next month
for the first time since the war.

Mr. McNamara is to join a group sponsored by the Council on Foreign Relations in
New York, a Foreign Ministry spokeswoman said today. The Foreign Ministry's
Institute of International Relations will receive the delegation.

As Defense Secretary for Presidents Kennedy and Johnson, Mr. McNamara helped
make United States policy toward Vietnam and strongly supported the American
troop buildup.

Mr. McNamara broke a decades-long silence about the war with the publication
earlier this year of a book in which he said he and other aides had made an
"incredible" mistake by not weighing the political, military, financial and
human costs of deepening United States involvement in Vietnam. The two countries
established diplomatic relations last month.

Mr. McNamara stepped down in 1968 after growing differences with President
Johnson over the war.

LOAD-DATE: September 22, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              291 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 23, 1995, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

A Fever, Once in Retreat, Surges in Latin America

BYLINE: By LARRY ROHTER

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 5;  Column 1;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1270 words

DATELINE: MIAMI, Sept. 22


After being virtually eradicated in the Western Hemisphere, dengue fever, a
debilitating tropical disease transmitted by mosquitoes, is re-emerging with
such force that it has now reached epidemic proportions in Central America and
is bearing down on the United States.

The resurgence, health experts say, is largely the result of rapid urban
population growth in Latin America and the Caribbean, which has led to lax
sanitation procedures, overcrowding and poverty. While dengue fever does not
pose as large a threat to the United States, experts at the Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention warn that states like Texas and Florida face the risk of
an outbreak.

More than 35,000 people have contracted the disease in Central America in recent
months, and El Salvador and Guatemala have declared states of "national
urgency," allowing them to deal with the epidemic as a natural disaster. At an
emergency meeting in Guatemala this week, health officials from Central American
and Caribbean countries met to coordinate their responses and to plead for
foreign economic aid to help control the epidemic.

"If control measures are not implemented immediately, the rates will be
tremendous for at least the next three months or so," said Dr. Gabriel Schmunis,
an Argentine physician who is director of the communicable disease program of
the Pan American Health Organization in Washington. "This is the rainy season in
Central America."

The disease has also reappeared in other places, including Mexico, where an
eightfold increase in the number of cases has been reported this year, and among
American troops in Haiti and hurricane relief workers in the Caribbean.

Brazil has identified more than 88,000 cases this year, and in Venezuela more
than 15,000 people have been afflicted, leading the Pan American Health
Organization to warn in a recent statement of "the growing threat of a
full-fledged epidemic" throughout the Western Hemisphere.

Experts say dengue (pronounced DEN-ghee or DEN-gay) is transmitted by the Aedes
aegypti mosquito and is characterized by the sudden onset of a high fever, rash,
severe headaches, nausea and vomiting. In English-speaking countries, the
disease is known as breakbone fever because of the excruciating pain in the
joints and muscles that usually accompanies it.

Four basic strains of so-called classic dengue have been identified.  There is
no vaccine or specific treatment for the disease, but in its classic form dengue
is rarely fatal.

But health experts say they are now concerned about the emergence of a more
virulent and potentially lethal form of the disease known as dengue hemorrhagic
fever, which is caused by the same strains as classic dengue. Beyond their
enhanced virulence, the greater severity of the strains also seems related to
the genetic susceptibility of the victims, according to the American Public
Health Association.

As its name implies, hemorrhagic dengue causes increased permeability of blood
vessels, which leads to plasma leakage, shock and death in about 10 percent of
reported cases.

Doctors say that falling victim to one variety of dengue does not confer
immunity to the others. In fact, experts say that people who have been infected
with one or more strains of classic dengue seem more vulnerable to the more
severe form of the disease. Antibodies acquired in the earlier infection, they
say, may overstimulate the body's immune cells and make them more susceptible.

With all four strains of the disease now having been observed in Central
America, the experts warn, conditions for the spread of the hemorrhagic form are
ideal.

Statistics on the number of hemorrhagic cases and deaths in the current epidemic
are fragmentary and difficult to obtain. Health workers in several countries say
they suspected that there has been underreporting of the extent of the epidemic,
in part because governments do not want to scare off tourists.

Dengue has long been endemic to the tropics, but after World War II, governments
throughout the Western Hemisphere started a coordinated effort to wipe out Aedes
aegypti, which also transmits yellow fever. By the 1970's, the campaign had
largely eliminated the mosquito and the dengue threat, and governments, ignoring
experts' warnings, began to relax their vigilance.

But small pockets of the insect were left in Venezuela and some Caribbean
islands, providing Aedes aegypti with the toehold it needed for a comeback.

"The eradication effort was stopped too soon, and when it was stopped, efforts
to keep the mosquito from reinvading also were not continued," said Dr. Duane
Gubler, a dengue expert at the Centers for Disease Control.

Then in 1981, a severe epidemic struck Cuba, infecting more than 300,000 people.
President Fidel Castro initially accused the United States of introducing the
virus as a form of biological warfare, but researchers later determined that the
disease had actually been imported from Vietnam by Cubans returning from jobs
there.

At the same time, a new and hardier species of dengue-bearing mosquito, Aedes
albopictus, known as the Asian tiger mosquito, was introduced into the Western
Hemisphere and became entrenched in the United States. The tiger mosquito, which
ranges as far north as Chicago, has not been identified as a transmitting the
current Central American epidemic, but is regarded as a potential carrier.

Over the last decade, there have been periodic eruptions of dengue in the
Caribbean and Latin America, though on a scale smaller than this year's
epidemic. Such outbreaks can be avoided, experts say, if governments and
citizens follow simple and low-cost sanitation measures that eliminate
mosquito-breeding sites.

"This is an urban mosquito, and the population of the cities has increased, so
more people are exposed," said Dr. Schmunis of the Pan American Health
Organization. "That is especially the case where there is no running water and
the larvae of the mosquito can grow in places where water collects, such as
barrels and tires."

Facing growing pressure from alarmed citizens, several Central American and
Caribbean governments have begun extensive spraying campaigns. But health
experts say such efforts are largely ineffective, since fumigation kills only
adult mosquitoes outdoors and spares both their larvae and those adults that are
indoors.

But as a result of this week's meeting in Guatemala, the affected countries have
said they will step up their education programs. In several Central American
countries, soldiers and health workers have already been deployed to clean up
breeding sites and explain to residents the relationship between the disease and
their sanitation practices.

To assist in that effort, Britain has already approved a small special aid
package, and Norway is expected to follow suit. Although representatives of the
United States Government attended the Guatemala meeting and Washington has
expressed concern that the disease may soon spread to southern and border
states, the United States has not contributed to the emergency fund.

On the average, about 75 cases of dengue are reported in the United States each
year, brought back from abroad by Americans visiting the tropics. Dr. Gubler of
the C.D.C. cautioned that an outbreak of dengue "along the entire Gulf Coast,
from Texas to Florida" is possible, but said a full fledged epidemic is
extremely unlikely.

In the United States, "mosquito densities are lower, local mosquito control
districts do good work, and the life style of humans is not really conducive to
an urban mosquito-borne disease like this," he said.

LOAD-DATE: September 23, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Dengue fever is rampant in Latin America, and dumps like this
one in Nicaragua, where the poor scavenge among the refuse, are breeding areas.
(Agence France-Presse)

Chart: "KEEPING TRACK: Dengue Takes Hold" shows number of Dengue cases,
Hemorrhagic Dengue cases and deaths in various countries. (Source: Pan American
Health Organization)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              292 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 23, 1995, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Journal;
Go to Cleveland

BYLINE: By FRANK RICH

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 23;  Column 1;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 719 words


Here is news you may not be dying to hear: You must go to Cleveland.

I can understand your skepticism.  When I told friends in New York that I was
going to begin my vacation there, they first thought I was joking, then assumed
I was from Cleveland and trapped in some unspeakable family obligation. When I
confessed I was going by choice, they laughed and changed the subject. The Rock
and Roll Hall of Fame and Museum sounded like a joke in those days just before
its Sept. 1 opening, and who cared if the Indians won their first pennant since
1954, anyway?

But such was the double header that drew me to the rust-belt city that can't
even claim the epic dysfunctionality of Detroit. And Cleveland more than
delivered. A visit to Jacobs Field -- an intimate and unabashedly urban new ball
park that dispenses with the faux-Wrigley mannerisms of Baltimore's Camden Yards
-- was the first to rev up my enthusiasm about the once-national pastime since
the strike.

The rock hall is an even more unlikely triumph than an Indians pennant. The $92
million building I. M. Pei created on the Lake Erie waterfront looks like a
cross between the architect's expansion of the Louvre and his flashy office
building for the Creative Artists talent agency in L.A. -- a fitting meeting
place for art both high and low. Like the dynamic building, the interactive
exhibits inside pull off the difficult stunt of stating the rebellious cultural
and historical import of rock without either stripping the music of its fun or
striking the pompous tone of academic pop-culture criticism.

Sure, some of the museum is given over to simple nostalgia. The countless
displays include John Lennon's Sgt. Pepper's costume, Janis Joplin's
psychedelically painted Porsche and yellowed covers of Rolling Stone and
Crawdaddy you haven't thought about in years. More poignant are a metal slice of
Otis Redding's downed plane and souvenirs from the childhood of the most
Dionysian of rock princes, Jim Morrison, who died at 27 in 1971. As a kid he was
a Cub Scout and a student government president. In elementary-school cursive he
wrote his mother an Easter note: "I only wish I could put on paper how much I
appreciate the help and love you have given me through my life."

But the rock hall is not merely a sentimental fount of memorabilia -- a Hard
Rock Cafe without the cheeseburgers. The institution's director, Dennis Barrie,
is a veteran of the culture wars; in 1990 he was indicted (and acquitted) for
exhibiting Robert Mapplethorpe's photographs at Cincinnati's Contemporary Arts
Center. As he led a tour of the museum, he talked of his efforts to provide a
"social context" for every performer and artifact.

For each musicological exhibit that might document the creation of a hit record
or the influence of, say, Woody Guthrie on Bob Dylan, there is another that
connects rock's history to the larger history of a city (from New Orleans in the
50's to Seattle in the 90's) or a cultural upheaval (the rise of television, the
raising of skirts) or a national cataclysm (Vietnam). Rock's social critics,
from the John Birch Society to Tipper Gore, are taken as seriously as rap; so
are the songs' political nuances. Mr. Barrie is quick to point out that rock was
the music of those who fought the Vietnam war as well as those who protested it.

Still, what inevitably makes this museum most powerful is rock's inextricable
tie to the biggest American story of all: race. As the rock hall repeatedly
animates the transracial genealogy of an all-American music in which Robert
Johnson and Hank Williams both play ancestral roles, a visitor is never allowed
to forget that rock-and-roll could be born only when black and white music
collided during the postwar boom.

You feel this particularly keenly as the forces that shaped Elvis in 50's
Memphis are evoked -- complete with a reconstruction of the tiny Sun Studios
where Sam Phillips first recorded him. This was the promising moment when
America found in music the true color-blind culture it had yet to achieve
anywhere else. Only when you're out the museum's door, back in the racially
poisonous present of the Simpson trial, "The Bell Curve" and bitter
affirmative-action debates, does the music stop, forcing you to reflect upon
just how we got from there to here.

LOAD-DATE: September 23, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              293 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 24, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

WESTCHESTER GUIDE

BYLINE: By ELEANOR CHARLES

SECTION: Section 13WC; Page 13; Column 1; Westchester Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1053 words



FUN AT THE JAYS'

Friends of the 64-acre John Jay Homestead in Katonah are holding their third
yearly Old-Fashioned Country Fair today from 11 A.M. to 4 P.M. with dozens of
attractions for children and adults.

The $10-a-car admission will be used to support the historic site's educational
programs.

Of special interest to animal lovers is a 4-month-old, 40-pound Siberian tiger
cub -- one of several nonpettable animals to be admired. Its handler, Andrew
Simmons, will also bring along an 8-month-old bear cub, an alligator snapping
turtle, a python, a European eagle owl and a peregrine falcon.

While children will have to observe the creatures from a distance, they will be
able to pet the goats, sheep, geese and a donkey in the homestead's farm-animal
compound.

There will be pony rides, rides on wagons drawn by Belgian draft horses,
three-legged races, egg tosses, demonstrations by artisans, an antique car and
tractor display, storytelling, numerous games, music by the New York Blue Grass
Authority, lots of food and many door prizes rounding out the agenda.

In addition, anyone with a home-baked apple pie may submit it for judging. The
winner will get a free dinner for two at the Monkey Bar in Manhattan.

The Homestead is on Route 22. For more information call 232-5651.

ARMONK ART OUTDOORS

Nearly 170 artists representing 17 states from coast to coast will take part in
the 34th Annual Armonk Outdoor Art Show on Saturday and Sunday from 11 A.M. to 5
P.M. It will be held at the American Legion Field behind the North Castle town
offices on Bedford Road. Admission will be free, but a donation will be
appreciated to support projects at the North Castle Library.

It was the Friends of the library that started the show years ago, bringing it
to a stage where it is now rated among the top 200 exhibitions of its kind in
the country by the professional artists publication Sunshine Artist Magazine.

Judged in six categories, the entrants are well known in their fields of oil,
watercolor and acrylic painting, sculpture, mixed media, graphics, and
handcrafts. Prices range from $35 to $9,000, and six works -- one in each
category -- will be distributed as prizes in a raffle for visitors.

Among the artists represented are Michael Patterson, Peter Bramhall, Laura
Breitman, Albert Drogin, Guenther Riess, Sue Phalieros and Carol Turentine.

For more information, call 666-7544.

A SMITHY AT MUSCOOT

William Fitzgerald is a seventh-generation blacksmith, the first of his family
to be born here or anywhere outside of County Limerick in Ireland.

He will lead four blacksmithing workshops at Muscoot Farm in Somers for anyone
who wants to learn the craft.

The first of the five-hour sessions will take place next Saturday from 9 A.M. to
2 P.M.; the others are scheduled on Oct. 7 and 28 and Nov. 4 during the same
hours. Each session costs $65 and is limited to five students.

"We have five forges, five anvils and five sets of tools for them to work with,"
Mr. Fitzgerald said. "And this is not a situation where people come and watch me
demonstrate. They do all the work, I just guide them through it."

In addition to running his own ironworks where he makes horseshoes, ornamental
objects, gates, fireplace tools, and provides decorative items for churches and
building contractors, he has held the classes at Muscoot for a dozen years.

Many of his students come back for increasingly advanced instruction. The most
popular items for first-time students are fireplace pokers and nails, but each
student can make whatever he or she likes.

"Making a nail is very difficult because it's so small," he said. "The iron
heats up and cools down quickly, before you have a chance to draw the point or
make the head." Fires are stoked with soft coal and the forges are hand cranked
the old-fashioned way.

Hard-soled shoes, not sneakers, are to be worn, with jeans, sweatshirts or other
sturdy clothing. Leather aprons are provided for protection.

To register or obtain more information, call 232-7118.

BIG POWER BREAKFAST

The first suburban breakfast to be held by the 240,000-member National
Association for Female Executives will have as its theme "The Big News in 'Big'
Business -- Thinking Small."

It is scheduled on Tuesday from 8 to 10 A.M. at the Nestle Building, 100
Manhattanville Road in Purchase, and registration is $30.

Planned in conjunction with the Entrepreneurial Center of Purchase, the event
will be attended by members of the two organizations and the public from
Fairfield, Rockland and Bergen Counties as well as Westchester.

Marge Lovero, president of the Entrepreneurial Center, will moderate a panel
discussion by Maurice Cox, vice president of Pepsico in Somers; Dee DelBello,
publisher of Westfair Communications and the wife of Alfred DelBello, a former
Westchester County Executive, and Joanne Reilly, senior vice president of
National Westminster Bank.

Billed as a "not for women only" event, the program is aimed at executives and
owners of small businesses, focusing on the demand by big businesses for outside
entrepreneurial ideas and services.

Call (212) 477- 2200, extension 334, to register or obtain more information.

BUSINESS AND ASIA

Sharon Russell FitzSimmons, international finance and treasury executive for
Philip Morris International, will be the speaker at the Westchester County
Association lunch on Wednesday at the Rye Town Hilton in Rye Brook.

Her topic will be "Is the Time Right for You to Be Doing Business in Southeast
Asia?"

She will outline opportunities in the markets of Brunei, Indonesia, Malaysia,
the Philippines, Singapore, Thailand and Vietnam, where a population of 425
million generates a gross domestic product worth $570 billion and the per capita
income is $1,400 a year. As a result, those markets are beginning to compete
strenuously with the developed economies of Japan, Taiwan, South Korea and Hong
Kong.

Ms. FitzSimmons is a graduate of the Harvard Business School who spent four
years in management positions at Philip Morris's Australian operations before
becoming involved in the company's Asian expansion.

A reception will begin at 11:30 A.M., followed by the lunch and presentation at
12:15. Reservations at $50 may be made by calling 948-6444.   ELEANOR CHARLES

LOAD-DATE: September 25, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              294 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 24, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

BELTWAY WARRIOR

SECTION: Section 6;  Page 12;  Column 4;  Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 104 words


As soon as I saw your editorializing photo of Colin Powell, I knew some trashing
was about to take place ("Beltway Warrior," by Michael R. Gordon and Bernard E.
Trainor, Aug. 27). Has anyone ever looked good in a close-up so extreme that the
skin pores show?

So what is the general's fault? It seems he is not a true son of Mars. He
respects the lives of American soldiers and seems to have learned the lessons of
Vietnam very well. And that is what the American public wants. Maybe someday, an
honest man will not be attacked on the level of character when the real issue is
ideas.

ANNIE DAVIS
New York

LOAD-DATE: September 25, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              295 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 24, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

FAULT LINES: The Big One: Washington's Political Earthquake;
Seismic Shift In the Parties Reflects View On Business

BYLINE: By DAVID E. SANGER

SECTION: Section 4;  Page 1;  Column 1;  Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1277 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


AS Newt Gingrich's army of anti-regulatory troops tore through the Capitol last
week, terminating bureaucracy and welfare benefits with extreme prejudice, and
even threatening to default on United States bonds if that's what it takes to
force the Clinton Administration to cut the budget their way, there was a
temptation to stick familiar labels on the combatants.

Certainly liberals are among those appalled at the depth of cuts in Medicare,
and conservatives are happily at work opening up Federal lands to loggers and
slicing the Commerce Department into a half-dozen pieces. But using the old
labels obscures a newer fault line running through Washington. More than ever
the struggles between Democrats and Republicans -- and some of those between
Republicans and Republicans -- have far more to do with the divergent interests
of big and small business.

Ever since Bill Clinton came to office, he has done more for the Fortune 500
than virtually any other President in this century -- making trade the No. 1
priority by, for example, pressing the North American Free Trade Agreement into
enactment over the objections of labor, or opening up relations with Vietnam
before every rice field around Saigon sports its own Japanese factory.

In contrast, the new Republican revolution -- even more than the Reagan
Revolution of more than a decade ago -- belongs to small business, the
disaffected and the thousands upon thousands who have become involuntary
entrepreneurs after being laid off or bought out. Their agenda is championed by
Mr. Gingrich and many newcomers in the House Republican majority that was swept
into power last year. What sets this aggressively activist class of freshmen
Republicans apart is their roots on Main Street: Nearly 60 of them grew up in
business, mostly small business, and think that most "business-government
partnerships" excluded them.

In some ways they bring to mind the Republican constituency of William Howard
Taft, who was famously rude to big-business executives who came to his door (his
half-brother had to caution the President that he was giving affront to "all our
friends") but rarely met a tariff he didn't like. That was an era, like today.
when business seemed so reflexively Republican that there was little danger in
going populist.

"There is this traditional cleavage within the Republicans that goes back to the
beginning of the century," said Michael R. Beschloss, the presidential
historian. "And over the past decade, as the Republicans have moved more and
more to the right, the pragmatic, moderate executives of big firms are not sure
where to go. On some issues the dividing line is not always that sharp, but
there are a lot of strange splits and new alliances. And big business is still
struggling with the fact that Bill Clinton is the first President who has pushed
hard on the issues that are important to them, and understands economic
realities of the world in a way no Republican President has."

That hardly means that big business is suddenly the Democratic Party's best
friend, or even that the change in alliances is likely to have much electoral
resonance. After beating down the doors in China and Japan, promoting free trade
pacts in Asia and Latin America and opening a "war room" that uses the power of
the United States Government to win contracts for American business around the
world, the White House's frustration is palpable. "It's incredible," said a
Clinton political adviser. "They all tell us we've done a great job, understood
their problems in a way Bush and Reagan never did. And yet the money goes to
Newt, and when you look at the polls of business executives, maybe 5 percent or
so express real support."

In fact, big business now looks like a constituency in search of a party --
culturally alienated from the Democrats, perpetually frustrated by the
Republicans.

Certainly there is common ground with Gingrich & Company. Business-led
organizations like the Coalition for Change have spent $10 million financing
television and radio ads calling for a balanced budget sooner rather than later.

But the Republican majority seems to go out of its way to tweak the boardroom.
Seizing on a phrase once favored by Labor Secretary Robert Reich (who was told
by the White House to pipe down) House Republicans scream daily about "corporate
welfare." That may be more hype than reality (on the same day welfare went under
the knife the Senate saved the Market Promotion Program to advertise American
farm goods overseas) but there is no question that it is the small-business
owners who have Congress's ear.

It was small businesses that led the charge against health care changes -- which
would put them at a disadvantage against their bigger brethren, who can better
afford any new burden -- and it is small businesses leading the drive against
environmental rules that big business can also better cope with, and sometimes
turn to its advantage.

The new order was aptly illustrated last week when Mr. Gingrich threatened to
force a default on Government obligations if that's what it takes to make the
White House see the budget his way. America has never defaulted -- and if it did
its cost of borrowing around the world would soar. The bond markets shook, not
because anyone thought a default was imminent but because the mere specter of
high officials bandying about the possibility could drive away foreign investors
and send interest rates up.

The old, Eastern-establishment Republicans of the Eisenhower-to-Nixon era would
have blanched at the very thought of publicly suggesting national financial
suicide. Mr. Gingrich's allies just smiled a smile that seemed to say: Who cares
what investors around the world think? We need every weapon we can get to force
the White House to accept our budget, even if it means threatening the nation's
credit rating.

Much the same divide can be seen in the early skirmishing over new Republican
proposals for financing the Federal government: the flat tax and a tariff on
Asian imports -- the latter the proposal of Pat Buchanan, the most protectionist
of the Presidential candidates. Flat-tax advocates tend to be small-business
owners looking to even the playing field with big competitors who have armies of
tax lawyers.

Meanwhile, any company that relies on exports for a huge part of its sales --
Boeing, Intel or Procter & Gamble -- recoils whenever Mr. Buchanan opens his
mouth.

"Big businesses have learned in recent years that they export or die," a senior
Administration trade official said recently, "and they need all the help they
can get."

Small businesses, no surprise, are less interested in market opportunities in
Bombay. Partly it is a matter of resources, but partly it is a matter of world
view. Even the smallest companies in Japan have a fairly subtle understanding of
export markets; in the United States, officials frequently have to start their
"emerging markets" seminars with a map: This is Indonesia.

No wonder, then, that it is the House freshmen, driven by memories of how
disconnected from Washington small business feels, who have led the drive to
dismantle the Commerce Department office by office. To them, it is just another
rule-making bureaucracy. Now it looks like the trade side of the Commerce
Department will be spared, but only after Commerce Secretary Ron Brown made
repeated pleas for executives to come to its defense.

Mr. Brown was one of the architects of the new, business-friendly Democratic
Party. If he can keep his department together -- a big if -- his next challenge
is to make sure Bill Clinton gets a return on that investment.

LOAD-DATE: September 25, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Outside the House, from left: David Bonior, Dick Gephardt and
Vic Fazio. (Associated Press) (pg. 14)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              296 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 24, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

A Grieved Mother Takes Her Daughter Home

BYLINE: By DIANA JEAN SCHEMO

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 45;  Column 1;  Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 904 words


Her daughter's life crammed into a few suitcases and her coffin in the cargo
hold, Lidia Pinto Machado flew home to Brazil today, vowing to return to New
York "for justice, not judgment."

Ms. Machado, weary after a sleepless night trembling with the grief of her
daughter's death, spoke of memories, hopes and plans as she waited for her
flight.

Maria Isabel Pinto Monteiro Alves was to be buried immediately, in a simple
service at a graveyard near her mother's house in the Barra da Marica outside
Rio de Janeiro. There will be no wake. Ms. Machado said she did not want to see
her daughter dead.

"She was so happy with life," she said. "That's how I want to remember her. Not
as an inert corpse."

Ms. Machado, a sculptor who has recently been making seated figures inspired by
Buddhism, said she would begin a new work: a three-foot statue of her
44-year-old daughter, wings blossoming from her shoulders, to serve as her
headstone.

She remembered how her daughter, who was killed while jogging in a rainy Central
Park last weekend, loved the feel of the rain against her skin, and would run
though her mother warned her about catching cold. "Oh, Mom, it feels so fresh
falling from the sky," she would say.

Ms. Machado's daughter-in-law, Martha Molnar, decided to visit the area where
Ms. Alves was killed a week ago. "I can't go back without seeing it," she said,
before donning dark glasses and heading there with a police escort.

Beneath a gray sky and a fierce wind, Ms. Molnar placed a basket bursting with
amaryllis and white lilies near where her sister-in-law, had struggled against
her attacker and fallen dead, her underpants and jogging shorts down to her
ankles. "Tell me this isn't true," she sobbed.

The flowers had been sent to the family by Sol Mayer and Dan Reich, two friends
of Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's who had also paid for the family's stay at the
Regency Hotel. Ms. Molnar stood up and surveyed the place where Ms. Alves died,
surprised that it was postcard beautiful.

Breathlessly, she reported to her mother-in-law. "First, we heard that she was
attacked at night, and now it turns out it was 6:30 or 7 in the morning," she
said. "Then we were told it was a bad part of the park. But it looked like a
good neighborhood to me, and a lovely place."

In Rio, police planted bright lights along the beaches at Copacabana and
Ipanema. Now, instead of muggings and other attacks, people play volleyball at
night, hold parties and go walking along the water's edge. Ms. Machado wondered
whether a similar solution might work in Central Park.

Ms. Machado, a soft-spoken 65-year-old woman who raised her two children alone
after their father abandoned the family some 30 years ago, relied on her
daughter for financial support. She had had many invitations to bitterness, but
had not succumbed. Now, she thanked Joao de Matos, the publisher of a
Brazilian-American newspaper who had paid for the family's flights from Brazil,
and asked him to print a message of thanks in his newspaper.

She said she would return to New York "for justice, not for judgment," unless
she was needed for the trial. Asked the difference, Ms. Machado said, "Justice
is a much bigger word."

"Judgment means you catch somebody and you put him in prison," she said.
"Justice means social justice -- educating children, treating drug addicts,
working against poverty," she said. She recalled the two periods when she lived
with her daughter in an apartment in the East Village, and the Vietnam veterans
living on the streets.

Most of all, she did not want her daughter's death to mean only that police
patrols at the park might be stepped up for a month or two, and she said she
would return if an anti-violence movement to improve safety needed her support.

Yesterday, police officers combed the park and passed out leaflets noting the
simple facts of Ms. Alves's murder and urging people who might have seen
something to call two hot line numbers: (212) 580-6410, or (800) 577-TIPS.

A homeless man who had been overheard talking to himself about the crime on
Tuesday was arrested on Fifth Avenue yesterday morning, after the police made a
composite sketch from a witness's description. But the man, identified as
William Hargrove, 51, was ruled out as a suspect because he weighs only 125
pounds and is believed to be too weak to have committed the crime, said
Assistant Chief John J. Hill, the commanding officer of the Manhattan
detectives.

Three other homeless men who had been held on various outstanding warrants were
released yesterday, police officials said, including one who had been found with
blood stains on his clothes that matched Ms. Alves's blood type. Tests showed
the blood was his own.

Yesterday, a senior Police Department official characterized the investigation
as "nowhere."

At her daughter's apartment Friday night, Ms. Machado held the hand of Laurel
Wilson, who had briefly been Ms. Alves's roommate and who stopped to offer
condolences to Ms. Alves's family and to help pack her things. Ms. Wilson asked
if there would be a service in New York, and Ms. Alves's mother said no.

"Go to a house of worship, or a church, or even a park, and think of my
daughter," she said. "Or give money to somebody who needs help. Not somebody
whose hand is out, but somebody who you know needs, but would never ask. Give
that person help, and when you do, think of my daughter's name."

LOAD-DATE: September 25, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              297 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 24, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Narrowing the U.S. Immigration Gate

BYLINE: By SETH MYDANS

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 18;  Column 4;  National Desk

LENGTH: 1236 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES, Sept. 23


Seventeen years ago, Sonya Canton, an American citizen born in the Philippines,
petitioned for her sister, a banker, to join her here under the
family-reunification policy that has been the basic principle of United States
immigration law for 30 years.

While she was waiting, a second sister, who sold exotic seashells for a living,
visited the United States as a tourist, liked the place and decided to stay on
illegally with her three children.

To this sister's surprise and good fortune, in 1986 Congress offered amnesty to
illegal immigrants, and she and her children became legal residents, eligible
for citizenship. Today she works as a saleswoman in a department store, and her
children have all graduated from high school with honors.

Meanwhile, as the banker sister continues to wait, the mood of the country, and
of Congress, has changed. Struggling to stem a flood of legal and illegal
immigrants, Congress is preparing to cut deeply into family-reunification quotas
this fall and drop people like her from eligibility.

If the changes are enacted, the United States would shut the door on about 2.4
million people -- the brothers, sisters and adult children of citizens and legal
residents -- who have waited for years or decades to enter the country as legal
immigrants. That number nearly matches the three million illegal immigrants
granted amnesty in 1986.

"It is some kind of injustice when those who played by the rules can't get in,
but those who broke the rules are now going to become citizens," said Ms.
Canton, an import specialist for the United States Customs Service.

But even immigration advocates concede that the current law has become unwieldy,
with a total of 3.5 million people waiting -- some in lines that stretch for 40
years or more -- to join relatives in the United States.

In some countries, like the Philippines, the projected wait for American visas
is so long that the categories for siblings and adult children effectively no
longer exist. Nonetheless, the applications keep coming in, and the lines grow
longer. The solution most favored by Congress is to focus on the nuclear family
and to eliminate from eligibility those with less immediate ties.

"I don't think there is any risk that family unity will be eliminated as a basis
for immigration to the United States," said Arthur C. Helton, an immigration
expert with the Open Society Institute, a lobbying group in New York that
studies international issues. "But what that means in a number of specific
contexts will be redefined, and a focus on the immediate nuclear family will
emerge."

That approach became evident when a Presidential commission led by Barbara
Jordan, a Democrat and former Representative from Texas, recently began drafting
proposed changes in the immigration laws. In an interim report issued in June,
the commission recommended, among other things, allowing citizens and legal
residents to bring in only spouses and minor, unmarried children -- not their
siblings or adult children.

Congress is now considering a number of immigration bills. The most far-reaching
was submitted in June by Representative Lamar Smith, the Texas Republican who
heads the House subcommittee on immigration. His bill is in the hands of the
House Judiciary Committee. In the Senate, Alan K. Simpson, Republican of
Wyoming, is preparing to introduce a similar bill.

The Smith and Simpson measures largely attack illegal immigration; they propose
stronger border controls, workplace enforcement and deportation procedures. In
addressing legal immigration, the bills drastically cut family-reunification
admissions by making the siblings and grown children of legal residents and
citizens no longer eligible for immigration. The Smith bill would reduce the
number of legal immigrants to 535,000 a year, compared with about 800,000 last
year.

The changes would reduce the waiting lists and speed the entry of the spouses
and minor children of legal residents. Currently, the spouses and minor children
of United States citizens can enter immediately, without a numerical quota. But
about 1.1 million spouses and minor children of legal residents are caught in
the backlog, along with siblings and children over 21.

Apart from family reunification, the primary avenue for immigration into the
United States is employment.

The 1986 amnesty is partly responsible for the flood of applicants that has
created pressure for the changes. About 80 percent of the spouses and minor
children on the immigration waiting lists are relatives of those who won legal
residence under that law, Government figures show.

The total family-preference waiting list of 3.5 million is twice as long as when
the amnesty law took effect.  Under current quotas, only 253,721 of those
waiting will receive visas this year, even as the list of applicants grows
longer.

The backlog includes one million applicants from Mexico and about 500,000 from
the Philippines. Before the 1986 amnesty, the Philippines was the largest source
of legal immigrants into the United States. Those countries are followed by
India, China, Vietnam, the Dominican Republic, Taiwan, South Korea, El Salvador
and Haiti.

Short of raising the ceiling for immigration, there seems to be little way to
accommodate the lengthening waiting list of siblings and adult children.

"Clearly the public mood and the practical realities of today's America require
that we cut down on immigration," said Dan Stein, executive director of the
Federation for American Immigration Reform, an independent lobbying group.

Calling the Jordan, Smith and Simpson proposals "an effort to strike a balance,"
he said, "We have to make these decisions based on what is in our national
interest." He added, "We have no duty or obligation to people who have been
waiting in line because the system is impractical in the first place."

But opponents say the cuts are politically motivated and unnecessary. "Since
when did the United States become too small for the parents and children and
brothers and sisters of United States citizens?" asked Frank Sharry, executive
director of the National Immigration Forum, a pro-immigration lobbying group.
"The idea of bringing in energetic newcomers who are helped by family members to
get a leg up in this society is something that has worked for 300 years."

He added, "For a Congress that prides itself in being pro-family, it seems
hypocritical to cut family immigration by 30 percent."

One potential victim of the expected changes is Leticia Chong, a Filipino nurse
who has played by the rules and prospered. She entered the country legally in
1981, became a legal resident, obtained both business and nursing degrees here
and brought up five Philippines-born children to become American doctors, nurses
and engineers. Today they are all either citizens or legal residents.

Her problem is her sixth and last child, an engineering student who will turn 21
this month, having waited in vain for his name to come up in the backlog of
petitions for minor children of legal residents. He now enters the category of
adult children, and -- like Ms. Canton's banker sister -- he would simply be
dropped from eligibility under the proposed changes.

"He has been here since he was 11 years old," Mrs. Chong said. "He has friends
here. His family is here. This is his home. What will he do if he has to go back
to the Philippines?"

LOAD-DATE: September 25, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Graph: "COMPARE AND CONTRAST: Waiting in a Long Line to Get In" shows
number of immigrants admitted in the U.S. in 1994, and number on waiting list as
of January 1995. (Sources: Immigration and Naturalization Service and the State
Department)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              298 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 24, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Parkway Agency Considers Leasing Its Arts Center to Private Managers

BYLINE: By JOSEPH F. SULLIVAN

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 48;  Column 1;  Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 714 words

DATELINE: TRENTON, Sept. 21


For 27 years, the authority that operates the Garden State Parkway has also been
one of the state's biggest entertainment entrepreneurs. That could change before
the end of the month.

The New Jersey Highway Authority is considering a plan to lease the Garden State
Arts Center, on the parkway at Holmdel in Monmouth County, to a group that
includes Sony Music Entertainment, Blockbuster Entertainment Corporation, Pace
Entertainment Corporation and the concert promoter that already serves as the
center's booking agent, Delsener/Slater Enterprises, a Manhattan firm.

Dennis Ingoglia, the spokesman for the authority, said that after a competing
group dropped out, the authority's commissioners were concentrating on a
proposal to give the remaining consortium a long-term lease to run the arts
center. In return, the operators would expand the capacity of the center's
amphitheater and lawn seating area to more than 17,000, from 10,800.

"We need to expand the seating in order to attract the bigger-name talent, to
match the present trends in the entertainment summer-tour industry that focuses
on big outdoor concerts," he said. "We already present some of the biggest
entertainers, but we need to grow to assure that we continue to attract the big
stars."

Mr. Ingoglia said that while the authority could sign a lease that would let the
entertainment group run the arts center program next summer, the seating would
not be expanded until the 1997 season. The lease could be brought up when the
authority meets on Sept. 28, he said.

The highway authority was created in 1952 to build and operate the 173-mile
parkway, which is the backbone of the state's shore resort industry. The toll
road carries millions of visitors each year to resorts from Cape May to Sandy
Hook and from the Raritan Bay shore north through Bergen County.

The legislation that created the authority said roadside recreational services
should also be provided. There are a few picnic areas along the way, but the
chief response to the legislation was the 400-acre Telegraph Hill Park, which
includes the arts center, nature trails, picnic areas and physical fitness
courses where visitors can work out on exercise equipment. It also has a
reception center and a new Vietnam Veterans Memorial.

"There were even plans for a swimming pool in the original design, but it was
never built," Mr. Ingoglia said.

The arts center opened on a windy, rain-swept night in 1968. The weather and
backstage flooding became the story of opening night, but soon the amphitheater
and the lawn, where thousands of patrons sit on blankets or chairs under the
stars, became one of the state's major entertainment venues.

Over the years, there have been complaints about the way ticket sales have been
handled by the center's staff. Most seats are reserved, especially for major
events, and even the lawn tickets become scarce those nights.

In 1987, the authority announced plans to double its tolls, a decision that was
rejected by Gov. Thomas H. Kean, although some toll increases were eventually
approved. The startling announcement on the tolls led to the appointment of a
special State Senate committee to study the highway authority. In 1989, the
committee recommended that the operation of the center be turned over to an
independent, professional management company.

The recommendation appeared to fall on deaf ears until recently, when the
authority decided it had to expand the arts center if it were to remain
competitive with other summer theaters.

Lewis B. Thurston 3d, the authority's executive director, said, "We're still
negotiating with the prospective operators, but we're not sure what elements
that were included in our original call for bids will be in the final document."
The authority made a $2.6 million profit last year from running the arts center
and hopes to do even better under a lease arrangement with the entertainment
consortium, if it is finally approved.

There is a proposal pending to allow the operators to sell alcoholic beverages
at the concerts to increase revenues.
 Holmdel officials have asked for information about the expansion to address
their concerns about the possible effects larger crowds would have on the
township's police, fire and first-aid units.

LOAD-DATE: September 25, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              299 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 24, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Foreign Affairs;
In Defense of Peace

BYLINE: By THOMAS L. FRIEDMAN

SECTION: Section 4;  Page 13;  Column 1;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 736 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


The Jewish New Year begins tonight, but my friend Abraham Foxman won't be in his
regular seat at his Orthodox synagogue in Bergen County, N.J., where he was a
member for 20 years. Mr. Foxman, director of the Anti-Defamation League, quit
his synagogue after his rabbi wrote articles accusing Israel's Prime Minister,
Yitzhak Rabin, of leading the Jewish people on a Holocaust-like death march,
because of his willingness to trade land for peace with the Palestinians. Says
Mr. Foxman, himself a Holocaust survivor: "I could not tolerate belonging to a
synagogue where the rabbi treats anyone who supports the peace process as a
sinner."

Unfortunately, Mr. Foxman's experience is not unique. Some of the Orthodox
Jewish press these days reads like Al Ahram in the 1950's, with weekly diatribes
against Israel's leaders. What is encouraging is that a mainstream Jewish leader
like Mr. Foxman has stepped forward to challenge this view. Polls show that
two-thirds of American Jews support Mr. Rabin, but you would never know it
listening to the tepid support he gets from some weak-kneed mainstream groups,
like the Conference of Presidents.

The right-wing Jewish critique of Mr. Rabin goes like this: "He's giving up
everything and getting nothing."

Oh really? Thanks to the Rabin peace process, for the second year in a row young
Israelis won't be spending their Rosh ha-Shanah holiday patrolling the Gaza
Strip, dodging rocks and bullets. For Israel, this peace process isn't just
about who controls which hill. It's about what sort of state Israel should be.
And the state Mr. Rabin wants Israel to be -- if the security arrangements can
be negotiated -- is a state that is not endlessly occupying two million
Palestinians, with the moral rot that produces.

The opponents of the peace process want to turn the Jewish people from advocates
of a universal morality into just another tribe grubbing for its maximum
interests, whatever the consequences. It may be that the Arabs are so
inalterably hostile to Israel that Israel will have no choice but to adopt such
a stance. But for the sake of those who elected him, and for the sake of future
generations, Mr. Rabin is trying to test whether there is an Arab partner for a
peace that allows Israel to remain true to its Jewish and democratic values --
and be secure.

Thanks to the peace process with the Palestinians, Israel now has diplomatic or
economic relations with half the Arab world, as well as with countries that
shunned Israel in the past, like India, China and Vietnam. These have become
huge markets for Israeli businesses and explain why Israel is now one of the
world's fastest-growing economies. Some 80,000 Israelis visited Jordan this
year. There would have been no peace treaty with King Hussein without the
IsraeliPalestinian talks' paving the way.

Yeah, that Rabin, what a sucker! He's giving up Israeli responsibility for
patrolling the seven biggest Arab towns in the West Bank, and he's giving up
Israel's responsibility to run the lives of every Palestinian there. And he's
doing it without having to move a single Jewish settler, and he's doing it while
maintaining Israel's military control along the Jordan River and the high ground
in the West Bank, and he's doing it while setting up a test for Yasir Arafat to
see if he can maintain this peace, because if he can't it will go no further.

Will all violence end tomorrow? Of course not. It was a 100-year war; it is not
going to be a five-year peace. But it is sheer fantasy to think that halting the
peace process will end terrorism. The only way to diminish Palestinian terrorism
is to build incentives and controls into a peace agreement. Palestinians do not
care a fig about what is good or bad for the Jews, but they do care about what
is good or bad for themselves. This peace process, for the first time, has
created a Palestinian majority which recognizes that to do good for itself, it
must do good for Israel's security as well.

Mr. Rabin's critics treat him as if he were some misguided American liberal.
Hardly. His peace process is built on three hard-nosed calculations -- that
maintaining the status quo is a strategy of despair, that because Israel cannot
trust Palestinian intentions any peace agreement must control Palestinian
military capabilities,and that if it all works, one day the Jews of Israel may
have less of the land but more of a home.

LOAD-DATE: September 25, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

This document could not be formatted for delivery. If your delivery request
included other documents, they completed successfully.

                              301 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 24, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THEATER;
The Clash of American Dreams

BYLINE: By ALVIN KLEIN

SECTION: Section 13CN;  Page 17;  Column 1;  Connecticut Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 359 words


WITH the wisdom that hindsight affords, Richard Hellesen has written a play
about a Midwestern couple who try to stop their terrifyingly gung-ho son from
going off to Vietnam.

It's July 20, 1969, and Ellen and Jack's younger son, Jeff, is obsessing over a
history-making moon walk. Meanwhile, their older son, Mark, has returned from
boot camp and is all revved up for active duty.

The play, "Moonshadow," being produced by Stamford Theater Works, juxtaposes a
youngster's idealism, an older brother's fanaticism and the utter confusion of
their parents.

Given a flag-waving beer-guzzling father who is still basking in his wartime
memories and a mother who went along with blind patriotism, it's hard to believe
in their sudden conviction to ship their son, a pitiable reflection of the
values they drummed into him, off to Canada.

In Mark, though, the playwright has created a crazed, conflicted character who
was brought up to worship false heroism. He was taught to obey. He is obeying.
He is now being told not to be obedient.

The seeds of abusiveness have been planted. He thrives on "playing army." "I've
done everything you ever taught me to do," he reminds his parents.

In a stunning first act curtain scene, the clash of American dreams resounds
with unnerving dissonance. Jeff is glued to the television set with the sound of
thousands cheering the astronauts. Mark, after a family showdown, runs off in a
daze.

At the top of Act II, President Nixon is talking about peace and tranquillity on
earth, as father and older son lie wasted on the grass among six-packs and a
quart of Jack Daniels.

Pat Nesbit and Jonathan Bell convincingly play the plain folks for whom depth of
argument once meant watching Ed Sullivan or Bonanza. Now choice includes
desertion for their oldest son and war is creepy, not just glamorous and sudden.

Even if "Moonshadow" smacks of a facile retrospective, rather than historical
perspective, it has moments of effective irony and it may be saying something to
slow learners.

"Moonshadow," Sacred Heart Academy, 200 Strawberry Hill Avenue, Stamford.
359-4414. Performances through Oct. 1.

LOAD-DATE: September 25, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              302 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 24, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Terminal City

BYLINE: By Paul Theroux;   Paul Theroux's travel book "The Pillars of Hercules"
will be published next month. He is a native of Medford, Mass.

SECTION: Section 7;  Page 11;  Column 1;  Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 881 words



HUDDLE FEVER
Living in the Immigrant City.
By Jeanne Schinto.
302 pp. New York:
Alfred A. Knopf.
$24.

IN the course of this account of life in Lawrence, Mass., the author, Jeanne
Schinto, remarks, "When it comes right down to it, where you will be happy
living depends on where you are most comfortable; not where you belong according
to some 'rule' about work or class, but where you feel you belong -- which is
usually the place where you feel free to be yourself."

That rambling, clumsy, good-hearted sentence gives an accurate flavor of the
book, which is also chatty, anecdotal to the point of being gossipy and given to
the well-intentioned cliche as well as the muddled summary. It is also
premature, because things change, places change, people come and go. As for
cities, some are hopeless. That is also the subtext of the book. At one time
such personal accounts of closely observed residence would be concerned with
distant cities: "Rangoon Jottings," "Ten Years in Khartoum," "A Decade in
Bangkok." Yet Lawrence is just that sort of city -- a remote, bereft, rotting
and blighted place that was once prosperous and proud. Its social structure was
complex in an Asian way even before the Vietnamese displaced the Irish.

After years of living on the periphery of middle-class life in Greenwich, Conn.,
and Washington, Ms. Schinto went to Lawrence because her husband, Bob Frishman,
needed to supervise his family's furniture business. But this was much more than
a relocation. The move was cultural outreach of a bold kind, for the couple made
a deliberate decision to buy an old house in Lawrence and live in this
now-decrepit city in the hope that the street and the town would rise again. An
alternative would have been to commute the short distance from Andover. But
Andover was no challenge at all. Well organized, tidy, prettily painted, a
buffed-up and well-appointed antique with a colonial pedigree, and also the site
of a distinguished school, Andover is consequently snobbish, preppy, fastidious,
racially and culturally monochrome and insufferable. "Known for its urban
blight," Lawrence, right next door ("a city of old Italians and young Latinos"),
became home for the couple.

"Huddle Fever," the story of Ms. Schinto's 10 years in Lawrence, is an
unclassifiable and somewhat garrulous chronicle that deals in sociology, local
history and politics, the rise and fall of American manufacturing, the
unpredictability of neighbors and the paradoxes of American immigration. It is
no help to Lawrence's dignity that Robert Frost was a Lawrence High School grad
(valedictorian of the class of 1892), or that Leonard Bernstein grew up there.
This is overshadowed by Willie Horton, who committed his 1974 murder there, and
by the city's high unemployment and even higher percentage of welfare cases.
Once the Irish and Italians went to Lawrence to work in its clothing mills, the
city became, by 1911, "the cloth-making capital of the world, easily surpassing
two of its early-day rivals -- Manchester, N.H., and Manchester, England --
combined." Latterly, new immigrants have gone to Lawrence from Puerto Rico and
Cambodia and Vietnam -- as well as from other cul-de-sacs in Massachusetts -- to
sign on for free welfare money.

As the city lost its grip on manufacturing, it went downhill, and the gigantic
mills became derelict. Ms. Schinto's history of Lawrence's luminaries and
declining fortunes, drawn from earlier, academic scholarship, shows the author's
indignation and sadness. She sketches the history of the town fathers, of Billy
Wood's famous textile operation, the American Woolen Company, and the important
contradictions of Roman Catholicism in Lawrence. But it remains a book that
makes up in feeling what it lacks in design or fluency; it would have profited
by being more rigorous. Ms. Schinto describes the experiences of her friends and
acquaintances, but in sentences like "Terri Kelley says a Vietnamese girl told
her" (a story of prejudice), she cannot adequately convey the larger picture of
a town of new immigrants with a terminal disease, where it is easier to get on
welfare than get a job.

WHEN a city is viable, as Lawrence was, and offers work to people and a fair
day's pay, there is a sense of community in spite of the ethnic differences.
Working people learn to rub along together. In the absence of work, there is
despair and foolishness and waste. The best intentions cannot change that. But
despair is not the thesis of this book, which is, ultimately, not the tale of a
ruined city but of the experience of living in it. It is awkwardly,
unapologetically personal. This is the story of two good people, Ms. Schinto, a
novelist and anthologist, and her husband, who ran unsuccessfully for Lawrence's
City Council. Their residence was an altruistic experiment, and like many other
altruistic experiments it ended in disappointment, confusion, alarm and flight.
The town they hoped would improve just got worse; the street they hoped would
rise fell into decay and became the haunt of arsonists and drug dealers. In the
end the hopeful couple move the few miles to Andover, and, almost against their
will, they quite like it. Perhaps Ms. Schinto will write a similar book about
smug little Andover.

LOAD-DATE: September 25, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              303 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 27, 1995, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Payment in Copter Downing In Iraq Brings Bitter Dispute

BYLINE: By ERIC SCHMITT

SECTION: Section A;  Page 14;  Column 5;  National Desk

LENGTH: 767 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 26


To keep peace with important allies, Defense Secretary William J. Perry last
year ordered the Pentagon to pay $100,000 to each of the families of 11 foreign
citizens killed in the accidental downing of two Army helicopters by two
American fighter jets over northern Iraq in April 1994.

The families of 14 American service members killed received much less from the
Pentagon: burial costs, $6,000 in death benefits and monthly payments of at
least $790 to surviving spouses and children, following standard policy for all
military deaths. All but one of the American victims also carried military life
insurance that paid $200,000 to their families.

Now the families of at least four of the American victims are demanding the same
lump sum awarded the families of the British, French, Turkish and Kurdish
citizens who died in one of the military's worst self-inflicted accidents.

"I've no gripe with paying foreigners," said Wilson Colbert, whose son, Jeffrey,
was one of the Army helicopter crew chiefs, "but to compensate them and not
fellow Americans is an insult."

The Pentagon and the families have clashed for months, but on Friday the dispute
caught Congress's attention. In approving a $243 billion military spending bill
for the fiscal year 1996, House and Senate negotiators tucked in a paragraph
warning the Pentagon against giving foreigners preferential treatment over
Americans in these kind of accidents, and ordered the Defense Department to
review its policy.

"Why should there be allotments of higher sums for non-Americans?" said
Representative Henry Bonilla, Republican of Texas, who had the paragraph
inserted on behalf of the family of Second Lieut. Laura Ashley Piper, the Air
Force officer who was the only service member without insurance. "We have to
take care of our own people first."

The fight for what the families say is a just settlement is only the latest
dispute between the American families and the Government. The Defense Department
resisted awarding Purple Hearts to the victims or holding any officers
accountable before bowing to pressure from the families and Congress.

The Defense Department says that the $100,000 payments were humanitarian
gestures to valued allies and that American military personnel are covered by a
generous benefits package. Pentagon officials also say it would set an expensive
precedent for the Government to pay the families of American soldiers killed by
fellow American troops.

"The United States Government has been equitable in providing for our families
in comparison to foreign families," Rodney A. Coleman, an Assistant Secretary of
the Air Force, wrote the Pipers.

It is rare for the United States to pay the families of foreigners killed from
American military mistakes.  After the cruiser Vincennes shot down an Iranian
passenger jet in 1988, killing all 290 people on board, Washington paid a total
of $2.9 million to the families. The United States also paid $1.9 million to the
families of three Turkish sailors who were killed and one who was injured when
the aircraft carrier Saratoga accidentally fired on their ship in 1992.

Lieutenant Piper's father, Danny, a retired Air Force colonel, said in a
telephone interview that his 25-year-old unmarried daughter declined the
$18-a-month life insurance policy after she graduated from the Air Force Academy
in 1992 and was assigned to Germany as an intelligence officer. Instead,
Lieutenant Piper invested the monthly premiums amount in a mutual fund, said her
mother, Joan.

A Pentagon spokesman, Maj. Tom LaRock, said that virtually all members of the
armed forces carry some life insurance.

Mr. Piper, an Air Force Academy graduate who served in Vietnam, said he did not
believe the Air Force reoffered his daughter life insurance before she was
temporarily assigned to a NATO air base in Turkey and flew on the ill-fated
mission. Air Force officials, while expressing sympathy for the Pipers, say
military personnel review and update their wills and other personal affairs
before each new deployment, and Lieutenant Piper had ample notice to buy
insurance.

The Pipers say they are fighting for principle, not money. Mr. Piper is an
operations analyst for an insurance company in San Antonio and also receives a
military pension. Mrs. Piper teaches fourth grade.

"This is a very uncomfortable thing to pursue because people look at us like we
are greedy," Mrs. Piper said in a telephone interview. "It's difficult enough to
lose a child, but we shouldn't be put in the position as surviving family
members of bearing the burden of proof."

LOAD-DATE: September 28, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Some families of Americans killed in the downing of two Army
helicopters by American fighter planes over Iraq are pressing the Government for
the same payments that were made to foreign victims. Danny and Joan Piper held a
picture of their daughter, Second Lieut. Laura Ashley Piper of the Air Force,
one of the American victims. (Craig Stafford for The New York Times)


                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              304 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 28, 1995, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

A 20-Year Sentence for 1982 Chelsea Killing

BYLINE: By LAWRENCE VAN GELDER

SECTION: Section B;  Page 4;  Column 4;  Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 389 words


A New Jersey businessman implicated on videotape by a dead accomplice 13 years
after a grisly Chelsea murder was sentenced yesterday to a minimum of 20 years
in prison.

Although his lawyer said dozens of letters submitted by clergy, police,
firefighters and others had asked the court to heed the virtuous life led by
William Seals after the slaying, District Attorney Daniel J. Bibb urged the
judge to grant Mr. Seals no leniency for the crime he committed when he was a
teen-age cocaine addict.

"The defendant should receive no extra credit simply because he chose to live
according to society's norms after he and a friend committed a particularly
gruesome homicide," Mr. Bibb told Acting State Supreme Court Justice Bernard J.
Fried in the courthouse at 111 Centre Street.

Mr. Seals, now 32, was convicted on July 6 of taking part with a boyhood friend,
Kenneth Arch, in the robbery and brutal slaying of Richard Greenberg, a
35-year-old lawyer, in his West 15th Street apartment during a spree of drugs
and sex in August 1982.

It was Mr. Arch, a career criminal dying of AIDS contracted from intravenous
drug use, who implicated Mr. Seals in the slaying three years ago in videotaped
testimony exchanged for an agreement with prosecutors to spend his final months
in a hospital.

Mr. Arch's testimony, as well as a fingerprint analysis made possible by a
computer system that did not exist at the time of the crime, placed Mr. Arch and
Mr. Seals at the site where Mr. Greenberg, 5 feet 5 inches tall and 140 pounds,
was stabbed, bludgeoned, strangled and sexually mutilated.

"I spent 13 months in Vietnam and never ran into such barbarism," Michael
Greenberg, the victim's brother, told the court yesterday.

Soon after the crime, Mr. Seals and Mr. Arch went their separate ways. Mr. Seals
married in the late 1980's and opened Best One Hour Photo, a film processing
shop in Bayonne, N.J.

Justice Fried sentenced Mr. Seals to 20 years to life for murder in the second
degree, 5 years less than the maximum sentence, 25 years to life. He sentenced
Mr. Seals to the maximum sentence for robbery in the second degree, 8 1/3 to 25
years. The sentences are to be served concurrently.

Mr. Seals remained silent.

His lawyer, David Breitbart, who argued that Mr. Seals was framed, said he would
appeal.

LOAD-DATE: September 28, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              305 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 29, 1995, Friday, Late Edition - Final

MIDEAST ACCORD: THE POLITICS;
Score One for Clinton

BYLINE: By R. W. APPLE Jr.

SECTION: Section A;   Page 1;   Column 4;   Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 973 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 28


Foreign policy came calling at the White House again today. Despite President
Clinton's early inclination to shun it, it has been a frequent visitor, and
lately an increasingly welcome one, not least because he has managed a series of
visible accomplishments overseas.

Whether progress abroad will continue, whether the Administration will find ways
to develop broader foreign-policy themes in place of improvisations, whether Mr.
Clinton will derive any political benefit in his re-election campaign -- those
questions hung in the air this afternoon as he promised to press forward in the
Middle East "until the circle of peace is closed."

By itself, foreign policy is not often decisive in American Presidential
elections. Occasionally, like Lyndon B. Johnson in 1968, Presidents stumble so
badly that they are unre-electable. But other Presidents have triumphed in
foreign wars and still lost, like George Bush in 1992.

Still, foreign policy is a major element in the subtle process by which the
electorate takes the measure of a President. If he seems out of his depth in
dealing with other countries, if he seems unfit to handle a crisis, if he allows
the United States to be embarrassed abroad, he is sure to pay a price. That
happened to Harry S. Truman early in his term, and it happened to President
Clinton too as he endured mishaps in Somalia and Haiti.

Mr. Clinton has never been highly regarded in this department by the American
voter. In New York Times/CBS News polls that began in March 1993, his second
full month in office, his foreign-policy approval rating has never risen above
53 percent (in the first poll), and it has most often been under 40 percent.
Last month, before the latest burst of activity, the figures stood at 36 percent
approval, 48 percent disapproval, the rest undecided.

In the South, his home region, where considerable emphasis is placed on the
President's role as Commander in Chief, Mr. Clinton has fared even less well.
That is one big reason why he seems unlikely to carry many states there.

The 1996 election is more than a year away, of course, and voters can change
their minds in a hurry. But Mr. Clinton will need good luck and then some if he
is to get a political bounce out of his improved foreign-policy fortunes.

Thus far it has been one step at a time for Mr. Clinton, with little drama. So
this afternoon's event marking limited Palestinian self-rule in the West Bank,
like the one on the White House lawn two years ago that produced the famous
handshake of reconciliation, provided some badly needed political theatrics.

Today's set-piece celebrated the agreement between Israel and the Palestinians
in grand style, with a visit to the Oval Office by Yasir Arafat, a man who until
recently was regularly denounced there as a villainous killer. Most of the
credit, no doubt, accrues to the principals, but the United States played the
midwife's role with skill and without too much self-praise, and the moment had
the genuine aroma of history.

The agreement was incremental, a single step on a long path. A last-minute
dispute over tiny details delayed the signing. Two peoples who hate each other
as much as these two have (and in some cases still do) could easily career off
that path before they reach the goal: peace.

Even if they do not, it is hard to see how such deeply rooted disputes as those
over the status of Jerusalem and the creation of a unitary Palestinian state
will be resolved.

One reason for caution was the absence of the leaders of Syria and Lebanon.
President Hosni Mubarak of Egypt and King Hussein of Jordan joined Mr. Arafat,
Mr. Clinton and Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin of Israel at the White House, but
the others will be needed for a comprehensive settlement of the hostilities that
have marred the region since the end of World War II.

But in the post-cold-war world, partial solutions seem to be the norm. The days
of sweeping agreements, like those between the United States and the Soviet
Union on nuclear weapons, seem to have passed, at least for the moment.

Even the Western Europeans, negotiating as it were among close relatives, find
the road to unity remains open only if it is traveled at low speed. Responding
to the energy and intensity of Richard C. Holbrooke, the American negotiator,
the combatants in Bosnia have edged closer to agreement. But they are still
fighting, and there is no consensus yet on exactly how the contested lands
should be divided.

China has agreed not to sell nuclear reactors to Iran, but in a spectacular
instance of cutting off one's nose to spite one's face, China has rejected the
long-sought invitation for a meeting between Mr. Clinton and President Jiang
Zemin because it did not come with a promise of 21-gun salutes, a state dinner
and Chinese flags fluttering along Pennsylvania Avenue. China's abysmal
human-rights record continues unbroken, but at least Beijing is talking.

Despite its historic links to the Serbs, Russia has stayed involved with the
Bosnian peace effort, even when it included NATO bombing of Bosnian Serb
positions. But trouble may lie ahead in trying to blend Russian with NATO troops
in any peacekeeping force, and it is not clear whether Moscow will sit still for
NATO expansion into central Europe on the American model.

For a President who came to office with little knowledge of the world, chose a
Secretary of State whose strength lies in quiet backroom dealings and not in
bold actions, and picked a national security adviser who has alienated many
longtime colleagues with his deviousness, Mr. Clinton is not doing at all badly.

Somalia and Haiti are both calm, as Somalia and Haiti go, and the recognition of
Vietnam, closing a chapter of pain, has occasioned little outcry. None of those
things seemed very likely only a year or so ago.

LOAD-DATE: September 29, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Yasir Arafat, the Palestine Liberation Organization leader,
escorts Prime Minister Rabin of Israel into the White House for the signing.
(Associated Press)



TYPE: News Analysis

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              306 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 29, 1995, Friday, Late Edition - Final

From 'Shanghai' to 'Carrington'

SECTION: Section C;   Page 28;   Column 4;   Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 897 words


The 33d New York Film Festival opens tonight with a screening of "Shanghai
Triad," directed by Zhang Yimou, and closes on Oct. 15 with "Carrington,"
directed by Christopher Hampton. The festival, presented by the Film Society of
Lincoln Center, includes 28 programs representing 17 countries. All films are
shown at Alice Tully Hall with the exception of the late show tonight and
"Carrington" on Oct. 15, which will be at Avery Fisher Hall, and "The Rossellini
War Trilogy: 'Open City,' 'Paisan' and 'Germany Year Zero' " on Oct. 15, which
will be at the Walter Reade Theater, 165 West 65th Street. Also at the Walter
Reade Theater from tomorrow through Thursday will be a tribute to the Russian
director Grigory Kozintsev.

Many festival screenings are sold out, although a few returns may be available.
Tickets are $8 and $11 at the Alice Tully Hall box office, (212) 875-5050;
tickets for opening and closing nights are $15 and $25; tickets for the
Rossellini and Kozintsev series are $7.50 a film. Unless otherwise noted, the
films were made this year. Here is the schedule.

Today

"SHANGHAI TRIAD" (China/France), directed by Zhang Yimou. 8 P.M. at Alice Tully
Hall; 9 P.M. at Avery Fisher Hall. The early show is sold out; there are
partial-view seats only for the 9 P.M. show.  Opens commercially in December.

Tomorrow

"THE WHITE BALLOON" (Iran), directed by Jafar Panahi. 12:30 P.M. Sold out. Opens
Jan. 19, 1996.

"DISCOVERING MAX LINDER" (France), directed by Maud Linder; a compilation of
silent films from 1912 to 1916, with piano accompaniment by Jean-Marie Senia.
3:30 P.M. Sold out.

"GEORGIA" (France/United States), directed by Ulu Grosbard. 6 P.M. Sold out.

"DEAD PRESIDENTS" (United States), directed by Albert and Allen Hughes. 9 P.M.
Sold out. Opens commercially Wednesdayin New York, Oct. 10 nationwide.

Sunday

"DEAD PRESIDENTS," 1:30 P.M. The screening is sold out.

"FLAMENCO" (Spain), directed by Carlos Saura. 4:30 P.M. Sold out.

"THE WHITE BALLOON," 7:15 P.M. Sold out.

"GEORGIA," 9:45 P.M. Sold out.

Monday

"SIXTEEN OH SIXTY" (Brazil), directed by Vinicius Mainardi. 6 P.M. Sold out.

"THE NEON BIBLE" (Britain), directed by Terence Davies, 9 P.M. Sold out. Opens
commercially in February 1996.

Tuesday

"SIXTEEN OH SIXTY," 9 P.M. Sold out.

"THE NEON BIBLE," 6 P.M. Sold out.

Wednesday

"KICKING AND SCREAMING" (United States), directed by Noah Baumbach, 6 P.M.
Limited seats. Opens commercially Oct. 6 in New York.

"LAMERICA" (Italy), directed by Gianni Amelio, 9 P.M. Opens Dec. 20 in New York.


Thursday

"LAMERICA," 6 P.M.

"KICKING AND SCREAMING," 9 P.M.

Oct. 6

"FLIRT" (United States/Germany/Japan), directed by Hal Hartley, 6 P.M. Sold out.


"LAND AND FREEDOM" (Britain/Spain), directed by Ken Loach, 9 P.M. Sold out.
Opens commercially in spring 1996.

Oct. 7

"LAND AND FREEDOM," 11 A.M. Sold out.

"GOOD MEN, GOOD WOMEN" (Taiwan), directed by Hou Hsiao-hsien, 2 P.M. Sold out.

"GUIMBA" (Mali/Burkina Faso/France), directed by Cheick Oumar Sissoko, 5 P.M.

"STRANGE DAYS" (United States), directed by Kathryn Bigelow, 8 P.M. Sold out.
Opens Oct. 8 in New York, Oct. 13 nationwide.

"FLIRT," 11:30 P.M. Sold out.

Oct. 8

"GUIMBA," 6 P.M.

"STRANGE DAYS," 2 P.M. Sold out.

"THE CONVENT" (Portugal/France), directed by Manoel de Oliveira, 9 P.M. Sold
out.

Oct. 9

FORTUNE SMILES, with "Le Franc" (Senegal/Switzerland), directed by Djibril Diop
Mambety, and "Augustin" (France), directed by Anne Fontaine. 6 P.M. "Augustin"
opens commercially Oct. 13.

"THE SON OF GASCOGNE" (France), directed by Pascal Aubier, 9 P.M. Sold out.

Oct. 10

"A CINEMA OF UNEASE" (New Zealand), directed by Sam Neill, and "CITIZEN
LANGLOIS" (France), directed by Edgardo Cozarinsky, 9 P.M.

"THE SON OF GASCOGNE," 6 P.M.

Oct. 11

"AVANT-GARDE VISIONS:" "Alpsee" (Germany, 1994), directed by Matthias Muller;
"Zone" (Japan), directed by Takashi Ito; and "River Colors" (Germany, 1994),
directed by Christoph Janetzko, 6 P.M.

"FROM THE JOURNALS OF JEAN SEBERG" (United States), directed by Mark Rappaport,
and "JOY STREET" (United States), directed by Suzan Pitt, 9 P.M. Sold out.

Oct. 12

"CYCLO" (France/Vietnam), directed by Tran Anh Hung, 6 P.M. Sold out.

"HATE" (France), directed by Mathieu Kassovitz, 9 P.M. Opens commercially in
1996.

Oct. 13

"THE CELLULOID CLOSET" (United States), directed by Rob Epstein and Jeffrey
Friedman, 6 P.M. Sold out.

"THE FLOWER OF MY SECRET" (Spain), directed by Pedro Almodovar, 9 P.M. Sold out.


Oct. 14

"THE FLOWER OF MY SECRET," 11 A.M. Sold out.

"HATE," 2 P.M.

"CYCLO," 5 P.M. Sold out.

"THE GATE OF HEAVENLY PEACE" (United States), directed by Carma Hinton and
Richard Gordon, 8 P.M. Sold out.

"THE CELLULOID CLOSET," midnight.

Oct. 15

THE ROSSELLINI WAR TRILOGY, directed by Roberto Rossellini. "OPEN CITY" (1945),
2 P.M.; "PAISAN" (1946), 5 P.M.; and "GERMANY YEAR ZERO" (1947), 7:30 P.M. These
performances are sold out, but the films will play through Oct. 26 at the Walter
Reade Theater.

"CARRINGTON" (Britain), directed by Christopher Hampton, 8:30 P.M. Partial-view
seats only. Opens commercially Nov. 10 in New York.

LOAD-DATE: September 29, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Schedule

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              307 of 307 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 29, 1995, Friday, Late Edition - Final

FILM FESTIVAL REVIEW;
The Evolution of a Very Confused Young Man

BYLINE: By CARYN JAMES

SECTION: Section C;   Page 28;   Column 2;   Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 761 words


There is a reason the terms "sophomoric" and "sophomore slump" are so common;
there is a lot of truth in them, as "Dead Presidents," the ambitious but naive
second film by the wildly talented Hughes brothers, suggests. Two years ago,
Albert and Allen Hughes, twins who are now all of 24, directed their startling,
sharp-eyed tale of street violence, "Menace II Society." Though the title "Dead
Presidents" is slang for the dollars in a climactic robbery scheme, the story is
far broader than that. Ranging from 1968 to 1974, it concerns a young man named
Anthony who goes from a black neighborhood in the Bronx to the Vietnam War and
back again.

A period piece, a war story, a coming-of-age tale and an indictment of a society
that is brutal on black men and veterans, "Dead Presidents" takes on much more
than it can handle. It offers a glaring example of what the Hugheses can do
well. With their cinematographer, Lisa Rinzler, they position the camera
unobtrusively, for maximum effect. They are experts at creating scenes of
visceral, exciting action. Yet the film also highlights what they need to learn
fast: everything to do with character and dialogue. "Dead Presidents" will be
shown tomorrow night at 9 and Sunday afternoon at 1:30 P.M. as part of the New
York Film Festival, and will open in New York theaters on Wednesday.

Larenz Tate, who was the crazed, violent O-Dog in "Menace II Society," plays
Anthony as smoothly as this scattershot script allows. A high school senior from
a middle-class family that values education, he nonetheless finds himself the
driver of a getaway car for a local mentor who runs a pool hall. He has a comic
sidekick named Skip (Chris Tucker), given to lines like "Pimping runs in my
family." In a scene of comic fumbling, Anthony gets his girlfriend pregnant.
Then, for reasons no more lucid than his desire to be different, he becomes a
marine. Even for a confused guy, Anthony has a background that is incoherent.

When Anthony and Skip find themselves in Vietnam, the film becomes more
gripping. Though the scenes look wrong (it is no surprise to learn they were
shot in Florida), the action plays to the Hugheses' strengths. Even the
characters, their fears and ruthlessness writ large by circumstances, make more
sense. Anthony decides not to think or feel until he gets back to reality, an
attitude he finds impossible to sustain. And their unit includes Cleon, a
preacher's son who severs an enemy's head and carries it around as a good luck
charm. He is played with convincing weirdness by Bokeem Woodbine, a fine actor
yet to appear in a film as good as he deserves.

But for long stretches in this two-hour film, the characters talk like parrots.
When Anthony returns home in 1973, to his girlfriend and daughter and a job that
soon falls out from under him, his girlfriend's activist sister actually says,
"Welcome home and welcome to the revolution."

The Hugheses obviously knew the world and generation of "Menace II Society"
better than the past of "Dead Presidents," but that is only part of the problem.
In "Menace" they trusted the audience more, immersing them in a violent world
the film explained without condoning. Their lapse into youthful sincerity and
didacticism is no improvement.

When Anthony, desperate to support his family, concocts a plan to rob a
truckload of "dead presidents," the film comes to life again. The images are
striking, notably of Anthony and his friends wearing mime-white makeup. This
late episode suggests how easily the Hugheses could have made a taut caper
movie. It's to their credit that they chose to do something more serious and
challenging instead. Like those overreaching sophomore term papers we can all
laugh at now, this disappointing film may free the Hughes brothers to move on to
fresher, more inspired work.

"Dead Presidents" is rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult
guardian). It includes much strong language and violence, with hard-to-bear war
scenes of mutilated bodies.


DEAD PRESIDENTS

Directed by Albert and Allen Hughes; written by Michael Henry Brown; director of
photography, Lisa Rinzler; edited by Dan Lebental; music by Danny Elfman;
production designer, David Brisbin; produced by Albert and Allen Hughes and
Michael Bennett; released by Hollywood Pictures. At Alice Tully Hall tomorrow
night at 9 and Sunday at 1:30 P.M. as part of the 33d New York Film Festival.
Running time: 120 minutes. This film is rated R.

WITH: Larenz Tate (Anthony), Chris Tucker (Skip) and Bokeem Woodbine (Cleon).

LOAD-DATE: September 29, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: A scene from "Dead Presidents," with characters in mime makeup.
(K. C. Bailey/Hollywood Pictures Company)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company
