
                               1 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   July 1, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

V.A. PLANS Change IN MEDICAL GROUP

BYLINE: Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 22, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 659 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 30


Ever since he jumped out of a grounded airplane during a rocket attack on Da
Nang, Vietnam, 23 years ago, Ron Rossani has had recurring back problems.
Bending to brush his teeth, he says, can leave him bedridden for days.

Still, when Mr. Rossani, who lives in Virginia, went to the Veterans
Administration to seek treatment, six months passed before doctors gave him the
orthopedic brace, corset and electric nerve stimulator that had been prescribed
for him.

Spurred by testimony from several veterans' groups that complained of slow and
inadequate medical service, Anthony J. Principi, Deputy Secretary of Veterans
Affairs, has proposed an overhaul of the agency's prosthetics division. The
prosthetics service of the Department of Veterans Affairs, formerly the Veterans
Administration, provides devices ranging from artificial limbs to Braille
wristwatches.

'We Can Do Better'

''I believe we can do better and we must do better,'' Mr. Principi said. ''But I
think it would be an injustice to say we have failed veterans.''

Mr. Principi has proposed several changes to a panel of agency officials. The
panel is to recommend revisions to the prosthetics service by the middle of
August.

As soon as he receives the recommendations, Mr. Principi will begin revising the
service, he said. Some revisions may affect veterans within days, others may
take months.

Critics say that in the current system hospital managers often use money
intended for prosthetic services to finance other hospital projects. Funding
prosthetics services from a central office, Mr. Principi said, would restrict
hospital managers from taking money from its prosthetics fund.

Most Pressing Needs

''Managers tend to shuffle money around to meet the most pressing medical
needs,'' said Joseph Manley, associate director, of the Seattle Veterans Medical
Center.

In hospitals that sometimes must provide more than one kind of wheelchair for a
veteran, Mr. Manley said, doctors may ask, ''Is a second wheelchair as important
as the blood that's needed for surgery?''

But centralized funding alone will not mean better service for veterans, experts
say.

Varying Services

In a letter to Mr. Principi last fall, Sen. Alan Cranston, Democrat of
California and chairman of the Senate Committee on Veterans' Affairs, reported
that prosthetics service at different Veterans hospitals was not consistent. And
he said different hospitals sometimes paid vastly different prices for similar
prosthetic devices. In one instance, Senator Cranston wrote, the Westside
Veterans Medical Center in Chicago paid $1,760 for an electric wheelchair while
the Madison, Wisconsin, medical center paid $2,282 .

''It is unacceptable that if two veterans seek treatment for similar disbilities
one could receive a normally-required prosthetic device and the other would
not,'' Sen. Cranston said at a recent committee hearing.

Expanding government contracts with prosthetics vendors will help hospitals get
lower and more consistent prices for prosthetic devices, Mr. Principi said.

The deputy secretary has also proposed creating a committee of veterans who use
prosthetics to oversee the service. He also wants to improve computer systems so
medical centers will be able to communicate better with each other and with the
administration's central office.

Almost half of the nearly one million veterans depending on the administration
for prosthetic devices need the aids because of injuries or wounds suffered
while in the service.

Noel C. Woosley, national service director for Amvets, a veterans organization
based in Maryland said about $120 million was used for prosthetics in 1989.

While Mr. Rossani considers himself more fortunate than amputees who depend on
the Department of Veterans Affairs for aid, he said he does not consider himself
lucky.

''Nobody was lucky,'' he said, sitting under a tree near the Lincoln Memorial in
front of a row of rustling flags.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                               2 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   July 1, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Boat People Face New Threat as U.S. Spars With Southeast Asian Nations

BYLINE: By STEVEN ERLANGER, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 10, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1436 words

DATELINE: KUALA LUMPUR, Malaysia


Nine Vietnamese boat people arrived on Malaysia's southeastern coast in mid-June
with a macabre cargo: several barrels containing the remains of 28 bodies and
some United States Army dogtags.

On their battered wooden boat was a crudely painted message in English: ''USA
remains in my boat.''

While the American Embassy here is skeptical that the remains are those of
Americans missing in action from the Vietnam War, there will, of course, be an
investigation.

Clearly the Vietnamese felt that carrying such remains could secure them better
treatment here, and perhaps even resettlement abroad. It is a measure of the
increasing desperation of some Vietnamese boat people in a region that has lost
patience with their plight. #8,700 Are Rejected These nine Vietnamese are in
fact lucky: they were allowed to land and remain in Malaysia, which has pushed
off or redirected more than 8,700 Vietnamese from its shores since May 1989,
relief officials say.

Malaysia's denial of first asylum to the boat people has not been matched by its
neighbors in Southeast Asia. But they threaten to do the same.

In what the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees calls a ''dramatic
situation,'' an open and intensifying conflict between the United States and the
countries of Southeast Asia is putting the lives of Vietnamese boat people at
risk.

Just as important, says the High Commissioner, Thorvald Stoltenberg, is that the
conflict threatens the principle of first asylum for refugees worldwide, not
only in Southeast Asia.

''We are in a very precarious and dramatic situation,'' Mr. Stoltenberg said in
a telephone interview. ''If we have a breakdown of first asylum, it is a
breakdown of one of the cornerstones of refugee policy, and I fear this will
have a global, contagious effect.''

Threats to Renege

The countries of Southeast Asia, and Britain, as the legal authority in Hong
Kong, are committed to providing first asylum, or temporary refuge, for
Vietnamese boat people.

But these countries have now formally warned the United States and Vietnam that
they may renege on their commitment to provide temporary refuge. They are asking
the United States and Vietnam to agree either to allow those judged not to be
refugees fleeing persecution to be sent back forcibly to Vietnam or to set up
holding centers for them on American or Vietnamese territory.

In what appears to be a warning coordinated with the formal diplomatic
statements, the Philippines refused in mid-June to allow 255 Vietnamese picked
up at sea by United States Navy ships to disembark until Manila was guaranteed
that all of them would be resettled elsewhere within three years. It was the
first time that the Philippines had refused automatically to accept boat people.

At the same time, 17 Vietnamese boat people rescued by a Taiwanese ship on May
22 have found nowhere to disembark, having been turned away from Taiwan, Hong
Kong and Thailand, ostensibly because they are legally the responsibility of
Taiwan.

'Shots Across Washington's Bow'

''These are shots across Washington's bow,'' said a senior Western diplomat.
''There really is a sense of urgency. First asylum hasn't really broken down
yet, except in Malaysia, but the threats are real.''

The conflict is simply stated. The United States refuses to allow the
involuntary return of boat people to Vietnam if the boat people are believed
simply to be seeking a better life for themselves and their families.

The Americans have insisted that before forcible repatriation is considered,
more time should be spent encouraging Vietnamese who are not refugees, and hence
are not guaranteed resettlement, to agree to return home voluntarily.

Vietnam, after bad publicity over the one group of boat people forcibly returned
from Hong Kong in December, has said it also opposes forcible repatriation. But
the Vietnamese say they are willing to accept those who do not agree to return
home, but who are not forced to get on a plane. This is an essentially semantic
distinction that the Bush Administration rejects.

According to the latest figures from the High Commissioner's office, through
April 30, there were 107,802 Vietnamese boat people in camps in Asia, plus
86,512 more Vietnamese who have come to Thailand by land. More than half the
boat people, or 54,718, are in Hong Kong, with 18,404 in Malaysia, 12,370 in
Thailand, 12,205 in Indonesia and 8,459 in the Philippines.

Malaysia has been pushing off the boats of Vietnamese since May 1989. At least
8,716 Vietnamese have made their way to Indonesia and elsewhere after having
been denied first asylum by the Malaysians, who are now turning away over 90
percent of Vietnamese, United Nations officials say. The number of those who may
have died after the denial of asylum cannot be estimated, the officials say.

Chilly Exchange of Letters

Mr. Bush and the Malaysian Prime Minister, Mahathir Mohamad, had a chilly
exchange of letters on the problem in April. Mr. Mahathir did not acknowledge
that pushoffs were occurring, but made it clear he felt that the United States
was not living up to its obligations, Malaysian officials and Western diplomats
here say.

The next month, in May, 2,649 Vietnamese were redirected from Malaysian shores,
while only 240 were allowed to stay, and the trend has continued, relief
officials say.

The Indonesians, who have been patient and behaved ''with great honor and
dignity,'' relief officials say, have said ''with increasing desperation'' that
they will find it hard to continue accepting boat people unless they can
repatriate the refugees.

Similarly, Western diplomats said, the Thais have provided clear warnings that
they may renew a policy of pushing off boats.

''If there's no movement in Washington, it's hard to see first asylum not
collapsing,'' a senior Western diplomat said.

''Having made the threat now, if Asean doesn't do anything in July or August,
they'll lose credibility,'' he said, referring to the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations. ''Some in Washington think they're bluffing. But I don't think
so.'' British Clamor Against U.S. British officials have kept up a loud public
clamor against the American stance. On June 13 in London, Francis Maude, the
British Foreign Office Minister responsible for Hong Kong, called American
policy ''indefensible'' and said: ''The United States has a responsibility it
cannot evade. Either it joins in the consensus of other nations and comes back
from its present isolation, or it provides an alternative.''

He threatened that Hong Kong might renew forcible repatriations if nothing was
done.

Mr. Maude favors an American holding center to be set up in Guam. That would
allow the Southeast Asian countries to shed themselves of boat people judged not
to be refugees while allowing the Americans to prevent their return to Vietnam.

But at the last major meeting of the countries concerned, in Manila in mid-May,
the American delegation rejected a holding center, and the Asean countries,
along with Britain, warned that unless the United States agreed to allow
forcible repatriation or created a holding center as an intermediate solution,
''countries of temporary refuge must reserve the right to take such unilateral
action as they deem necessary to safeguard their national interests, including
the abandonment of temporary refuge.''

There are areas where a solution can yet be found, diplomats and relief
officials said.

U.N. Suggests Moratorium

Western diplomats said they thought it unlikely that Washington would agree to a
holding center on American territory. United Nations officials are suggesting a
three-month moratorium on forcible repatriation after a boat person has had a
final appeal rejected for refugee status, to enable officials to try to convince
him to return home voluntarily. But if does not agree to return by then, he
would be forced to do so.

Some Asian diplomats have suggested that at the next meeting, the Americans
simply leave the room while the vote for forcible repatriation is taken, but
American diplomats find that an unpalatable suggestion. More plausibly, they
say, the Americans could denounce the vote but choose to abstain rather than
block consensus.

Mr. Stoltenberg, the High Commissioner for Refugees, refused to comment on the
morality of either the Asian or the American position. ''The realities are so
dramatic in themselves - thousands of people in small boats on the open sea -
that I must act according to that drama to try to protect refugees,'' he said.
''We are facing one of the key human challenges of the decade.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Vietnamese boat people nearing a Canadian vessel last week in
the China Sea. Southeast Asian nations have warned that they may renege on their
commitment to give first asylum to refugees. (Associated Press): map: Southeast
Asia indicating Kuala Lumpur which has pushed off or redirected more than 8,700
Vietnamese since May 1989. (The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                               3 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   July 1, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Rajen Dalal Wed To Linda Burch

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2, Page 47, Column 2; Society Desk

LENGTH: 194 words


Linda Marie Burch, a daughter of Rosemary Lenrow of Westport Point, Mass., and
Robert A. Burch of Wilton, Conn., was married yesterday at her mother's home to
Rajen Kantilal Dalal, a son of Mr. and Mrs. Kantilal Delal of New Dehli. The
Rev. J. Patrick Mauney, an Episcopal priest, officiated.

The bride, who will keep her name, is a summa cum laude graduate of Yale
University with an M.B.A. degree from Stanford University. She is a consultant
at McKinsey & Company, management consultants in New York. Her father is the
vice president of development and public affairs at New York Hospital and the
vice provost of Cornell Medical College. Her mother is the dean of students at
the Lincoln School in Providence, R.I.

The bridegroom, also a consultant at McKinsey in New York, is a graduate of St.
Xavier's College in Bombay, India. He has a master's degree in biochemical
engineering from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and an M.B.A. degree
from the University of Chicago. His father, who is retired, was an official of
the Indian Government, having served as a Secretary of External Affairs and as
Ambassador to Austria, Thailand and Vietnam.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                               4 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   July 1, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

MOTION PICTURES;
Bruce Willis Looks for the Man Within the Icon

BYLINE: By KENNETH TURAN; Kenneth Turan is a member of the National Society of
Film Critics.

SECTION: Section 2; Page 11, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 2090 words

DATELINE: BURBANK, Calif.


Somewhere in Hell's Kitchen, hard by West 49th Street and 10th Avenue in
Manhattan, there is an apartment with Bruce Willis's name on it. A railroad flat
where, for $175 a month, he bivouacked as one of New York's small army of
aspiring actors, it still remains, and not by accident, in the man's family.
''It's like a Museum of Bruce Willis, the early days,'' he says, at once wistful
and amused. ''It's been only six years since the whole thing really turned
around for me, and I like to keep that attitude, to remember what it was like. I
like that guy more than all this movie star celebrity malarkey.''

Mr. Willis is sitting in a tangible reminder of that celebrity, a sleek, gray
trailer parked outside the sound stage where he is starring as a boozy,
freeloading journalist in one much talked about movie, Brian De Palma's
''Bonfire of the Vanities,'' and discussing another one, ''Die Hard 2,'' opening
(after previews Tuesday) on more than 2,000 screens around the country on
WdeendayayThough he is insistent on his privacy, Mr. Willis is a man who says
what's on his mind, and when he speaks at length the different strands of his
personality intertwine, the appealing insouciance of the wisecracking kid from
South Jersey who became ''Moonlighting's'' David Addison alternating with the
serious actor who got a major break doing Sam Shepard's ''Fool for Love'' Off
Broadway.

Holding everything together is an insistence on respect, an honest irritation
with people who do not understand the code he lives by or who make the mistake
of trying to push him in directions not to his liking. And when he gets
irritated, he gets wound up, and you are likely to hear about what is getting
under his skin. Yet more than anythng else, Bruce Willis comes across much as he
must have when he lived in that Hell's Kitchen apartment. ''When I go home at
night,'' he says, ''I don't feel like a big movie star, a big celebrity, a big
box-office draw. I feel like just a guy.''

In ''Die Hard 2,'' Mr. Willis reprises his role as Detective John McClane, a
resilient one-man gang. This time around he reluctantly rescues an entire
airport from a nasty bunch of former elite United States military troops who use
terrorist tactics in an effort to free a Central American strongman being flown
to Washington to face drug charges. Though the first film was a major hit of
1988, Mr. Willis was not especially eager to repeat the role.

''A sequel is a strange animal; it's another chapter in a movie you've already
seen, a little taste of the repetitiveness of TV,'' he says. ''The first film
was like walking into the woods for the first time. Now there was a path, with
landmarks, and there wasn't the excitment of creating something new. And,
frankly, I didn't know what the hell we were going to make a movie about.''

''Die Hard 2'' was co-produced by Lawrence Gordon, who discovered that 20th
Century Fox already owned a script, based on a novel by Walter Wager called ''58
Minutes,'' that could be tailored to fit John McClane's persona. Then, Mr.
Willis says, the lure became the challenge of: ''Can we top ourselves, take a
shot at making a better film?'' The result, the co-screenwriter Steven E. de
Souza told Mr. Willis, ''ought to do for airline travel what 'Jaws' did for
taking a swim in the ocean.''

Getting ''Die Hard 2'' to that point turned out to be a logistical nightmare
because snow, an essential element of the script, ended up being maddeningly
elusive. ''It turned out to be the worst winter for snow in the past six or
seven years,'' Mr. Willis says. ''We tried four different locations where there
was snow, and within two days it all evaporated.'' As a result, ''Die Hard 2''
was shot even more out of continuity than most films. ''There is a scene where I
climb up a ladder, push up a grate and come out on a runway,'' Mr. Willis says.
''It lasts a minute and a half on screen, and the audience will think it's all
in one place, but it was shot on nine different locations across the United
States.''

Though his success as McClane made his casting seem a natural, in fact Mr.
Willis had never done a full-bore action film before the first ''Die Hard.''
''The role satisfies a lot of male things in me,'' he says. ''As a kid, I used
to play Army all the time, running around in the woods and making believe I was
in 'Combat,' '' he says, referring to the 1960's television series that starred
Vic Morrow.

Those woods were outside what Mr. Willis smiles and calls ''the twin communities
of Carneys Point and Penns Grove, N.J.'' He grew up as a strictly blue-collar
kid, but, he says, ''at a very early age, without any prompting, I found I
enjoyed entertaining people. When I was 8 years old, I did an old vaudeville
skit at a Cub Scout Jamboree. The audience sees me making up a mixture of eggs
and water and thinks I'm going to throw it on them, but what I throw turns out
to be confetti. I got a big laugh, and I remember thinking: 'This is a good
thing. This feels good.' ''

In the context of organized education, however, this translated into being ''the
class clown, constantly annoying the teachers,'' Mr. Willis says. ''I was
perceived as being a troublemaker, but I really see it as the first tendrils of
creative energy.'' Making things more complicated was the fact that as a
youngster Mr. Willis had a serious stutter. ''That's where I honed my sense of
humor,'' he says. ''It was: 'If I can make you laugh, you won't notice that I
stutter.' And I found that I never stuttered when I was on stage. When I was
able to be someone else, I didn't have to think about it.''

Mr. Willis ended up at Montclair State College, a New Jersey school with a fine
theater department. ''Three weeks into my first semester, I auditioned for a
college play and felt, 'This is home.' I never took any required courses; I took
nothing but theater for two years, cutting classes to go to New York and
audition.'' In 1977, he got a small part Off Broadway and left school for good.

Bartending, working at health clubs, doing commercials but not being a waiter
(''I couldn't stand serving people food''), Mr. Willis survived seven years in
New York, an experience he considers ''the college of life. After that, nothing
will ever scare you again.'' He ''studied a little'' with Stella Adler, but
couldn't afford any kind of sustained lessons, instead concentrating on learning
by doing. ''Every job was a little better part in a little better play,'' he
remembers. ''I got a lot of confidence, because I chose to do something against
anybody's better judgment and succeeded.''

That confidence was a key factor in Mr. Willis's beating out 3,000 other actors
for the career-making role of David Addison opposite Cybill Shepherd's Maddie
Hayes in the cult hit ABC-TV series ''Moonlighting.'' The show, however, went
from triumph to ordeal for Mr. Willis over a four-year span that began in 1985,
and he views it today with decidedly mixed emotions.

''I was very amazed I survived,'' he says, weary at even the memory. ''The
one-hour weekly two-character show is the hardest format that exists on TV;
there's no relief from it. 'Moonlighting' gave me the opportunity to work in
front of a camera, to learn about what I did well and what I needed to work on,
but I also learned about the limits of the media. My training as an actor had
geared me toward service in the performance, but this was all about hurrying up
and servicing the page count. If we didn't do 10 pages a day, we got behind. And
because of television's time and money constraints, you only really get to the
obvious choice, the cliche choice. It doesn't afford you the opportunity to try
new things.

''I'd never experienced mental exhaustion before this. After 18-hour days, I'd
come home so spaced out, so stressed out from it, I'd be shaking. No matter what
it is that you do, no matter what it is that you love, if you do it 18 hours a
day, 5 days a week, 12 months of the year, you'll get tired of it.
'Moonlighting' came close to grinding my desire to work out of me.''

While other actors have had difficulty making the transition from television to
feature films, Mr. Willis - who made his first two features, ''Blind Date'' and
''Sunset,'' while on hiatus from ''Moonlighting,'' and who took on ''Die Hard''
on fairly short notice during the time Cybill Shepherd was on maternity leave -
did it all so simultaneously that he hardly thought about the switch.

What he did think about, what in fact he had a serious amount of trouble
becoming used to, was the intense scrutiny focused on his life when he became a
celebrity. He is still somewhat rankled, for instance, at the fuss that was made
over the $5 million he earned for the first ''Die Hard.''

''The jealousy astonished me,'' he says. ''I was raised to believe you don't ask
somebody what they make; it's nobody's business. But it became a newsworthy
item, to the point where they have a difficult time mentioning my name without
saying something like, 'Will success spoil the $7 million man?' ''

This business of being a public figure is clearly something that Bruce Willis is
never ever going to be happy about, and his personal feelings are most evident
when he talks about the experience. ''I never thought it was anybody's business
how I lived my life,'' he says. ''I was just having fun, enjoying myself, and
not in any different way than before I became well known. But now people were
examining me, saying: 'So that's who he is. That's how he lives his life.'

''How can I explain what it feels like?'' He goes on, allowing himself a shrug
of helplessness. ''It's all kind of summed up in the removal of your anonymity.
Everything that is bothersome about celebrity stems from that. All those heads
turning when you enter a room, people saying, 'It's Bruce Willis; it's Bruce
Willis.' It's unnerving. I'm never comfortable in a crowd, and being talked
about by complete strangers is not my idea of a good time.''

Though he is very much aware that the rest of the world is not necessarily
sympathetic to the complaints of movie stars, Mr. Willis can't help himself: He
is truly bothered by the demands his position places on him. Take the
ever-present paparazzi, for instance. ''Someone follows you around all day,
taking pictures of your life. It's an invasion. Where is it written that you
have to accept the negative stuff? I saw one of these guys on TV, talking about
how he took a picture of Rock Hudson's corpse. If this is the high point of your
career, blow your brains out; get another job.''

Helping to give Mr. Willis a kind of equilibrium these days is his marriage to
the actress Demi Moore. The couple have a daughter, Rumer Glenn (named after the
writer Rumer Godden), and Mr. Willis agrees that the onset of family life has
been ''a stabilizing influence.''

''In all this very unreal work of success, for a while I was finding my way.
When you have all your goals answered, when you're given what you want, you have
to ask yourself what makes you happy, what is the through line of reality in all
this stuff. Having a family has allowed me to put more of a focus on keeping my
life simple.''

With a film career of generally solid notices that has included a serious
dramatic role as a Vietnam veteran in ''In Country'' and ''about a week's worth
of voice-over work'' in the $133-million-grossing hit ''Look Who's Talking,''Mr.
Willis is intent on diversifying. Having recently completed co-starring with his
wife in Alan Rudolph's dark ''Mortal Thoughts,'' he has ''Hudson Hawk,'' a ''To
Catch a Thief''-type caper film to be directed by Michael Lehman of ''Heathers''
coming up, to be followed by a version of Marvel Comics' ''Sgt. Rock and His
Howling Commandos.'' '' 'Die Hard' meets World War II,'' says Mr. Willis. ''As
long as I give the studios one of these big action films, they let me do a
small, much more internal one.''

Though Mr. Willis claims no role models as an actor, he speaks with surprising
warmth about the career, of all people, of The Three Stooges. ''I think about
them in a very social way,'' he explains. ''They made it their job during a very
depressing time in American history to try and cheer people up, to take their
minds off their problems, and they did it with a purity I've never seen anyone
else get to. When I think about what it is I do, about what my place is in this
giant machine that is show business, it's that I like to entertain. I like to
make 'em laugh. As I tell the guys on the crew, it's not a bad job.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Mr. Willis as the dauntless Detective John McClane in ''Die
Hard 2''-''A sequel is a strange animal,'' he says (John Shannon/20th Century
Fox) (pg. 11); Mr. Willis, out of ''Moonlighting'' and into movies: in ''Blind
Date,'' (Tri-Star Pictures) in ''Sunset'' (Tri-Star Pictures) and in ''In
Country'' (Warner Brothers)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                               5 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   July 1, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Nostalgia Can Choke the Ongoing Stream of Your Life

BYLINE: By JAMES GORMAN; James Gorman, the author of ''The Man With No
Endorphins'' (Penguin), is a columnist for Wigwag magazine.

SECTION: Section 2; Page 16, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1427 words


Got any old bourbon bottles around the house? Empty cigarette packs? Cheap
perfume bottles? Any junk left over from the 50's and 60's? Throw it out, quick.
Otherwise somebody is likely to convince you that the detritus of popular
culture from these two decades is worth saving, worth cataloguing, worth - I
hate even to use the word - collecting. And if once you start to think this way
nostalgia will choke the ongoing stream of your life, like kudzu in a Southern
waterway. The whole notion of junk will be challenged. You will never be able to
clean a basement or an attic again. Do I exaggerate? Am I extreme in considering
the idea of ''collectibles'' to be a hazard on the same order as global warming?
I think not.

Consider the opening lines of ''The Lyle Price Guide to Collectibles and
Memorabilia'' (Perigee/Putnam, 1988): ''Hold on! Don't throw that away!'' As
Snoopy (Ceramic Sitting Snoopy, hand-painted in Italy, $40-$60) or somebody in
the comics likes to say - Aaaarrrgh!

Of course collecting old trash is one thing. It may be objectionable and
distasteful, requiring, according to the Lyle guide, that you ''dig in garbage
dumps, haunt rummage sales'' and otherwise abase yourself. But it's avoidable.
You don't have to go to the dump if you don't want to. A more recent vogue for
collecting items from the immediate past is far more insidious. Witness ''The
Official Price Guide to Collectibles of the 50's and 60's'' by Charles Jordan
(Random House, 1987), a remarkable book that documents countless collectible
items from these decades worth, oh, 25 cents and up. Trash from the 50's and
60's is harder to avoid. You may have piles of it already; you may now be
tempted to keep it.

The threat is relatively new. At one time, not so long ago, there were standards
as to what was collected and what was thrown out. Fine old books, antique
furniture, and paintings of the great masters were kept. At a slightly lower
socioeconomic level prints of Brittany spaniels and duck decoys were in favor.
Old cigarette packages, on the other hand, were thrown out. Of course, there
were some gray areas. Some people threw out canceled stamps; other people
collected them. But in general items to be collected had to have some inherent
value. One collected them because they were beautiful or because they cost pots
of money. Collecting smacked of class distinctions, which was the main reason
people went in for it.

This is not the case with collectibles, particularly with stuff from the 50's
and 60's. Consider, once again, the Lyle guide: ''There is absolutely no limit
to what is worth money. . . . One train ticket crumpled up on a station platform
is worth nothing. Ten train tickets, neatly arranged in order, form the basis of
. . .'' Oh, well, you can guess the rest, fame, fortune, honor of a sort.

Sad, isn't it, to see all distinctions fall, to see the democracy of the
marketplace (Eastern Europe - take note of your future), which produced Gomer
Pyle, Vanna White and Froot Loops, triumph in yet another sphere? Or maybe,
depending on one's cultural politics, it's encouraging in a sort of lunatic,
populist way. It's the rise of the disenfranchised, after all, of latent
collectors, long excluded from the pastime by lack of money or taste, having
their hideous revenge. (TV Guide, issue No. 614, Jan. 2-8, 1965, with the
Munsters on the cover, $7-$9.) Not that all items from the 50's and 60's are
coarse. The Official Guide also includes collectibles that might almost be
considered sublime - Eames chairs, baseball cards, women's leotards (certain
women's leotards). Marilyn Monroe's leotard from ''Gentlemen Prefer Blondes'' is
worth more than $2,000 and one worn by Jane Russell more than $3,000.

But these are the exceptions. Some of the more typical 50's and 60's items now
being collected are: decorative bottles and other products from Avon, such as
''Best Friend,'' a blue, dog-shaped soap that sold for 59 cents in 1956 and now
brings $55; special Jim Beam bottles, like the Man in Barrel, No. 1 ($445), or
the Golden Chalice, executive series, ($73); cigarette packs from the good old
days, before the whole idea of not smoking had been invented; Coca-Cola cans and
ashtrays; anything having to do with Elvis or the Beatles; the famed Flying Nun
lunch box from 1968 ($7 to $9); Snoopy things; Howdy Doody things, and James
Dean masks. These last are very unusual items, ''life-size replicas of the
actor's head, made with a plastic that looked and felt like actual flesh. The
masks, though widely produced at the time, are a rarity today.'' Thank God.

One of the characteristics of collectibles, in particular so-called memorabilia,
from these recent decades, is that whereas in older, pre-post-modern times
people would collect actual paintings, or fruit knives, or even old light bulbs,
in which the object itself was what was of interest both then and now, with
memorabilia the objects that are most popular and accessible only refer to the
thing that was originally important. This is a kind of meta-collecting. Marilyn
Monroe's clothes are one example. Posters for movies, empty cigarette packs and
old copies of TV Guide are others. The music of the Beatles is not collectible -
it is available everywhere. Ah, but how many people have old, authentic Beatles
sweatshirts, or boots, or dolls, or lunch boxes, or better yet, wallpaper.

Faced with the complete lack of interest in workmanship or esthetics involved in
collecting an old copy of TV Guide or a photograph of Ronald Reagan (when he was
an actor), one is forced to consider the possibility that the 50's and 60's
collectibles are well, camp. But this can't be. Not all of them. Someone might
indulge in an Elvis fetish for complex reasons of reverse snobbism, but nobody
is moved by subtlety and irony to spend $60 on a G. I. Joe from 1964, (''hard
plastic, blond molded hair'' ). No one belongs to the Ginny Doll Club and
receives the Ginny Doll Club News as a clever comment on the tyranny of high
culture.

On the other hand it is simply too frightening to imagine that, as the
collectors themselves claim, Ginny Dolls and G. I. Joes are collected because
people like them. I prefer to think that the collectors have higher intentions.
I imagine nostalgic collecting to be, in reality, a vast, altruistic enterprise
in prospective archeology. After all, the Smithsonian Institution has a Barbie
collection, intended presumably to show somebody from the future what disgusting
times we lived in.

But even the Smithsonian can't save every variety of Barbie, not every single
one, not in addition to every G. I. Joe, Beatle coin purse, Minnie the Moo
Sponge Puppet and Jayne Mansfield's bathing suit from the 1956 movie ''The Girl
Can't Help It'' (I hope the people who buy these leotards and bathing suits
don't do it so they can dress up in them). So the little people, the collectors
of collectibles, have decided to pitch in and help. And thanks to them, the
popular culture of the 50's and 60's, two decades that probably surpassed the
entire Renaissance in the number of statuettes produced, is being selflessly
preserved.

Which brings up a minor objection to the subjects covered in Jordan's Official
Price Guide. There seem to be strange gaps here. Does nobody collect those funny
little buttons with the peace symbols on them? (There's supposed to be a peace
symbol in this book, but I couldn't find it.) Or is it only Nixon buttons? Do we
want to remember just the Beatles and Julie Andrews? What about old Grateful
Dead paraphernalia? And how about R. Crumb comic books featuring Mr. Natural? Is
there any possible monetary value attached to partly charred draft cards,
redeemed from the fire at the last moment? Or is anything directly related to
the Vietnam War by definition not collectible?

I myself was alive during both of these decades, first as a child and then as a
young man, and I'll admit that I have a soft spot for Sergeant Preston and his
dog King (more for King, really), but I think if we're going to collect junk we
need to have a truly broad scope. For instance, here are two items from my past
that I would be interested in pricing, that I think more honestly reflect the
gamut of experience of the 50's and 60's than the Eisenhower/Monkees/Elvis nexus
of Jordan's guide. They are: one original, although slightly scratched, set of
Davy Crockett records, 78l's, (''Born on a mountaintop in Tennessee . . .''),
and one orange-and-black Princeton University S.D.S. button (school colors), ca.
1969. Anybody interested?

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: The passion for memorabilia involving the Beatles, Elvis
Presley, Ronald Reagan (M-G-M, 1954), even cigarettes, is a sign that those
without money or taste are having their hideous revenge; Baseball cards and G.I.
Joe (Hasbro)-''There is absolutely no limit to what is worth money.''

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                               6 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   July 1, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

STAGE VIEW;
A Guidebook to the Soul Of a City in Confusion

BYLINE: By FRANK RICH

SECTION: Section 2; Page 1, Column 2; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 2119 words


Tward the end of John Guare's new play, ''Six Degrees of Separation,'' a young
man named Rick takes center stage to describe the horrors that have befallen him
in New York City. Rick, played by Paul McCrane, is a struggling actor who had
hit town from Utah with visions of stardom. But now his eyes fight back tears,
his mouth weakens with revulsion. Seduced and then discarded by a flashy
confidence man who did him out of his money and sexual innocence at the Rainbow
Room, Rick finds himself without means, without prospects, without self-respect
and possibly without the devoted girlfriend he shunted aside for a reckless
one-night stand.

''I came here to have experience,'' says Mr. McCrane, a shattered figure peering
at the audience from beneath a lonely spotlight. ''I didn't come here to be
this.''

Rick is only one dupe - the saddest - on a stage full of dupes in Mr. Guare's
remarkable play, which was loosely inspired by the actual, 1983 confidence
schemes of a young black man who fleeced New Yorkers by passing himself off as
Sidney Poitier's son. In Mr. Guare's version, ''Paul Poitier'' (James McDaniel)
also talks his way into the lives of a New York Hospital obstetrician (Stephen
Pearlman) whose parents were Holocaust victims, a visiting South African magnate
(Sam Stoneburner), a warring married couple (Peter Maloney and Kelly Bishop)
and, most prominently, Flan Kittredge (John Cunningham), a WASP-y, high-rolling
private art dealer, and his devoted, terribly social wife, Ouisa (Stockard
Channing). These are the smart, sophisticated, tough New Yorkers who populate
the pages of the city's newspapers and glossy magazines - the folk one might
meet in William Hamilton cartoons, Louis Auchincloss stories or Stephen Sondheim
musicals. Yet they, like the hick actor, open their homes to a stranger with a
gift for Ivy League gab and an infinite supply of clever lies.

Why is everyone so easily fooled? The answer to that question gives ''Six
Degrees of Separation'' its searing substance, which, combined with its hugely
entertaining surface, makes this play not only the long-awaited fulfillment of a
playwriting career that promised so much with the 1971 ''House of Blue Leaves,''
but also the outstanding American play in an outstanding season for American
plays. Mr. Guare has given the theater a work that runs only 90 minutes but that
should linger, on stage and in its audience's consciousness, for years to come.

I haven't stopped thinking about ''Six Degrees'' in the week since I first saw
it at the Mitzi E. Newhouse Theater at Lincoln Center, and a second viewing has
only heightened my admiration for Mr. Guare's writing, Jerry Zaks's direction
and the acting of a large cast. In this production, every collaborator helps
create an exquisite balance between high comedy and rending pathos, all the
better to give airy life to a densely packed text whose tone can flip instantly
from the madcap humor of ''Hellzapoppin' '' to the astringent domestic warfare
of ''Who's Afraid of Virginia Woolf?'' to the hallucinatory lyricism of past
Guare works like ''Landscape of the Body,'' ''Bosoms and Neglect'' and the film
''Atlantic City.''

Better still, this range is fitted to a canvas worthy of such sweep - New York.
As ''The House of Blue Leaves'' apotheosized Vietnam-era Queens at the time the
Pope visited Yankee Stadium, so ''Six Degrees of Separation'' captures the
divided Manhattan of the year in which Nelson Mandela made the same pilgrimage.
Using his impostor as a catalyst, Mr. Guare has created a Baedeker to the soul
of a chaotic city and its people, a play as central to the deflated and confused
post-crash New York of 1990 as Tom Wolfe's ''Bonfire of the Vanities'' was to
the immediately preceding go-go years of junk-bond boom. But ''Six Degrees,'' in
contrast to the Wolfe novel, owes nothing to journalism - it rises above daily
headlines, including the newspaper stories that inspired it, to take the
population's psychic pulse. The play has an insinuating subconscious afterlife
that can make you, like its characters, bolt upright at 3 in the morning.

More interested in meaning than in facts, Mr. Guare never does reveal the true
identity of ''Paul Poitier.'' But Paul's identity doesn't matter any more than
that of Rosebud in ''Citizen Kane,'' or that of James Gatz, the ''penniless
young man without a past,'' who reinvents himself as Jay Gatsby to crash society
in Scott Fitzgerald's novel. Like the unknowable Kane and Gatsby, Paul is a
successful con man precisely because he parrots and mirrors the America he cons.
In Paul's case, that America is a fractionalized metropolis teeming with debt,
show-biz fantasies of fame and fortune, passionless couplings and love-starved
families of habit and convenience.

What makes Paul's scams moving as well as farcical, and Mr. Guare's play
compassionate rather than mean, is that the victims, financially overprivileged
but emotionally undernourished, yearn for what is missing in their lives. The
well-heeled Flan and Ouisa Kittredge are not the cartoonish white liberal
satirical foils of, say, Mr. Wolfe's ''Radical Chic.'' No less than the actor
Rick, Ouisa hungers for ''experience'' - some sort of genuine human connection
in a city crowded with people trying on new identities as easily as actors take
on roles. Even the more opaque Flan still hasn't quite forgotten the beauty of
the art he exchanges for cash. ''Six Degrees'' is most of all the story of how
the Kittredges' devastation by a fraud forces them at last to begin sorting out
what is authentic from what is fraudulent in themselves and in their world.

The Kittredges' story becomes a city's story because of Mr. Guare's ability to
merge theme, character, language and plot into a large and seamless theatrical
fabric. It is no small achievement to pack 17 vividly drawn people and a
breathless plot embracing knockabout mistaken-identity farce and tragic death
into 90 minutes of stage time. Mr. Guare goes well beyond that impressive feat
by deftly extending the interior drama of the Kittredges prismatically through
layer after layer of his play until finally the plight of his characters seems
to be imprinted on every line and action in the entire work.

As both Paul and his prey are schizophrenically divided against themselves,
presenting false faces to the world while burying their true identities and
feelings, so everything in ''Six Degrees'' is two-faced, double-sided. The
metaphor extends from a two-sided Kandinsky painting that twirls in the
half-light above the Kittredge living room to a mother and daughter's
conflicting readings of the phrase ''cruelty-free cosmetics'' to an angry
father's protestation that ''There are two sides to every story!'' after being
dismissed as ''a cretin'' by his collegiate son.

In the urbanscape beyond the characters, Mr. Guare finds a bifurcated New York
in which not only are whites ignorant of blacks, but heterosexuals don't know
homosexuals, the rich don't know the poor, husbands don't know their wives, and
parents don't know their alienated offspring. If no one in New York knows
anybody else, it is no wonder that an impostor can take charge, especially one
who purports to be the son of a movie star and a college classmate of his
victims' absent children.

The city's schisms reflect a cultural schizophrenia as well. As Paul explains in
a soliloquy inspired by ''The Catcher in the Rye,'' we live in a time when
imagination has become ''something outside ourselves'' - not an integral part of
our identities, a tool for the essential act of self-examination, but an
anesthetizing escape from the inner life we should be embracing and exploring.
So topsy-turvy is our definition of culture, in Paul's view, that J. D.
Salinger's ''touching, beautiful, sensitive story'' has been turned into ''a
manifesto of hate'' by assassins like Mark David Chapman and John Hinckley who
use Holden Caulfield's social estrangement as an excuse to commit murder. The
death of introspection has similarly allowed such antihuman fads as ''Star
Wars,'' ''The Andy Warhol Diaries'' and ''Cats'' - the butt of Mr. Guare's most
scalding running gag - to pass for works of imagination while a Cezanne canvas
is merely a ''piece of meat'' that passes briefly and uncontemplated through
Sotheby's on its way to new owners in Tokyo.

But Mr. Guare is not offering the audience anything as pat as a neoconservative,
Allan Bloom-style diatribe about the decline of cultural standards. He doesn't
really have anything against pop culture: his play's form, after all, owes as
much to the campy Sidney Poitier film ''Guess Who's Coming to Dinner?'' which it
devilishly subverts, as it does to Cezanne's use of structure and color. What is
really at stake in ''Six Degrees'' is humanity itself, which must regain the
harmonious composition and spiritual self-awareness that inspired high culture
in the first place.

For all the modern jump-cuts and absurdist devices of his play, Mr. Guare holds
out for the classical unities in both life and art. When his characters discuss
Salinger, Chekhov and Beckett and their ''great modern theme'' of ''emotional
and intellectual paralysis,'' it is not because Mr. Guare wants to endorse the
theme. Nor is the playwright championing the disjunctive 20th-century art of
collage when he sets it in rhetorical opposition to Ouisa's memories of visiting
the Sistine Chapel. Like the reawakened Ouisa, who finds in Paul a sense of
family her own children never gave her, Mr. Guare hungers for the city's
disjointed collage of pasted-together, fragmented lives to be exchanged for a
family - a community of lives that touch one another and, figuratively at least,
touch the hand of God.

How does one achieve that family? ''In a world of destruction one must hold fast
to whatever fragments of love are left,'' wrote Dawn Powell (1897-1965) in ''The
Locusts Have No King'' (1948), her postwar Manhattan comic novel that was
reissued (by Yarrow Press) with an introductory essay by Mr. Guare last fall.
The playwright quotes Powell's line approvingly in his essay, and it could be a
prescription for the characters of ''Six Degrees,'' which he was writing at
roughly the same time. Mr. Guare wants people to rebel against modern paralysis,
to move on as the tramps of ''Waiting for Godot'' cannot at their final curtain.
He wants people to reunite with their souls. He wants people to stop reducing
experience to newspaper and cocktail-party anecdotes as impersonally
entertaining as ''Cats.'' If Ouisa Kittredge is to move on at play's end - if
she is to walk through ''new doors opening up into other worlds'' - she must
plug into what she calls the ''six degrees of separation,'' the hypothetical
trail of six people, authentic people, who can connect anyone on the planet with
anyone else. But to plug in, she must find ''the right six people'' - people who
know who they are, not frauds.

Mr. Guare isn't sentimental or polemical about the importance of making that
human connection. He is impassioned. ''Six Degrees'' never seems like an
illustrated theory and always feels like a fully inhabited play, in which
whites, blacks, Jews, WASP's, men, women, young, old, the wealthy and the
homeless are all given their voice. Some of the characters are filled in by
simply a few well-chosen brush strokes, just as the city is evoked by verbal
snapshots of the Strand Book Store and the old Madison Square Garden and
''traffic on the F.D.R.'' rather than by realistic scenery. (The designer Tony
Walton provides two levels of haunted doorways bordered by gilt picture frames.)
Mr. Zaks's actors do the rest, with Ms. Channing's Ouisa setting the tone in a
performance that can bring a laughing audience to a tear-stained hush as
smoothly as if she were turning down the volume of a radio.

''I didn't come here to be this,'' says Rick, the young man who came to New York
from Utah in search of experience and roles in plays only to find himself hating
the role he is playing in real life. What finally allows ''Six Degrees of
Separation'' to become a touching, beautiful, sensitive work is that Mr. Guare
doesn't waste time assigning the predictable political blame for all the
separations that turn a city's people into what Holden Caulfield called phonies.
Instead the playwright points the way - by the lustrous examples of Ouisa's
redemptive spiritual journey to authenticity and his own elevated act of art -
to a transcendent alternative to the inhuman urban collage. This play invades an
audience's soul by forcing it to confront the same urgent question asked of its
New Yorkers: If we didn't come here to be this, then who do we intend to be?

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: James McDaniel-playing an impostor whose true identity is never
revealed (Sara Krulwich/The New York Times); Stockard Channing-In the new play
at Lincoln Center, her character seeks authenticity in a world of fraud (Sara
Krulwich/The New York Times) (pg. 1); Swoosie Kurtz in the 1986 revival of ''The
House of Blue Leaves.'' In Mr. Guare's new play, ''Six Degrees,'' the promise is
fulfilled. (Brigitte Lacombe/Lincoln Center); John Guare-unpolemic passion
(Brigitte Lacombe/Lincoln Center) (pg. 7)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                               7 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   July 1, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

The Nation;
Old Glory: The Saga Of a National Love Affair

BYLINE: By ALAN BRINKLEY; Alan Brinkley is a professor of American history at
the City University of New York Graduate School.

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1105 words


THE failed attempt in Congress in the last two weeks to enact a Constitutional
amendment concludes, at least for now, the latest effort to use the law to
protect the American flag from unpopular uses. But as in the past, more has been
at issue than a neutral desire to defend what many have called a unique symbol
of our existence as a nation. Battles over the flag have almost always been
battles over how to define patriotism and, by implication, how to define
America.

Until the Civil War, the idea of regulating the use of the flag would have
seemed ridiculous. Most 19th-century Americans considered the nation's founding
ideals so powerful that nationalistic symbols were of relatively minor
importance. The flag was popular, but it was not yet ubiquitous and not yet an
object of worship. For decades, in fact, American flags did not always have a
standard form. A member of Congress noted in 1818 that the flags flying over
Government buildings in Washington included between 9 and 18 stripes and varying
numbers of stars. His revelation produced no particular alarm.

Widespread and conspicuous display of the flag became common for the first time
during the Civil War, and efforts to protect it by statute quickly followed. In
1878, Congress rejected a proposal to ban using the flag for commercial
advertising. But in 1897, Pennsylvania passed a law making it a crime to
''damage or destroy'' the flag. Eighteen other states soon followed
Pennsylvania's lead, although Congress again rejected similar proposals.

The laws of the 1890's were ostensibly a response to events in the 1896
presidential contest, when the prominent use of flags in both the McKinley and
Bryan campaigns occasionally provoked opponents to violence. ''Infuriated
partisanship was manifested in tearing down the Flag, tearing it in pieces, and
trampling it in the dust,'' complained the president of the American Flag
Association, which was created in 1897 to promote flag legislation. Members of
both political parties, he wrote, assumed ''that they alone represented the
patriotism of the country.''

But these first flag laws rested on other anxieties as well. They reflected the
growing national alarm about agrarian protest, labor unrest and anarchism - all
intensified by the depression of the 1890's - and a more general concern about
the effects of new, large-scale immigration from southern and eastern Europe.

Legislating Patriotism

The same combination of nativism and anti-radicalism lay at the heart of most
later efforts to legislate patriotism. Demands for new flag laws intensified
during and immediately after World War I, when hostility to both immigrants and
radicals reached a crescendo and at times ran amok. In 1917, Congress responded
to the wartime passions by making it a misdemeanor to ''publicly mutilate'' the
flag in the District of Columbia. Flag enthusiasts hoped the Government would go
further. They proposed, also in 1917, a Civilian Flag Code to establish official
guidelines for displaying the flag and punishing its ''desecration.'' Warning of
threats from Bolsheviks, anarchists and ''un-American'' immigrant groups, they
began lobbying Congress to translate the guidelines into law. Congress did not
respond until 1942, when it passed a joint resolution to ''provide an
authoritative guide to those civilians who desire to use the flag correctly.''
There were no penalties for those who ignored or flouted the guidelines.

That legislative restraint finally vanished in the 1960's, in response to flag
burnings protesting American involvement in the Vietnam War. In 1968, Congress
for the first time imposed criminal penalties nationwide on anyone who
''knowingly casts contempt upon any flag of the United States by publicly
mutilating, defacing, defiling, burning or trampling upon it.'' Flag burning, a
conservative congressman explained, ''tends to undermine the morale of American
troops.'' But it was clearly not just the act of burning the flag that alarmed
supporters of the law. It was the radical politics of those who did the burning,
and the specter of political and cultural upheaval they represented.

The recent Supreme Court decisions in Texas v. Johnson and United States v.
Eichman are only two of a series of decisions in the last two decades striking
down flag-protection laws on First Amendment grounds. Earlier rulings, in 1969
and 1974, produced relatively muted reactions. Given the infrequency and
inconspicuousness of flag burnings in recent years, the political furor of the
moment - and the unprecedented effort to amend the Bill of Rights - may seem
puzzling. There are, of course, some obvious explanations for the intensity of
the reaction: the effort of the Bush Administration to make patriotism a
partisan issue; the genuine alarm among much of the public at the disappearance
of a legislative protection they incorrectly believed had a long and
uncontroversial history; and the fear among members of Congress of the cost of
standing against the tide. But the salience of the flag issue in 1989 and 1990
suggests other anxieties as well, similar to the anti-radical and nativist
concerns that fueled earlier flag-protection efforts. One is the continuing
resentment of the radicalism of the 1960's and 1970's, which has been a staple
of American conservative politics for more than 20 years. The New Left may be
all but dead, but the effort to discredit it lives on.

Another is the fear of anti-American radicalism in the Third World and the
larger, often related fear of America's decline as an international power. For
most Americans, the most vivid recent examples of flag burning are not the
actions of Gregory Johnson and Shawn Eichman, the defendants in the two cases
that came before the Supreme Court in recent years. They are the actions of
Islamic revolutionaries in Teheran.

Subliminal Anxiety

And another, perhaps subliminal, anxiety behind the current controversy may have
arisen in response to the immigration of the last 20 years and the substantial
new communities of Asians and Hispanics it has produced. Once again, as the
growing movement to restrict immigration suggests, fears have arisen over the
survival of what some people still insist on calling ''Americanism.''

Democracies secure in their identities and confident of their principles - as
the United States was through much of its history - do not usually feel the need
to define patriotism by law. But given the conspicuous absence of either
security or confidence in contemporary American culture, no one should assume
that the flag issue has been put to rest for good.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Burning Flag. (Kirk Kondyles/Photoreporters)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                               8 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   July 1, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THE PRIME OF PAT SCHROEDER

BYLINE: BY Susan Ferraro; Susan Ferraro is a contributor to the Hers column and
other sections of The New York Times.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 12, Column 3; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 4831 words


AT THE ASSEMBLY POINT FOR DENVER'S 1990 ST. PATRICK'S DAY Parade, a tall, slim
woman resplendent in a Kelly-green coat and a glittery, green top hat darted
through the genial confusion of skirling bagpipes, Irish wolfhounds, green
balloons and teen-age beauty queens showing more goose bumps than cleavage.

''Top o' the mornin' to ya!'' she called to onlookers, her face stretched tight
in a wide grin. ''Hey, Mrs. Schroeder!'' a man shouted. Heads swiveled and
Patricia Schroeder, Denver's nine-term Congresswoman known for her witty
one-liners, her fierce dedication to family issues and her brief 1987
exploratory campaign for President, which ended in a flood of tears, stepped
eagerly toward the crowd.

''You came to my class to judge Halloween costumes - it must have been in '74,''
a young father told her. Schroeder grinned. ''We thought you'd be wearing a
green bunny suit,'' an official teased, alluding to the Easter bunny suit she
may or may not have worn in 1979 to the Great Wall of China. ''Well, I thought
of it,'' she replied mildly.

Perched on the back seat of a convertible for the parade, Schroeder waved to the
crowd, amid shouts of ''Hey, Pat!'' and ''Pro-choice!'' Blinky the Clown, a
local children's show celebrity, introduced her to the television audience and,
off camera, asked Schroeder to autograph her new book, ''Champion of the Great
American Family.''

As the parade came to an end and Schroeder headed for a small gray sedan, a
passerby shouted, ''When are you going to run for President?'' Schroeder's
stride didn't falter. ''Hey, great to see ya,'' she said, flashing the grin.

Schroeder had reason to duck the question. Once before, she had been caught
unawares. In 1987, she was running to catch a flight from Washington to Denver
when an Associated Press reporter asked her if she was considering a
Presidential race now that Gary Hart had dropped out.

''I feel I have to look at it seriously,'' she said. By the time her plane
landed, reporters were waiting. Her husband, Jim - one of her principal advisers
- in Bangkok on business at the time, found out about his wife's plans in The
International Herald Tribune.

Moreover, after 18 years in Congress, she has a lot to lose. Now the most senior
woman in Congress, an incumbent who won her last election with 70 percent of the
vote, Schroeder has become part of the Establishment without sacrificing either
the family issues she stands for or her independent style, both of which have
always set her at odds with it. Long a darling of liberals, she is increasingly
welcome within the business community, as was evident when she spoke to Du Pont
Company employees last December. The audience of mostly middle-level managers
listened raptly as she talked about the country's military budget: ''Power
issues are things like -in the post-INF environment, should the United States
have the D-5 missile, the cruise missile, the MX missile, the rail garrison, or
all of the above, some of the above, none of the above?'' And about the
struggles parents face: ''Toddlers don't have political-action committees, they
don't pay you honorariums if you drop by their child-care center, and they don't
vote.'' And about changing our national priorities: the real issues are the
national debt, more equitable allocation of defense costs with allies, and
''getting our educational resources in place so we are ready to compete.''

In Congress, Schroeder sits on the House Armed Services Committee (where she is
fifth-ranking Democrat) and eight other committees and subcommittees; she is
chairwoman of the House Armed Services Subcommittee on Military Installations
and Facilities. She heads a task force on how tax policies affect families and
she is a Deputy Whip. She co-heads both the Democratic Caucus's Task Force on
National Security and the Congressional Caucus for Women's Issues, a group that
has grown, largely by her design, to number 150 members of Congress - a sizable
lobbying force.

That kind of influence is useful to a woman who has made a career out of
changing systems she doesn't like. Since her election to Congress in 1972,
Schroeder has almost single-handedly wrenched family issues - child care and
education, pension reform for widows and former spouses, flextime in the work
place for parents and women's economic equity - out of the dim peripheries of
campaign rhetoric and into the political mainstream.

Given the sudden surge of women in politics, the time may be right for a
Schroeder Presidential campaign, though it would presumably take party pols by
surprise: few mention Schroeder when the subject of the 1992 campaign comes up.
Nationally, 10 women, including Ann Richards of Texas and Dianne Feinstein of
California, are running for governor in 1990. Five women, one an incumbent, are
running for the United States Senate. Three of the five are members of the
House, where 24 women are running for re-election and another 2o or so are
running for seats now held by men. Women are seeking office in unprecedented
numbers at the local level as well, according to the National Organization for
Women.

Many are answering what Schroeder calls the ''wake-up call'' of the Supreme
Court's Webster decision in 1989, which gave states the right to restrict
abortions. Limitations enacted in Pennsylvania remain the strictest to date;
although the number of women seeking election to the Pennsylvania State
Legislature has historically been almost nonexistent, some 90 women announced
candidacies this year, and about 70 made it past primaries. The influx of women
into the permanent work force means that so-called ''women's issues,'' like
child care and health services for the elderly, have an impact on the national
economy. Political pioneers like Schroeder, Feinstein and Lynn Martin (R.-Ill.),
Schroeder's colleague in the House who is going after Paul Simon's Senate seat,
have been in politics for some time. They can take aim at higher office and talk
about, for instance, fiscal policy without encountering sexist condescension.

Schroeder is often rebuked for ''running as a woman.'' Her reply, complete with
practiced, elaborate shrug, is: ''Do I have a choice?''

At a podium or on the House floor, her searing wit can vaporize an opponent in
the 15 seconds suitable for a sound bite: it was she who labeled Reagan ''the
Teflon President,'' she who called defense contractors ''the welfare queens of
the 80's.'' Behind the scenes she does a surprising amount of homework and
displays a shrewd, even lethal political savvy. Over the years she has helped
bump not one, but two, chairmen of the House Armed Services Committee.

The woman who manages all this - who seems to inhabit a blur of energy
punctuated by a toothy smile - is a curious blend of effusive friendliness and
private reserve, a Harvard-trained lawyer who relies on instinct and common
sense. On the hustings, she is personal, spontaneous and direct; she delights in
cooing babies and seems genuinely moved by the stories people tell her.

Ask about her own struggles, however, and she retreats behind a relentless
cheerfulness. ''She's not introspective publicly,'' says Dan Buck, her top
staffer in Washington, who has known Schroeder 18 years. ''A lot of it is
hidden. You let personal things out and people are gonna grab 'em. . . .''

That wariness may be due in part to the extreme reactions Schroeder evokes. To
admirers, she has the angularity of Katharine Hepburn, an Irish grin reminiscent
of the Kennedys, a passionate speaking style and laughing eyes; her occasional
silliness - celebrating the ''little holidays'' like Valentine's Day, signing
notes with a smile face drawn inside the ''P'' - proves her lack of pretension.
They think of her as a woman warrior, a leader.

To critics, she has a ''hard'' look, a grin that is really a grimace, a
nasal-voiced delivery through clenched jaws and eyes that disappear behind a
squint; her signature is too cute, her girlish celebrations ridiculous. They
think of her as a lightweight.

The reality is that Schroeder is a driven politician who smiles too hard. She
makes the complicated ideas behind inventive legislation look easy, maybe too
easy. Her preference for simple, crowd-pleasing sentences - the one-liners that
spin so well onto the 11 o'clock news - belies and often undercuts Schroeder's
seriousness in a job that, for her, is as much about changing national
priorities as representing Colorado's First Congressional district.

Off the campaign trail, in committee hearings, she seems to revel in complexity
and detail. She serves as head of the Armed Services Committee's panel on
Defense Burden Sharing, a term that is Washingtonese for the policy that results
in billions of dollars the United States spends defending financially secure
allies, and that, she says, has helped Japan, Canada and Germany to become
powerful trade competitors. Relieved of the financial drain of their own
defense, she points out, these countries have invested in their work force -
with programs for education, health care, and even, in some parts of Europe,
mandated ''spa leave'' for workers.

Schroeder proposes alternatives: other developed nations should contribute
amounts of their gross national products proportionately equal to what the
United States contributes, to help alleviate nonmilitary world threats like the
destruction of the environment and overpopulation. (The Japanese, she suggests,
would do an ''excellent'' job on family planning in Asia.)

AT A RECENT HEARING OF SCHROEDER'S Subcommittee on Military Installations and
Facilities, she wore a tomato-red dress and a wide-shouldered royal blue
sweater; her bright, insouciant style seemed to dominate a room full of military
uniforms and dark business suits. But it was obvious that she'd absorbed the
implications, political and otherwise, of the material to be discussed that day.

Brig. Gen. Wayne T. Adams, of the Marine Corps, began his comments with
pleasantries: ''We all thank you for your past support, especially regarding the
quality of life and importance of taking care of our troops,'' he said,
addressing Schroeder directly. ''Only the accomplishment of the mission is more
important.'' He was flanked by a rear admiral, two major generals, a brigadier
general and a spokesman from the office of the Secretary of Defense; under the
witness table, some highly polished shoes danced nervously. Schroeder's
questions about the 1991 military construction budget were brief but to the
point:

Given growing civilian intolerance for training maneuvers in the German
countryside, ''Why are we there?'' Could the committee have a list of such
maneuvers from five years ago? ''We would like to go through it, specifically
thing by thing, so that will help us as we make some decisions.''

Why is the United States funding a new base for the F-16 bomber in Crotone, ''a
few miles from Italy's kidnap capital?''

About money set aside to build chapels and family centers on foreign bases:
''Why? That's outrageous, I would think! You haven't requested it, but you're
going to. . . ?'' (''Yessir - uh, ma'am,'' Rear Adm. David E. Bottorff gulped in
reply, glancing too late at the sign he'd taped in front of him that said
''Madame Chairwoman.'') ''Let me also note why we are putting the first
follow-on MX rail garrison in Speaker Foley's district?'' she said, referring to
one of the first controversial installations housing the rail-born MX missile,
which is scheduled for House Speaker Thomas S. Foley's Washington state
district. ''There wouldn't be any politics involved, would there? You're not
trying to solicit more support for rail garrisons?'' Yet for all her military
expertise, Schroeder is best known for family issues. Two years ago she put
together the ''Great American Family Tour,'' a series of presentations on
child-care issues with the pediatrician T. Berry Brazelton and Gary David
Goldberg, the executive producer of ''Family Ties,'' who once ran a day-care
facility. She credits the interest the tour generated with getting candidates in
the 1988 Presidential election to take child care seriously. She was a primary
sponsor of the House's companion bill to the Senate's Act for Better Child Care
Services (the A.B.C. bill). She lobbied personally for the bill and coordinated
support through the Caucus on Women's Issues. In March, House Speaker Foley
guided the bill to passage in the House, 265-145.

Another bill she pushed for with increasing fervor in 1989 and early 1990 was
her Family and Medical Leave Act, which gives both male and female workers a
minimum amount of job-protected, unpaid leave at the birth or adoption of a
child, or for serious but temporary family illness. She first proposed it in
1985, after developing ''issues sheets'' on the subject with her staff. Not
everyone was pleased: ''To hear the Chamber of Commerce talk about it, you'd
think we were Communists,'' says Dan Buck. ''In Washington the politicians say,
'There go the people - let's get in front of 'em!' '' Schroeder says. She
operates on the assumption that, after a while, the message will trickle up to
the politicians. As she had with the child-care bill, she lobbied for the
family-leave bill in Congress and took it directly to the voters in dozens of
speeches. When President Bush said he would veto ''any kind of maternity-leave
bill,'' she accused him of ''coming out against motherhood.'' The bill passed
the House on May 10, 287-187. The companion bill passed the Senate by a voice
vote on June 14. Within hours after the vote, White House officials reaffirmed
the President's intention to veto the measure ''as soon as it reaches his
desk.''

Long adept at linking domestic issues to foreign policy, Schroeder doubts the
''peace dividend'' will materialize: ''It's now you see it - blink, blink - now
you don't,'' she says. But if it does, she thinks it should be ''more broadly
defined,'' to include the Department of Energy (where much of the budget goes
into nuclear weapons) and the Central Intelligence Agency.

''We've got so much in the intelligence budget it makes you gag - who are we
gonna spy on, Albania?'' she snorts. She believes a $70 billion cut in defense
spending is possible. Half of that amount should go toward the deficit, the rest
into education. ''I think it's absolute garbage that young people who have the
ability of passing the tests can't go to school because their dad doesn't have
the money,'' she argues vehemently. ''How are we gonna compete in the 21st
century?''

Schroeder's voting record is as independent as her style. In 1989 she voted
against positions taken by President Bush more than any other member of the
House (79 percent of the time), but among the Colorado delegation, she is also
known for not voting with fellow Democrats on ''party unity'' votes, in which a
majority of Democrats oppose a majority of Republicans. Though a liberal, she is
also one of the most fiscally conservative members of the House, according to
the National Taxpayer's Union - ''Jack Kemp just hates it when I mention that,''
she says, giggling. Not surprisingly, she is known in the Congress as a ''lone
wolf,'' not a compliment.

PARTLY BECAUSE OF this independence, Schroeder relies heavily on her staff
members in Denver and Washington, some of whom have worked for her for their
entire careers. She also relies, less formally, on Jim Schroeder, the amiable,
low-key man she married almost 28 years ago when the two were students at
Harvard Law School. He was the one who first urged her to run for Congress in
1972 in what was supposed to be a hopeless but honorable race. When she won, he
abandoned his partnership in a Denver law firm and his own political ambitions
(a liberal Democrat, he once ran for office in Denver) to go to Washington: ''I
had no alternative,'' he says simply. Often ''the first line of defense,'' as he
says, at home when their children were small, he eventually became a partner at
Kaplan, Russin & Vecchi, a Washington law firm with a sizable international
practice. Jim Schroeder, a founder of the Denis Thatcher Society, for men
married to powerful women (their motto is ''Yes, dear'') downplays his influence
on his wife's career today: ''When I go home at night I don't want to discuss my
cases, she doesn't discuss what happened in committee.'' But when asked to name
her boss's ''most trusted adviser,'' Andrea Camp, Pat Schroeder's press
secretary, instantly names him.

In 1987 Jim flew home from Bangkok to manage his wife's unexpected exploratory
bid for President. In a campaign in which the eventual victor talked about the
''vision thing'' but settled for television visuals - Schroeder had vision to
spare. Fueled by junk food (''I'm turning my body into a hazardous waste
dump''), sometimes catching only a few hours of sleep a night, her theme was
''Rendezvous with Reality.''

She talked about the environment, arms control, the need for more jobs, and
defense burden sharing. Her team, mostly made up of volunteers, worked
enthusiastically to raise money. The press loved her: she was called Snow White
and the other Democratic contenders the Seven Dwarfs, she said the Reagan
Administration thought arms control was ''deodorant.'' In a September 1987 Time
magazine poll, Schroeder led the other Democratic candidates on matters of who
would best manage the economy, which candidate people would be ''proud'' to have
as President, and whom they would trust.

Yet the same poll found that only 9 percent of respondents named Schroeder their
''first choice'' (26 percent named Jesse Jackson; 11 percent, Michael S.
Dukakis). And a poll sponsored by the National Women's Political Caucus showed
that roughly 30 percent of the population felt that a woman, any woman, would be
a ''worse'' President than a man. By September Schroeder had raised only about
$850,000 of the $2 million she said she would need by that point to run. She
would decide whether to continue by the end of the month.

Two days before her scheduled announcement, Jim Schroeder wrote his wife a
''neutral'' memo, listing pros and cons. Then he got three phone calls. He says
an executive of a Texas oil and gas organization told him: ''We're ready to go,
we need a Westerner, we need somebody like your wife; let me know what we can
do.'' The pollster Lou Harris said: ''Your wife's already number three and I can
promise that by Iowa . . . New Hampshire, she'll be number two.''

Bill Dunfey, the ex-Democratic chairman of New Hampshire, told him: ''We're
ready up here, let me know what you want us to do.''

But the decision, ultimately, was hers. On September 28, she announced her
withdrawal. Her late start was a major difficulty, she said; many key people had
already pledged support to other candidates. And she cited the dehumanizing
process of campaigning on the national level: ''I could not figure out how to
run and not be separated from those I serve.''

But her words were largely ignored, because when her listeners grasped her
intent and groaned, she cried. In an astonishingly intimate public moment, she
leaned back toward Jim and choked. He gave her a handkerchief. She cried some
more. She finished her speech and threw herself into his arms.

''When Reagan left town, the reporters following him were in hip-waders - he was
bawling all the time,'' says Dan Buck. ''Bush says he cries at movies - he
probably gave 'Who Framed Roger Rabbit?' three hankies.'' John Sununu ended up
crying and embracing his wife during his farewell speech as governor to the New
Hampshire Legislature. ''He bawled his head off,'' Buck adds. Still,
conservatives felt she had displayed a dangerous emotionalism, and liberals were
embarrassed.

Schroeder herself did not apologize, and explained only that she was ''human.''
But she cracked jokes: that she could make a fortune advertising Kleenex. And
she continues to bring it up - for example, in a skit before the Washington
Press Club Foundation last January - if only to shrug it off as unimportant.

PATRICIA NELL Scott was born in Portland, Ore., in the summer of 1940, the first
child of Lee and Bernice Scott. He was a licensed pilot, she a first-grade
teacher; the hospital bill came to $53.35 and the Scotts, who had grown up on
farms in Nebraska during the Depression, paid it in two installments.

They were Democrats, with populism in their blood: Lee's father was an Irish
immigrant who had served with the three-time Democratic Presidential candidate
William Jennings Bryan in the Nebraska State Legislature. They taught Pat and
her younger brother, Mike - now a Denver attorney - to be independent and
responsible and to manage their own allowance for clothes and trinkets; both
children became licensed pilots, Pat by the age of 15.

Her early years were not always easy. Pat had crossed eyes, a condition known as
amblyopia. She outgrew it, but the taunts of other children hurt: ''With a patch
over one eye, I wasn't exactly the number-one choice for kickball.'' The woman
known for her brilliant smile often quotes the advice her father gave her:
''Never frown at your enemies. Smile - it scares the hell out of them.''

Harder still, the family moved often. By the age of 3 Pat learned how to make
friends: she lined up her toys on the sidewalk and told her mother, ''This ought
to get 'em.'' ''I was always the one that was trying to get in,'' she says.
''But in a way, it's one of the things people struggle with all their lives - to
define themselves. If you move a lot, then you define yourself.''

She graduated from the University of Minnesota in three years, magna cum laude
and Phi Beta Kappa, with a major in history and minors in philosophy and
political science. At Harvard Law School, which she entered in 1961, she was one
of 19 women in a class of 554.

A male classmate told Schroeder she ought to be ashamed of taking a man's place.
She found friends anyway - on her terms: ''They were all guys who had been in
the service for three years - y'know, I was a pilot, they were pilots,'' she
recalls. ''When you find the real people, it's ten times more fun.'' One of the
ex-servicemen was Jim Schroeder, who had gone into the Navy after graduating
from Princeton. ''We hit it off pretty well,'' he recalls laconically. They were
married in 1962.

Pat Schroeder wanted children, but pregnancies were difficult. ''Some people
think of it as a nine-month cruise,'' she says. ''It isn't.'' While she was
pregnant with her first child, a gas leak in the house almost killed the couple,
and it was months before they were sure that the baby was not affected. (Scott
Schroeder, a 1988 graduate of Georgetown University, now works in Washington.) A
second pregnancy ended grievously at seven months when Schroeder lost twins. She
had felt something was wrong all along and had suffered bleeding, but her doctor
dismissed her concerns and told her she was ''high-strung.'' ''Most of all I was
angry at myself,'' the woman who later became a champion of underdog issues has
written. ''Here I was, a trained lawyer, letting a doctor convince me I had no
right to question his judgment about my pregnancy and my baby. He intimidated me
and made me feel powerless.'' In 1970 she delivered her daughter, Jamie, now a
junior at Princeton, without complications, but was rushed back to the hospital
with life-threatening bleeding that lasted for six weeks.

Jim juggled child care for a 4-year-old and a newborn, went to the office, and
worried about Pat; Pat recalls him having a recurring nightmare of driving to
work but being unable to go into the office because Jamie was in the back seat.
Schroeder tells audiences today that was when ''he got it'' - when he understood
the kind of stress working mothers experience every day.

Two years later she ran for Congress and Denver was ready for her anti-Vietnam
-War stance. Pat Schroeder was sworn into office with diapers in her purse. Her
greatest fear as a freshman in Congress, she told reporters, was ''losing my
housekeeper.''

When asked how she could be both a mother and a Congresswoman she snapped, ''I
have a brain and a uterus, and I use both.''

''HER ASSETS ARE HER liabilities, her liabilities are her assets,'' say Dan Buck
and Andrea Camp, speaking in unison.

Schroeder's quick wit grabs headlines, but Republicans claim she is superficial,
and even sympathetic audiences can be confused by a wisecrack in the middle of a
speech on foreign policy. She is smart (a recent article in Roll Call, the
Congressional newspaper, named her one of the 20 smartest members of Congress),
but as she admits, ''I don't think anyone likes a smart aleck.''

Jim Schroeder is a strong defender of his wife's controversial style. ''Over the
years it has really annoyed me that she is called scatterbrained or flip,'' he
says, almost sounding testy. ''She has a commendable ability to simplify.''

To a certain extent he is right: Schroeder's grasp of military spending and its
ramifications on domestic policy, her long battles to turn ideas into statutes,
are impressive. But the wide array of causes she embraces can bewilder: an
antiwar activist, she supports women in the military; a supporter of abortion
rights, she also calls herself pro-life because she favors increased research on
infertility.

Her ''prepared text'' is usually a hastily scribbled list of talking points, and
she can be superb. But the freewheeling oratory can be uneven, her endings
chopped, as if she has suddenly run out of time or interest. Her debating style
(if not her thinking) is scattered: on a recent ''Firing Line'' program, the
subject was free-market competition; Schroeder's one-liners fizzled next to
Jeane J. Kirkpatrick's grave pronouncements. At one point she spoke inexplicably
about the plight of the Japanese consumer.

For now, Schroeder is running for re-election to the House, her 10th term. Her
announced challenger is Gloria Gonzales Roemer, a 37-year-old Republican
businesswoman and mother of four. Roemer says she's in the race to win, but
political pundits suspect that she wants to establish name recognition for a
1992 race, should Schroeder run for President. But will she? Schroeder's serious
answer is: ''My life would be easier if I find a candidate I can back. If I
don't see one, then I would have to seriously consider it.'' In Denver, Louis X.
(Kip) Cheroutes, her press secretary, says, ''I don't think she knows herself''
what she will do.

There are signs and portents. Her 1989 book, ''Champion of the Great American
Family,'' outlines a national family policy and is full of personal and
political anecdotes.

Some $400,000 left over from the 1987 Presidential bid is available, should
Schroeder try again, according to Pam Solo, a top aide in 1987 and until
recently co-director of the Institute for Peace and International Security in
Cambridge, Mass. (Still,the amount is nowhere near the estimated $20 million a
Presidential campaign now costs for a full primary run.) Her wardrobe,
criticized three years ago for a certain haphazardness - she tended toward
schoolmarmish ruffles and once Scotch-taped a carnation to her lapel - now
features plain collars and sleek, wide-shouldered suits and dresses in strong,
bold colors. An image adviser she consulted told her to wear wispier bangs and
earrings; most of the time these days, she does both.

In addition to bimonthly visits to Denver, she crisscrosses the country on
dozens of trips. In February, a few days after appearing in Hershey, Pa., she
flew to Boston; the day's schedule ended in Salem and included a luncheon, three
press interviews, two major speeches, a cocktail party, a photo session, dinner
and a reception.

Back in her hotel room at 10 P.M., she sagged against a couch, legs stretched
out. Andrea Camp, who was traveling with her, got some sodas. For the first time
all day Schroeder looked tired; her angular face softened, the eyes, obscured
earlier by the well-known squint, looked large and blue.

''People say that the first woman President will be tough, a man in woman's
clothing, a conservative,'' she said. ''I don't think so. Sandra Day O'Connor
has so disappointed them, so let down on Roe v. Wade with this [Webster]
decision.'' She made an odd sound, half ''no,'' half growl. ''It's a powder-puff
decision, a little of this, a little of that.

''Margaret Thatcher can be Prime Minister because she comes from a country
raised by strong women. She puts on her pearls, points her finger, and people do
it. In this country we don't like that.'' Schroeder stirred restlessly,
searching for a conclusion. ''But if we're just going to have a man in woman's
clothing? Is that what this is all about? I've got better things to do with my
life than spending it in Hershey and Salem and all the places. . . .''

The next morning she was the first one down to the lobby, smile fresh, ready for
an interview on WCVB-TV, a Boston ABC affiliate in Needham, Mass.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: The nine-term Colorado Congresswoman at Gilpin Elementary in
Denver. She has sponsored a number of bills promoting medical leave, education
and other family concerns. (Jeffrey Aaronson for The New York Times); The senior
woman in Congress, known as a ''blur of energy,'' checks her watch with
Congressman Charlie Wilson of Texas as they ride the people-mover in the
Capitol. (Alexandra Avakian/Woodfin Camp for The New York Times); In Denver in
September 1987, Schroeder makes a tearful farewell tothe '88 Presidential race,
with her husband, Jim, at her side. (Sara Krulwich for The New York Times); High
school group, sponsored by Planned Parenthood, in Milwaukee. Family planning is
on Schroeder's agenda. (Michael Kienitz/Picture Group); Women marines at Parris
Island, S.C. Schroeder

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                               9 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   July 1, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

BEST SELLERS: July 1, 1990

SECTION: Section 7; Page 20, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1466 words




$

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Fiction

 1      1   3    THE BURDEN OF PROOF, by Scott Turow.
                 (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $22.95.) An attorney
                 tries to unravel the mystery of his wife's death
                 while defending his wheeler-dealer brother-in-law.

 2      2   2    MESSAGE FROM NAM, by Danielle Steel.
                 (Delacorte, $21.95.) A woman journalist's coming
                 of age in the years between the assassination of
                 John F. Kennedy and the fall of Saigon.

 3      3   19   OH, THE PLACES YOU'LL GO! by Dr. Seuss.
                 (Random House, $12.95.) The problems of finding
                 your way through life; in verse and pictures.

 4      4   8    THE STAND, by Stephen King. (Doubleday,
                 $24.95.) Doomsday brings horrors to America; the
                 uncut version of a novel first published in 1978.

 5      6   8    DRAGON, by Clive Cussler. (Simon & Schuster,
                 $21.95.) In 1993, Dirk Pitt moves fast to save
                 America from a Japanese extremist.

 6      7   16   THE BOURNE ULTIMATUM, by Robert Ludlum.
                 (Random House, $21.95.) Jason Bourne plans to
                 infiltrate the ruthless Medusa Brigade.

 7      5   11   SEPTEMBER, by Rosamunde Pilcher. (Dunne/St.
                 Martin's, $22.95.) Guests from many parts of the
                 world encounter their often unexpected destinies
                 during a get-together in a small Scottish town.

 8     10   5    THE OUTLAWS OF MESQUITE, by Louis
                 L'Amour. (Bantam, $16.95.) Eight short stories
                 about the American frontier.

 9      8   8    AN INCONVENIENT WOMAN, by Dominick
                 Dunne. (Crown, $19.95.) Manners, morals and
                 murder in Los Angeles's high society.

10      9   7    THE GOLDEN ORANGE, by Joseph Wambaugh.
                 (Perigord/Morrow, $19.95.) Murder and chicanery
                 amid Orange County's yachts and mansions.

11     11   44   CLEAR AND PRESENT DANGER, by Tom
                 Clancy. (Putnam, $21.95.) The C.I.A.'s Jack Ryan
                 fights Colombian drug lords.

12     13   2    SULLIVAN'S STING, by Lawrence Sanders.
                 (Putnam, $19.95.) The ordeals of a female cop
                 assigned to track down a Florida con man.

13            1          SECOND CHILD, by John Saul. (Bantam, $14.95.)
                 A horrible crime committed 100 years ago returns
                 to haunt a quiet Maine village.

14     15   10   THE GOLD COAST, by Nelson DeMille. (Warner,
                 $19.95.) How life changes for an old WASP family
                 when the head of a crime family becomes its
                 neighbor on Long Island's North Shore.

15     14   11   SKINNY LEGS AND ALL, by Tom Robbins.
                 (Bantam, $19.95.) The horror and humor of the
                 upcoming apocalypse are played out at a
                 restaurant near the United Nations.

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Nonfiction

 1      1   12   MEN AT WORK, by George F. Will. (Macmillan,
                 $19.95.) The political pundit and baseball buff
                 describes the craft of the game.

 2      2   5    DAVE BARRY TURNS 40, by Dave Barry. (Crown,
                 $16.95.) Comments on the crises of middle age.

 3      3   4    DON'T SHOOT, IT'S ONLY ME, by Bob Hope with
                 Melville Shavelson. (Putnam, $19.95.) The
                 comedian reminisces about his career.

 4      5   4    FATHER, SON & CO., by Thomas J. Watson Jr. and
                 Peter Petre. (Bantam, $22.95.) The autobiography
                 of the man who headed I.B.M.

 5      7   23   BARBARIANS AT THE GATE, by Bryan
                 Burrough and John Helyar. (HarperCollins,
                 $22.95.) The 1988 battle for control of RJR Nabisco.

 6      4   23   MEGATRENDS 2000, by John Naisbitt and
                 Patricia Aburdene. (Morrow, $21.95.)
                 Prognostications for the next decade.

 7     14   10   IN THE ARENA, by Richard Nixon. (Simon &
                 Schuster, $21.95.) The 37th President reflects on his
                 public career and private life.

 8      6   41   IT WAS ON FIRE WHEN I LAY DOWN ON IT, by
                 Robert Fulghum. (Villard, $17.95.) A new collection
                 of inspirational essays.

 9      8   86   ALL I REALLY NEED TO KNOW I LEARNED IN
                 KINDERGARTEN, by Robert Fulghum. (Villard,
                 $17.95.) Inspirational essays.

10     11   34   LIAR'S POKER, by Michael Lewis. (Norton,
                 $19.95.) Wall Street's tumultuous 1980's.

11      9   2    PERIL AND PROMISE, by John Chancellor.
                 (HarperCollins, $17.95.) Observations about
                 contemporary America by a television newscaster.

12     13   14   MEANS OF ASCENT, by Robert A. Caro. (Knopf,
                 $24.95.) Lyndon Johnson's 1948 run for the Senate.

13     12   9    LEGACIES, by Bette Bao Lord. (Knopf, $19.95.)
                 Reflections on the Chinese experience during the
                 past quarter-century.

14     10   21   HEAD FIRST, by Norman Cousins. (Dutton,
                 $19.95.) How the brain affects the body's endocrine
                 and immune systems.

15           12  PARTING WITH ILLUSIONS, by Vladimir
                 Pozner. (Atlantic Monthly, $19.95.) The
                 autobiography of a Soviet commentator.

16 *   15   3    THE SEARCH FOR MODERN CHINA, by
                 Jonathan D. Spence. (Norton, $29.95.) Four
                 centuries of Chinese history.

17 *         18  WHAT I SAW AT THE REVOLUTION, by Peggy
                 Noonan. (Random House, $19.95.) The memoirs of
                 a former Presidential speechwriter.

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous

 1      2   72   WEALTH WITHOUT RISK, by Charles J. Givens.
                 (Simon & Schuster, $19.95.) A Florida
                 entrepreneur's advice about how to make a
                 personal fortune.

 2      3   29   THE GREAT WALDO SEARCH, by Martin
                 Handford. (Little, Brown, $10.95.) A book of
                 illustrations in which the game is to find a
                 ubiquitous chap named Waldo.

 3      1  182   WEBSTER'S NINTH NEW COLLEGIATE
                 DICTIONARY. (Merriam-Webster, $16.95.) A
                 standard reference work, revised and updated.

 4      4   26   WEBSTER'S NEW WORLD DICTIONARY.
                 (Simon & Schuster, $17.95.) The Third College
                 Edition of a standard work, revised in 1988.

 5      5   19   BEWARE THE NAKED MAN WHO OFFERS
                 YOU HIS SHIRT, by Harvey Mackay. (Morrow,
                 $19.95.) Advice on how to get ahead in business.


These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,000
bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 28,000 other
retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets. The figures are
statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United
States.

 *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to
reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from
those of the book above.

AND BEAR IN MIND
(Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)

KILLING MISTER WATSON, by Peter Matthiessen. (Random House, $21.95.) A fierce,
fascinating novel based on the life and death of a buccaneer businessman shot to
death in Florida in 1910.

LANTERN SLIDES, by Edna O'Brien. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $18.95.) This fine
collection of stories, little tragedies of passion, stupidity or stubbornness,
continues the quest for origins and explanations that has concerned Ms.
O'Brien's fiction for decades.

FADE OUT: The Calamitous Final Days of MGM, by Peter Bart. (Morrow, $19.95.) How
a corporate raider bought a going movie company and bled it dry; a cautionary
tale of the 1980's.

SLIM: Memories of a Rich and Imperfect Life, by Slim Keith with Annette Tapert.
(Simon & Schuster, $22.95.) A high-powered, experienced wife (of a film
director, an impresario, a British banker) tells what fun charm, brains and
beauty were to have.

THE COMING GLOBAL BOOM: How to Benefit Now From Tomorrow's Dynamic World
Economy, by Charles R. Morris. (Bantam, $19.95.) An entrepreneur and former
banker argues ingeniously that boom is right around the corner, and that scary
things like Japan and deficits are either neutral or good for us.

THE POLITICS OF RICH AND POOR: Wealth and the American Electorate in the Reagan
Aftermath, by Kevin Phillips. (Random House, $19.95.) The redistribution of
wealth toward the rich in the last 20 years was a Republican policy objective,
not just an accident, Mr. Phillips contends, and a populist reaction is likely.

STALIN'S APOLOGIST: Walter Duranty, The New York Times's Man in Moscow, by S. J.
Taylor. (Oxford University, $24.95.) A beautifully researched life of the
high-living, cynical journalist who helped cover up Stalin's atrocities in the
1930's.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: LIST

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              10 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   July 1, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

New& Noteworthy

BYLINE: By GEORGE JOHNSON

SECTION: Section 7; Page 22, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 939 words



AGENT OF INFLUENCE, by David Aaron. (Avon, $4.95.) A big-time
mergers-and-acquisitions specialist discovers that his client, a wealthy
Frenchman trying to take over the largest communications empire in the United
States, is an agent for the K.G.B. Last year our reviewer, Donovan Fitzpatrick,
called the novel ''an 'econo-thriller,' a frightening journey through the
netherworld of corporate raiding, financial espionage, leveraged buyouts,
scorched-earth maneuvers, poison pill ploys and Wall Street esoterica.''

GREAT PLAINS, by Ian Frazier. (Penguin, $9.95.) From the air, the Great Plains
look as flat and boring as a parquet floor, but zoom in close, Ian Frazier
discovered, and there is a quirky topography that is every bit as valuable and
worthy of protection as a sawtooth mountain range. ''With wit and style, Mr.
Frazier writes about tumbleweeds, Bonnie and Clyde, the weather, cafe
conversation, tepees, MX missiles,'' Sue Hubbell said here last year. ''He
writes about the Mennonites who became, as it were, the inventors of Plains
agriculture when they introduced hard red wheat. He tells about the destruction
of the land that followed and the dust storms.''

THE BRIDESMAID, by Ruth Rendell. (Mysterious Press, $4.95.) Philip, a rather
ordinary young Londoner, finds the woman of his dreams: a crazed goddess named
Senta who proposes that they seal their love by each committing a murder. Ruth
Rendell ''is a diabolically subtle writer,'' our reviewer, Marilyn Stasio, said
last year.

THE ENIGMA OF JAPANESE POWER: People and Politics in a Stateless Nation, by
Karel van Wolferen. (Vintage, $14.95.) Japan is not a democracy, a Dutch
journalist argues, but a dictatorship in disguise: by practicing their low-key
totalitarianism, the business and political leaders of ''the system'' keep a
largely docile populace feeding the engines of economic domination. Last year
our reviewer, Frank B. Gibney, said that, while he found some of the author's
generalizations too sweeping, Karel van Wolferen has written ''a distinguished
and disturbing book about how the world's new economic superpower is run.''

THESE THINGS HAPPEN, by Marian Thurm. (Washington Square/Pocket, $7.95.) A
mother and daughter both going through their second divorces become roommates. A
gay man's lover and former wife both show up at his son's bar mitzvah. In these
and other stories, Marian Thurm provides a ''wry, insightful . . . compendium of
contemporary alternatives to the nuclear family,'' Lisa Zeidner said here in
1988.

MALARIA DREAMS: An African Adventure, by Stuart Stevens. (Atlantic Monthly,
$9.95.) In the midst of an attempt to retrieve a friend's Land-Rover, abandoned
for obscure reasons in the Central African Republic, the author and his female
companion discover that the man they are trying to help may have been a diamond
smuggler and a spy. ''Though 'Malaria Dreams' is ultimately too light to linger
long afterward in the reader's mind, Mr. Stevens emerges from the book not only
as an engaging, picaresque hero, but also as a clever and observant writer,''
Michiko Kakutani said in The Times last year.

EMMA WHO SAVED MY LIFE, by Wilton Barnhardt. (St. Martin's, $4.95.) In this
first novel, the object of the narrator's affections is Emma Gennaro, an
aspiring poet who hovers in his orbit for a decade as he tries to become a
Broadway star. Last year our reviewer, Joseph Olshan, said the story has
''wonderful dividends, including biting remarks . . . and a diverting group of
characters who represent the socioeconomic spectrum of New York City.''

WHERE THE RIVERS RAN BACKWARD, by William E. Merritt. (Anchor/Doubleday, $8.95.)
When this memoir of the Vietnam war was published last year, our reviewer, David
Murray, called it ''a fascinating mosaic of reminiscences about Mr. Merritt's
fellow soldiers, their weapons, their travails and training and their war. Mr.
Merritt has a zoom lens for an eye and a broadcast-quality tape recorder for an
ear.''

THE SHOPLIFTER'S APPRENTICE, by Ellen Lesser. (Washington Square/Pocket Books,
$7.95.) In the title piece of this collection, a woman catches a shoplifter in
action and then spends the night with him. Ellen Lesser ''has a way of conjuring
up scenes that vibrate with subtle tensions,'' Tom Nolan said here last year.
''When this impressive style is matched with subjects and situations of equal
interest, the results are memorable.''

WORDS OF FIRE, DEEDS OF BLOOD: The Mob, the Monarchy, and the French Revolution,
by Olivier Bernier. (Anchor/Doubleday, $12.95.) This fast-paced dramatization of
the French Revolution is ''highly readable'' and the author, who has written
books about Louis XIV, Louis XV and Marie Antoinette, ''has a good eye for
detail,'' David Walton said here last year.

GARDEN OF LIES, by Eileen Goudge. (Signet, $5.95.) Switched in the hospital at
birth, Rachel and Rose grow up in different surroundings - an upper-class
Manhattan neighborhood and an impoverished section of Brooklyn - but they both
become successful career women and even fall in love with the same man. ''The
pleasure of this kind of romantic novel is its very superficiality,'' Regina
Weinreich said here last year. The book is ''a successful entertainment.''

EYEWITNESS TO HISTORY, edited by John Carey. (Avon, $10.95.) In more than 300
firsthand accounts, observers from Thucydides to Neil Armstrong tell what it was
like to make history. Last year one reviewer called this collection ''a bedside
book . . . full of the illuminating, the compelling, the informative and the
simply entertaining.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Ian Frazier (Farrar, Straus & Giroux)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              11 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   July 1, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

DEAN RUSK'S PERSONAL TRUCE

BYLINE: By JOHN LEWIS GADDIS; John Lewis Gaddis teaches history and directs the
Contemporary History Institute at Ohio University. His most recent book is a new
edition of ''Russia, the Soviet Union, and the United States: An Interpretive
History.''

SECTION: Section 7; Page 3, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1634 words



AS I SAW IT
By Dean Rusk as told to Richard Rusk.
Edited by Daniel S. Papp.
Illustrated. 672 pp. New York:
W. W. Norton & Company. $29.95.

This is the memoir that Dean Rusk vowed he would never write. The former
Secretary of State in the Kennedy and Johnson Administrations patterned his
public career, as did so many others of his generation, on the example of George
C. Marshall, the organizer of victory in World War II and, as Secretary of State
between 1947 and 1949, the man who presided over the most creative years in the
history of modern American foreign policy. Because Marshall chose not to write
his memoirs, Mr. Rusk resolved not to either. As a result he has remained an
elusive figure to historians, just as he was to many of his colleagues in
government at the time. One had the feeling, indeed, that he rather enjoyed
being mysterious, for although he regularly granted interviews to scholars and
journalists after leaving the State Department, he was always circumspect and
often cryptic in what he said. He was also known for his emphatic distrust of
tape recorders, and for his insistence that notes be taken - if at all - the
old-fashioned way.

It is a testimony to the persuasive powers of his son, Richard Rusk, that Dean
Rusk has now abandoned Marshall's example and provided us with a 600-plus-page
memoir. ''As I Saw It'' is neither cryptic nor circumspect, and it is based on
many hours in front of the detested machine. It originated, Mr. Rusk tells us,
out of his son's determination to ''make peace with the events of his youth and
of my public service.''

Richard Rusk was going through high school and college while his father was
Secretary of State, a situation that would not have been easy even in the best
of circumstances (we learn that the Rusks averaged an evening meal at home about
once a month during those eight years). But these were in fact the worst of
circumstances, for they were the years of the Vietnam War, an event that set
sons and fathers against each other in ways that are painful to recall even a
quarter of a century later. The relationship between Richard Rusk and his father
fell victim not only to the problems of prominence anyone in public life has to
endure, but also to the particular anguish of that particular time. This book,
in which Richard intersperses his own brief reminiscences with the more
extensive ones of his father, is as much an act of familial reconciliation as it
is an act of benevolence toward those historians who have been trying, all this
time, to understand Dean Rusk.

Mr. Rusk's reputation for inscrutability arose largely from Arthur M.
Schlesinger Jr.'s description of him in ''A Thousand Days,'' one of the earliest
histories of the Kennedy Administration, as sitting quietly at White House
meetings, ''with his Buddha-like face and half-smile,'' taking little part in
the discussions that swirled around him and proclaiming only the blandest of
platitudes when he did. The portrait was unfair, as Mr. Schlesinger admitted it
might be, but it stuck, and it has affected our image of Mr. Rusk ever since.

What makes this book interesting is that Mr. Rusk comes across in it as anything
but bland: he is alternately eloquent, funny, moving, devilish and even earthy.
He recounts with great vividness his upbringing in Cherokee County, Georgia,
where children like him got bad teeth from unbalanced diets, wore underwear made
out of flour sacks and hid snugly under feather beds during thunderstorms (for
who had ever heard of lightning striking a chicken?). He discusses with candor
the racism that influenced his youth, as well as the military tradition that
made R.O.T.C. mandatory - with few complaints, he pointedly adds - in his
Atlanta high school and at Davidson College in North Carolina. He provides an
impressive account of witnessing, as a Rhodes scholar, the rise of fascism in
Germany and of appeasement in England during the 1930's. And he is scrupulously
honest (not all veterans would have been) in assessing his World War II military
service: ''Our time in [the China-Burma-India theater] contributed marginally at
best to the defeat of Japan.''

Among the pleasures of this book are the sharply etched portraits of the people
Mr. Rusk knew in government: Harry Truman, scribbling flip remarks about
''Mousie Dung'' on diplomatic communications; Dean Acheson, who ''really didn't
give a damn about the brown, yellow, black, and red peoples of the world''; U
Thant, the United Nations Secretary General, who ''lied like a sailor''; Andrei
Gromyko, the Soviet foreign minister, garbling an allusion to Mr. Rusk's famous
''eyeball to eyeball'' comment during the Cuban missile crisis, so that it came
out, ''I am looking forward to talking with you balls to balls.'' Nor does Mr.
Rusk spare Mr. Schlesinger and the ''silent Buddha'' image. ''He was right,
because when forty and fifty people were in the room, especially people like
Schlesinger, I kept my mouth shut; I always wondered how secure our
conversations were in Schlesinger's presence.''

Mr. Rusk also provides a shrewd, if modest, assessment of himself. ''I am one of
the few Americans who were close friends of both Dean Acheson and John Foster
Dulles,'' he writes. ''I often wondered whether each suspected this was due to
lack of character on my part.'' He attributes his rise to eminence more to luck
than to skill or ambition; indeed, after the election of 1960 he was still so
remote from the Kennedy circle that when Sargent Shriver, John F. Kennedy's
brother-in-law, telephoned to raise the possibility of a cabinet appointment,
Mr. Rusk's first reaction was to wonder why the President-elect was having a
junior military aide make his calls. After becoming Secretary of State, Mr. Rusk
tried to emulate Marshall's practice of addressing subordinates only by their
last names, but it didn't work: ''I only developed a reputation for being aloof
and enigmatic.''

Then there is the war in Vietnam, which is what provoked Richard Rusk's quest to
understand his father in the first place. The subject is obviously an awkward
one for both of them, even now, but the account Mr. Rusk provides of why he
supported the war - he admits candidly that he was not, until very late, a dove
- is as revealing as any we are likely to get. Two critical points emerge from
it. First, Mr. Rusk took quite literally the United States' obligation to South
Vietnam under the SEATO treaty, even though he admits to having had strong
doubts about the wisdom of that treaty when it was signed. Once such a
commitment had been extended, he believed, Washington had no choice but to honor
it, because otherwise all other commitments would lose credibility. Second, Mr.
Rusk took solace in the view that throughout World War II and the early cold war
the United States had overcome unfavorable odds through sheer persistence. That
lesson of history justified perseverance in Vietnam, despite the repeated
discouragements that characterized the conflict.

In retrospect, Mr. Rusk sees himself as having made two mistakes: he
underestimated the staying power of the North Vietnamese and overestimated that
of the American people. The criticisms are fair, and Mr. Rusk does not spare
himself in making them. But one cannot help wondering - as Mr. Rusk must have
done a hundred times - what Marshall would have done in a similar situation. We
don't have to look very far to find out, for as Mr. Rusk himself indicates, it
was Marshall who rushed to get World War II over with before it destroyed the
institutions of American democracy; it was Marshall who concluded that the
United States should not fight to try to save the biggest domino of all, Chiang
Kai-shek's China. What is left unresolved in this book is how Mr. Rusk could
admire Marshall so thoroughly and yet fail to absorb the central point of
Marshall's strategy, which was never to lose sight of the relationship between
ends and means.

Mr. Rusk quotes his own wife as having once attributed to him an ''infinite
capacity to adjust to the inevitable,'' and perhaps that is part of the
explanation. For one is hard pressed to find instances - apart from his early
support for civil rights - in which Mr. Rusk went against prevailing
orthodoxies; in this sense Mr. Schlesinger's portrait still rings true. Mr. Rusk
was a skillful facilitator of policy, but unlike Marshall he was rarely a maker
of policy. In contemplating his father's 14-hour days and seven-day weeks in the
State Department, his son wonders, ''Where was there time for long-range
planning, for quiet reflection, for reconsidering the directions of foreign
policy as well as operational detail?'' It's a good question, and Richard Rusk
is honest enough to ask, near the end of this book, whether the country - as
well as his father and his family - did not pay a price because of the
difficulty of answering it.

Professional historians generally frown on efforts by the offspring of the
famous to undertake biographical projects like this one: the temptations of
filiopietism too often overshadow the advantages of access and familiarity. But
historians and others would do well to welcome this account, both because
Richard Rusk has not hesitated to ask his father tough questions and because he
was in a better position than Mr. Rusk's previous biographers to press for
answers. The results are not always satisfactory, as Richard himself
acknowledges: Dean Rusk remains elusive in some ways, even to his own son. But
this book does significantly enhance our understanding of Mr. Rusk's strengths
as well as his shortcomings, and the fact that it does so in Mr. Rusk's own
words makes it all the more valuable. It is, because of its honesty, a fitting
tribute from a son to a father, and vice versa.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Dean Rusk with his wife, Virginai, and sons Richard and David in
their Washington home, 1963. (From ''As I Saw It'')

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              12 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   July 1, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THE VOLTAIRE PROJECT: A COLLECTOR'S OBSESSION

BYLINE: By STEPHEN WEISSMAN; Stephen Weissman is a rare-book dealer in New York.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 1, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 3509 words


I'm sure I must have heard his name a few times as I was growing up, but I don't
think I ever actually read anything by Voltaire until the early 1960's when, as
a halfhearted graduate student of English literature, carefully husbanding a
student deferment during the Vietnam War days, I was assigned an essay comparing
''Candide'' and Samuel Johnson's ''Rasselas.'' Both books had first appeared in
1759. I went on to learn a good deal more about Dr. Johnson, but Voltaire had
served his purpose, and was forgotten.

By 1965 the Army was, for various reasons, no longer a threat to me, and I
abandoned a half-finished dissertation and came to New York to earn my living as
a dealer in rare books. About two years ago Voltaire resurfaced. There was no
special reason for his reappearance beyond a chance accumulation on my shelves
of about a dozen 18th-century English printings, not from any plan, but simply
because no one seemed to want them very much. It must have been a slow day at
the shop, and I remember thinking that it might be rather amusing to build a
small collection of Voltaire as he was published in England during the course of
his lifetime. His Continental editions I rejected as being too numerous and
outside my usual area of interest. The first step, then, was to learn the limits
of my chosen universe.

This would have been a slightly cumbersome task 25 years ago, but technology has
gradually made its way into the antiquarian book world, and I now had access to
some rather powerful tools, such as the Eighteenth-Century Short Title Catalogue
(ESTC), a data base available in most large libraries, whose purpose is to
record every book, pamphlet and broadside printed in English or, for
foreign-language texts, in the English-speaking world, between the years 1701
and 1800, and to provide the locations of actual copies where possible. And
across my desk was a metal cabinet containing more than 9,000 microfiches. This
is the National Union Catalogue, compiled over the years at the Library of
Congress. This catalogue tries to list every book printed up to 1955 of which
copies may be found in the institutional libraries of North America. It is not
complete, or wholly accurate, but it is impressive nonetheless. There are almost
4,200 entries for Voltaire alone, each representing a different printing. With
these, and a few lesser sources, I was able to compile a list of about 450
printings of Voltaire up to the end of the 18th century. Now all I had to do was
find them.

I was a bit surprised by the size of my project, but in a way this was
encouraging, because it meant, if nothing else, that Voltaire had been of
substantial interest to his English contemporaries. A similar list, say, for
Henry Fielding, whose dates (1707-54) fall entirely within those of Voltaire
(1694-1778), would be no longer, and Fielding was by any standard one of the
great literary successes of the period. And British as well. The profusion of
Voltaire also meant that his books were not too hard to find, and by the end of
a year I had accumulated some 40 titles in about 75 different printings. It was
now time to look more closely at what I had, and I entered into a world of often
bewildering complexity.

Take ''Candide,'' for a start. During 1759 no fewer than three different English
translations had appeared, two in London and one in Edinburgh; before the year
was out one of these had gone into a second edition and another had been pirated
in Dublin, where cheap reprints were often manufactured for export to the
colonies. There were even two London printings in French, both apparently
produced by a bookseller named John Nourse, with whom Voltaire seems to have
maintained some contact through his Geneva printers, the Cramers.

This international connection has one surprising consequence. We know from
surviving documents that the text of ''Candide'' was first set in type in Geneva
in January 1759. A copy was then dispatched to Nourse in London for reprinting
and distribution to the French-reading English market. The original was followed
closely, and the two editions indeed look much the same; each has 299 pages, and
each has a leafy ornament on the title page with a little post horn sticking out
at the top. If one puts the two side by side it is not hard to see differences
in typeface and layout, but superficially the resemblance is close.

But there is a catch. Voltaire, like many an author before and since, made some
last-minute changes after his text had already been sent off to England. As a
result the two editions are not, after all, quite the same. The most notable
difference occurs on page 242, where the London printings have a paragraph
beginning, ''Candide etait afflige. . . .'' This passage goes on to speak in a
rather critical way of contemporary German poets and has been interpreted as an
oblique attack on Frederick the Great, the homosexual autocrat of Prussia with
whom Voltaire had a long and involved intellectual relationship. Voltaire
apparently had second thoughts about this paragraph, and it does not appear in
any surviving copy of the Geneva edition; only the London printings remain as
testimony to his first intentions. The 1759 English translations are from the
London text, and somewhere in England there may survive a copy of the
French-language Geneva edition in its unrevised state. This would be a very
valuable little object indeed. Exactly what it would be worth is anyone's guess
- $50,000?

Actually, Voltaire seems not to have had all that much regard for ''Candide,''
for he does not mention the book in any of his autobiographical writings. Unlike
his younger rival Rousseau, Voltaire was not by nature an autobiographer, but he
has left behind two accounts of himself. The first, his ''Memoires,'' was
written in 1759 as well, but not published until after his death; it largely
concerns his turbulent relations with Frederick. The second and more interesting
account was published in 1776, and calls itself a historical commentary on the
author of ''La Henriade,'' an early epic poem that Voltaire regarded as one of
his major accomplishments. The narrative is entirely in the third person and
purports to be by an outsider, possibly Voltaire's secretary, Jean Louis
Wagniere, but the style of the master is unmistakable. It was quickly translated
into English (1777), but thereafter disappeared from print, at least in its pure
form, until it was resurrected by Theodore Besterman as an appendix to his
slightly quirky but highly readable biography of Voltaire published in 1969.

The first edition of this second autobiography proclaims itself on the title
page as having been printed in Basel by the heirs of one Paul Duker, but all
this is completely untrue. Like ''Candide,'' the book was actually printed in
Geneva, again by the Cramers. In terms of publishing, we live now in a
comparatively straightforward world. If a book says it was printed in Paris, or
London, or New York, that is probably where it was indeed printed. But in the
French-speaking world of the 18th century, freedom of the press was at best a
vision and censorship was an industry. False imprints were commonplace, and came
to be almost a literary habit; authors' names were frequently omitted, and were
revealed only by word of mouth or were inferred from style and content. Imprints
were employed for philosophical effect, or to amuse. ''Philadelphie,'' the city
of brotherly love, was often used to justify controversial, say,
antiauthoritarian texts. Diderot's racy novel ''Les Bijoux Indiscrets''
announces itself as emanating from ''Monomopata,'' wherever that might be.
Exactly why Voltaire and his printers chose Basel for this particular book is
not clear, but it is not in itself surprising.

I happened upon a copy one day in London. In theory it was beyond the scope of
my collection, as it was printed on the Continent, but it was not very
expensive, and the binding was clearly 18th-century English. I thought it might
be interesting to compare the French text with the English translation, which I
had already acquired elsewhere. So I bought it and added it to my accumulation.
When I came later to look at this French text more closely, I discovered to my
astonishment that I could prove it had been printed not in Basel or Geneva but
in England. In general it is not all that easy to look at a European book
printed in 1776 and be certain exactly where it was produced; as I have said,
the information on the title page can often be misleading. But much English
printing of the period has one odd feature that makes it easy to identify.

The giveaway is what is known as a press figure, a single numeral, say a ''2''
or a ''6,'' which appears in the lower margin of the occasional pages,
underneath the text. These apparently meaningless press figures were largely
disregarded by the scholarly world until the 1950's, when it was first noticed
that two copies of what seemed to be a single edition might well have a
different pattern of numerals. The explanation of such variations was simple but
unexpected. It seems that these numbers were used by the employees of English
printing shops, the compositors and pressmen, to keep track of exactly what work
they had done, and that what might appear at first glance to be a single edition
was often two, or even more, with the type partly or wholly reset, often with
revisions to the text, but with no obvious indication of change beyond the
telltale numerical signatures of the workmen.

The patterns of these press figures are still not fully understood; some books
have lots of them, some have only one. But one thing is certain. If a book has
press figures, it was printed in England. There are a few Irish and American
examples, but these can pretty much be ignored. No book printed in France,
Holland, Switzerland, Germany or Italy has press figures. It's as simple as
that.

It turns out that there are really two ''Basle'' printings of Voltaire's
autobiography, one indeed Swiss, as has long been known, and one - mine -
printed in England. Evidently Voltaire was interested in having his works
printed in London, and there was a sufficient audience there to read them in the
original French. And the London booksellers chose, as often as not, to provide
their customers with what looked like the real thing. English publishers had no
other reason to be devious or secretive, but I've now found another ''Basle''
title, as well as one that purports to have been printed in Paris, one in
Amsterdam and seven or eight that, like ''Candide,'' have no place of printing
at all on the title page.

To the extent that Voltaire can have known about the dissemination of his works
in England, he must have been pleased, for he was a great Anglophile. As a young
man Voltaire, whose origins were fairly humble, found that his talent and wit
allowed him to mingle with the nobility. But one day in 1726 he got rather above
himself and became involved in a quarrel over lineage with the chevalier de
Rohan, who proceeded to have him pummeled by a band of thugs. A sense of fair
play was not a conspicuous feature of the French class system, and Voltaire
found himself confined to the Bastille. In the end he agreed to resolve the
affair by making himself scarce, and in May he left for England, where he stayed
for more than two years.

Voltaire seems to have had quite a good time. He quickly set about learning
English, and by 1727 he was able to publish a slim volume in his new language,
''printed by Samuel Jallasson, in Prujean's Court Old Baily, and sold by the
booksellers of London and Westminster'' (thus reads the title page). As he says
in his preface, this rather charming little book represents an ''attempt to
write in a language, which he cannot pronounce at all, and which he hardly
understands in conversation.'' Besides my own copy, I can now locate 15 others,
four in England, two in Canada and nine in the United States. My guess is that
the print run must have been 500 or 750 copies, and that of these perhaps
another 20 or so survive. It is not quite a rarity, but it is not common either.

The text consists of two essays. The first deals with ''the civil wars of
France, extracted from curious manuscripts,'' and is Voltaire's initial effort
at what became a lifelong preoccupation, a desire to separate history from
theology, and to extract the past from documentary evidence, rather than from
the received wisdom of the Bible or the Roman Catholic Church. (Almost 30 years
were to pass before the appearance of what is perhaps Voltaire's most important
book, his 1756 ''Essai sur les Moeurs,'' a treatise on the general history and
state of Europe which is a kind of universal history based upon principles that
were soon to be used in another masterpiece of the Enlightenment, Gibbon's
''Decline and Fall,'' which began appearing in 1776.) The second essay is on
''the epick poetry of the European nations from Homer down to Milton.'' Voltaire
turns out to be a great admirer of Milton, and he displays as well a familiarity
with Dryden and other Restoration poets and with such contemporaries as Addison
and Pope. Voltaire was always proud of his knowledge of English literature. In a
letter to Horace Walpole written in the 1760's, he says: ''I can assure you that
before me nobody in France knew English poetry.''

This was not an idle boast. Among so many other things he was the first
Frenchman to translate more than a few words of Shakespeare, who remained
virtually unknown in France until the end of the 18th century. Voltaire's own
interest in Shakespeare's plays was persistent and intense, but he never quite
managed to feel at home with them. He knew that the language of ''Hamlet'' was
remarkable, but he remained too French to overlook the breach of decorum and
principle that permitted gravediggers to appear onstage. Shakespeare forever
remained in Voltaire's mind an inspired barbarian.

All this first appears in his chief book on England, his ''Letters Concerning
the English Nation,'' published originally in London in 1733 and in Paris in
1734, and succinctly described by one critic as ''the first bomb thrown at the
ancien regime.'' At present I've only managed to find a second edition of 1741,
albeit ''with large additions,'' and a Glasgow reprint of 1752, but I am most
anxious to acquire a first, because it is a remarkable book - worth $500 to
$700.

Besides literature, Voltaire describes English Government, English finance,
English science and English philosophy. His ''Letters'' introduced a wide French
audience to the ideas of John Locke and the theorems of Isaac Newton. And these,
as we now know, were to have a profound effect on humanity's view of itself.
Voltaire later published his own popularization of Newton's ''Principia.'' He
had an abiding interest in these discoveries, and it is perhaps no coincidence
that the first woman with whom he had a lasting alliance, Madame du Chatelet,
turned out in the end to be more interested in science than in sex.

As much as anything, the ''Letters '' deal with religion. There was, of course,
a state religion in England and certain restrictions still applied, but compared
to France, where the St. Bartholomew's Day massacre of Protestants was
remembered and Jesuit and Jansenist vied for power, the atmosphere was
remarkably tolerant. Voltaire at one point gives a vivid description of the
London stock exchange: ''There the Jew, the Mahometan, and the Christian
transact together as tho' they all profess'd the same religion, and give the
name of infidel to none but bankrupts.''

Voltaire's description of England was quickly recognized, and rightly so, as an
implied criticism of his own country. The book was soon banned in France, but it
was reprinted frequently and circulated widely, and served to solidify
Voltaire's reputation as France's greatest writer.

Great he remained, but he remained dangerous as well, and the latter part of his
life was spent in virtual exile at Ferney in the canton of Geneva, at a safe
distance from Paris - safe for him and safe, or so it was thought, for the
establishment. From this outpost he produced a blizzard of print, attacking in
turn the nobility, the clergy, the French legal system and such favorite targets
as the literal interpretation of the Bible, whose details he mimicked in his
satirical fiction.

Most of all he condemned fanaticism, in all its manifestations. In 1761,
Marc-Antoine Calas, the 23-year-old eldest son of a Toulouse cloth merchant, was
found hanged in his father's shop, a probable suicide. The Calas family, who
were Huguenots, claimed that the young man had been murdered by an intruder, as
suicides were at that time subject to humiliating mock-trials and ignominious
ritual executions. A rumor soon spread that Marc-Antoine had been about to
convert to Catholicism, and that his family had strangled him to prevent him
from embracing the true faith of France. The father, Jean, was brought to trial,
convicted and put to death in a particularly unpleasant way (broken on the
wheel). When this case came to his attention, Voltaire fastened upon it as an
outrageous example of what he called ''infamy'' (''l'infame''), and he turned it
into one of the great causes celebres, a kind of precursor of the Dreyfus
affair.

The case also dramatized for Voltaire the absurdities and inadequacies of the
French legal code and he became a vocal champion of victims of judicial
perversion, often going to great lengths to gather evidence, hire lawyers and,
especially, generate publicity. It goes without saying that Voltaire also used
the Calas case as the basis of philosophical and anti-religious propaganda. Once
again his voice was heard in England. I have recently acquired a copy of a tract
printed in London in 1762, entitled ''Original Pieces Relative to the Trial and
Execution of Mr. John Calas . . . with a Preface, and Remarks on the Whole, by
M. de Voltaire.'' This 100-page pamphlet appears to be quite rare. Thus far I
can locate only four other copies: at the British Library; in Manchester,
England; in Urbana, Ill.; and at Harvard University.

Now that I have gotten involved with Voltaire through these old books, I have
begun to see him everywhere, to the extent that my wife sometimes cautions me on
an excessive preoccupation with ''the V word.'' But his name does now come up
constantly, and I am amazed at how I can have overlooked him in the past. He is
mentioned any number of times in the pages of Stendhal's ''Red and the Black,''
and he plays a significant role in the concluding passages of Tolstoy's ''War
and Peace.'' Reading the recently published letters of Leonard Woolf the other
day, I found that Woolf took with him to Ceylon, where he worked for several
years as a civil servant, 70 volumes of Voltaire, presumably the magisterial
collected edition in French printed at Kehl, Germany, from 1785 to 1789, a set
still readily available despite the French Government's immediate attempt to
suppress it in a last gesture of intolerance just before the Revolution.

More recent references to Voltaire seem less common, and predominantly academic
in orientation. There is an active Voltaire Foundation at Oxford, which is
gradually producing a complete edition of his writings in French ''in
approximately 150 volumes.''

But I do not recall having heard his name in ordinary conversation, and if I
bring it up myself, I get a slightly blank response. Perhaps we need a new
Voltaire. Fanaticism, injustice, hypocrisy and cant, after all, are hardly
things of the past. But the thought of such a resurrection is rather daunting,
as the requirements are many: the new Voltaire would need to be the world's most
widely acclaimed playwright, a major poet, a serious but popular novelist, a
popular interpreter of Albert Einstein, Werner Heisenberg and Stephen Hawking, a
philosopher, a celebrated legal advocate and, perhaps more than anything, a
satirist with the ability to inspire both laughter and fear.

This encounter with Voltaire has set me to contemplation, on his terms, of our
own times. Some of his concerns are still with us and as virulent as ever -
selfishness and greed, intolerance, the misuse of power in the name of religion
or national pride. Other problems would no doubt seem new, such as the
proliferation of drugs, the destruction of the environment and the development
of nuclear weapons. But the biggest change would perhaps be the rate of change
itself, the accelerating growth of humanity and humanity's store of knowledge.
There is simply so much to know now, so much to read, so much to see. Evolution,
a notion Voltaire would have been much taken by, is a very slow process after
all, and we have ''evolved'' hardly at all since the 18th century and have
little more than new technology to cope with all that is laid before us. I'd
like to take Voltaire reborn and set him down in the midst of a modern airport
on a busy day, and see if he finds it civilization or swarm.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawng: Voltaire (Darren Ching) (pg. 23)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              13 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   July 2, 1990, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Political Memo;
About-Face on Taxes Is No Surprise to Public

BYLINE: By RICHARD L. BERKE, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 1117 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 1


While President Bush conceded last week that he was now vulnerable to charges
that he had broken his word, his turnabout on taxes appears to have fulfilled
public expectations.

As popular as Mr. Bush is, 7 in 10 Americans responding to a New York Times/CBS
News Poll several weeks ago said they had expected him to abandon his steadfast
''no new taxes'' vow and ask Congress to raise taxes.

And if the voters were anticipating Mr. Bush's reversal all along, they had
ample precedent on their side: in Presidential politics, unkept campaign pledges
have long been the rule.

A 'Mutual Con Game'

''Campaign promises are made to be broken,'' said David Wise, who wrote ''The
Politics of Lying,'' which was published at the height of the Watergate
scandals. ''The voter wants to hear pie-in-the-sky, and the politician knows
that he or she has to make promises to get elected. So it's a kind of mutual con
game, although neither side will ever admit that.''

At a news conference on Friday where he responded to a barrage of questions
about his reversal, Mr. Bush said he expected ''to hear some campaign words
played back to me.'' And there certainly has been an uproar from Republican
candidates who contend that the President robbed them of a campaign issue this
year. But the fact that most Presidents get away with breaking their campaign
vows clearly entered Mr. Bush's thinking before he shattered his 1988 campaign
pledge on taxes.

''I've gone back and done a little research and seen these firestorms come and
go,'' Mr. Bush said at his news conference. ''That's the American system.''

Lincoln and Slavery

Mr. Bush went so far back as to cite Abraham Lincoln, who in freeing the slaves,
broke a campaign pledge.

Horace W. Busby, an aide to President Lyndon B. Johnson, seemed to agree with
Mr. Bush's point that the public is willing to forgive a President who changes
his mind. ''You get these things in Washington,'' he said. ''It doesn't cause
people to run out in the street and tear out their hair and say, 'The President
went back on his word!' People are quite realistic.''

Indeed, Lincoln is but one example in a long line of Presidents, some revered
and some despised, who went back on their campaign pledges.

Roosevelt and Deficits

Franklin D. Roosevelt promised in a 1932 campaign speech in Pittsburgh to
balance the budget. He never did. Advising Roosevelt on how to explain his
broken promise, a Presidential aide is said to have told him, ''Deny you were
ever in Pittsburgh.''

The budget-balancing problem haunted several other occupants of the Oval Office
who made, and reneged on, similar pledges.

Which Presidents went back on their word more than others? It is hard to say,
because promises differ so much in their magnitude and in the way the pledge was
made.

President Johnson, on the stump in 1964, declared that he was not ''about to
send American boys 9,000 or 10,000 miles away from home to do what Asian boys
ought to be doing for themselves.'' He did, of course, and the Vietnam War was
the most important factor in his decision not to seek re-election four years
later.

Or President Richard M. Nixon's secret plan to end the Vietnam War? Jimmy
Carter's promise to remove price ceilings on natural gas? Ronald Reagan's
promise not to negotiate for the release of hostages?

'I'll Never Lie'

Sounding almost evangelical in his 1976 election campaign, Jimmy Carter
promised, ''I'll never lie to you,'' a refrain he repeated at least as often as
Mr. Bush declared, ''Read my lips, no new taxes,'' in his campaign 12 years
later.

In his zeal to portray himself as the essence of integrity, Mr. Carter at times
went overboard. Before he took office, he ordered his transition team to draw up
a list of his campaign commitments. It took up 112 pages.

Jody Powell, who was Mr. Carter's press secretary, recalls that to his
consternation reporters obtained the document - which some newspapers titled
''Promises, Promises'' - and forever tried to hold Mr. Carter accountable to it.

The effort backfired, giving the press ammunition to hold Mr. Carter
accountable. As two writers who researched Mr. Carter's pledges wrote at the end
of his term in 1980, ''Today, much of the President's official list of promises
reads like a page out of an H. G. Wells science-fiction novel.''

No President has since been known to dare compile such a large list of his
utterances, but Walter F. Mondale, the Democratic nominee in 1984, did try to
follow the Carter model and stake out a position of being the more honest
candidate in his challenge to Mr. Reagan.

Honest Walter Mondale

''Taxes will go up,'' Mr. Mondale said in his speech accepting the Democratic
nomination. ''Let's tell the truth. It must be done. It must be done. Mr. Reagan
will raise taxes, and so will I. He won't tell you. I just did.'' Mr. Mondale
lost 49 states.

Mr. Reagan should get his due, however, for keeping two out of three major
promises: As he vowed, he increased military spending and he did not increase
taxes. But he never balanced the budget.

Although Presidents do not seem to suffer significant political damage for going
back on their word, Mr. Bush may face greater danger than his predecessors.

Roosevelt could deny being in Pittsburgh. But Mr. Bush cannot deny being at the
Republican National Convention in New Orleans or dozens of other cities where he
repeated the ''no new taxes'' pledge.

''Bush made the promise so flatly, and dramatized it so sharply, that it became
fixed in the public mind,'' said James MacGregor Burns, the political historian.
''If he continues to exhibit vacillation and shifting leadership, this could be
used as a specific example of his wavering.''

That is what Mr. Bush's aides fear the most.

As a White House official said shortly after the President made his statement
public on taxes: ''The deepest charge is that he is a fraud, that there was a
misrepresentation in what he did, that he illegitimized the Presidency. What we
need to do is answer that: that he made the judgment for the good of the
country.''

No Way to Keep Pledge

To some, that concern may be legitimate. After all, candidates sometimes find
that when they take office, making good on a pledge can be difficult, if not
impossible.

Nelson W. Polsby, director of the Institute of Governmental Studies at the
University of California at Berkeley, says candidates ought to know better than
to make promises they cannot keep. Yet in Mr. Bush's case, Mr. Polsby was
pleased to hear the President's reversal on taxes.

''Think of how much worse it would be,'' he said, ''if we had irresponsible
governing on top of irresponsible campaigning.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              14 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   July 2, 1990, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Big Aims, Small Means on Cambodia

SECTION: Section A; Page 14, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 458 words


Time is the most certain enemy of the Bush Administration's Cambodia policy. The
longer the current diplomatic stalemate continues, the closer dreaded Khmer
Rouge forces come to battlefield victory, and the worse the prospects grow for
free elections and a role for the non-Communist forces led by Prince Sihanouk.

Despite last week's House vote to provide $7 million in additional ''non-lethal
aid'' to non-Communist forces, doubts on Capitol Hill are growing, and the
pressure is now on Washington to accelerate the quest for a diplomatic solution.
That can be done only if the White House recognizes two points:

The United States simply does not have the means, military or political, to
impose a solution.

To avoid the worst outcome, a Khmer Rouge victory, it's better to openly promote
a coalition between the Vietnamese-backed Government in Phnom Penh and the
non-Communist forces led by Prince Sihanouk.

It's hard to quarrel with the Administration's judgment that neither the
Vietnamese-style Communists around Prime Minister Hun Sen nor the revived Khmer
Rouge killers of Pol Pot are a happy choice. But Pol Pot is far worse. And
further fighting only makes a military solution, excluding the non-Communists, a
certainty. The non-Communists are not a significant military factor; an early
diplomatic settlement is their only hope. The Bush Administration insists on a
settlement that will simultaneously deny Hanoi the fruits of conquest and insure
a large political role for the non-Communists. That's a dangerously unrealistic
negotiating stance, considering that no one believes the U.S. will once again
commit military resources in Indochina. And it could leave the non-Communist
Cambodians the major losers.

Diplomacy is proceeding, ineffectively, along four tracks: (a) among the various
Cambodian factions; (b) between Vietnam and China, chief sponsors of the two
main armies; (c) among the five permanent members of the U.N. Security Council,
and (d) among various combinations.

The first two approaches have broken down in an apparently futile search for a
comprehensive solution. The third, the so-called Perm Five talks, continues but
with diminishing momentum. And the fourth, the partial talks, promoted by
Thailand, has produced promising ideas only to be thwarted by the chimera of a
comprehensive solution. Meanwhile, Khmer Rouge armies keep advancing.

Washington needs to respond to the danger of a renewed genocide by scaling down
its negotiating goals and pressing urgently for diplomatic consensus.

For more than three decades the U.S. has sown grand illusions in Indochina and
reaped disaster. There's no shame in belatedly discovering the virtue of
policies that match available means to desirable ends.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              15 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   July 2, 1990, Monday, Late Edition - Final

James P. Hendrick, 88, Former Federal Official

SECTION: Section D; Page 10, Column 2; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 247 words


James Pomeroy Hendrick, a lawyer who was an adviser to Eleanor Roosevelt and
later became deputy assistant secretary of the Treasury, died yesterday in
Conway, Mass. He was 88 years old and lived in St. Croix in the Virgin Islands.

His daughter, Alice Hardigg, said Mr. Hendrick died of a self-inflicted gunshot
wound.

He served in Federal posts for nearly 30 years, beginning in the War Department
in 1941. As a civilian assistant to the Secretary of War, Robert P. Patterson,
he rose to the rank of colonel. In the State Department from 1946 to 1948, he
was a principal adviser to Mrs. Roosevelt, contributing to creation of the
United Nations Children's Fund -Unicef - and to the drafting of the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights.

In the late 1940's, he was named special foreign aid representative in charge of
North Vietnam. He was deputy assistant secretary of the Treasury from 1962 to
1969 after nine years of serving in a number of other Treasury positions. After
leaving the Treasury Department, he moved to the Virgin Islands, where he was
head of the parole board until retiring in 1988.

Mr. Hendrick, who was born in Wainscott, L.I., received a bachelor's and a law
degree from Yale and a degree from Corpus Christi College in Cambridge, England.

In addition to his daughter, Alice, who lives in Conway, he is survived by his
two sons, Arthur Hendrick of McLean, Va., and Robert Hendrick of New York City;
eight grandchildren and two great-grandchildren.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              16 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 3, 1990, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Economic Pulse; Southern California;
Test for Peace Dividend: Boom or Bust in California

BYLINE: By ROBERT REINHOLD, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 2971 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES


Southern California, perhaps more than any other region, offers a clear test of
the American economy's capacity to convert from military to peaceful purposes.

For years it has been the center of the nation's aerospace and weapons industry,
seemingly invulnerable to the economic vicissitudes that in the 1980's hit the
once-booming economies of Texas and then the Northeast.

But an economic slowdown of uncertain proportions and duration has gripped this
region in response to the easing of the Communist threat in Europe. And it comes
against a backdrop of other problems in recent years, including growing
congestion, soaring housing prices and increasingly costly environmental rules
that have made this region less competitive for industry.

A crucial question is whether it can make up for lost business by taking
advantage of the growing worldwide demand for commercial aircraft and expanding
its space exploration industries.

Pentagon Spending Peaked

Pentagon spending here peaked three years ago, and deeper reductions have caused
recent announcements of layoffs by the region's major military contractors -
including the Lockheed Corporation, the Northrop Corporation and the McDonnell
Douglas Corporation - shaking confidence throughout California and sparking
debate over whether such industries and their workers can readily shift to other
work.

Aerospace and high-technology industries in the five-county Los Angeles basin -
which embraces Los Angeles, Orange, Ventura, Riverside and San Bernardino
counties - employ nearly 420,000 people, or 7 percent of the region's 6.2
million jobholders, double that of the rest of the country. And in San Diego to
the south, with the largest military presence in the country, one-fifth of the
county's annual output of goods and services, or gross product, depends directly
on military procurement and salaries.

Signs of a Downturn

While few economists here contend the region is sliding into a recession
comparable to the Northeast's, there is a growing perception that the era is
over when Southern California could rely on a laissez-faire business ethic
leavened by good climate, balmy beaches and proximity to the Pacific Rim and
Latin countries. The unrelenting optimism of the booming 1980's has turned into
caution for the 90's.

Signs of the difficulties are apparent along the coast from Santa Barbara to San
Diego. Retailers complain that sales are flat, permits for new home construction
have plunged, banks are tightening credit rules, unemployment rates are creeping
up and the superheated housing market has stabilized, with prices falling in
some areas as home sales drop.

In addition, an unexpected slowdown in the growth of tax revenue has forced Los
Angeles to impose new taxes, like a 10 percent levy on people who park in lots
and garages, and to cut municipal spending.

California is far less dependent on military spending than it was during the
Vietnam War, after which it suffered a much more severe recession than the rest
of the country. The military's contribution to the state's gross product has
dropped to 8 percent this year, from 15 percent in 1968. But the state's more
diversified economy is now hobbled by the effects of huge growth - high housing
costs, costly smog-control rules, traffic congestion, deteriorating schools,
crime and drug abuse - that have made it more difficult to attract and retain
industry.

'Everything Points To Slower Growth'

While Northern California shares many of the problems plaguing the Los Angeles
basin, the situation is more pronounced in Southern California simply because of
its large population.

''Everything points now to slower growth in California and Los Angeles,'' said
David G. Hensley, director of California forecasting at the University of
California at Los Angeles Business Forecasting Project.

''It is true we have moved away from defense,'' Mr. Hensley said, ''but we must
take into account the other negative things that have developed - traffic,
crime, costs, pollution, environmental regulations. Defense cuts in this
environment will have a different effect than 20 years ago. People underestimate
the importance of that segment.''

Mr. Hensley predicts that job growth in the state will drop from its recent rate
of 500,000 new jobs a year to 300,000 this year, which would be the slowest rise
since 1982.

Jack A. Kyser, chief economist at the Los Angeles Area Chamber of Commerce,
said: ''All this is making people think they've got to do a good old-fashioned
job of economic development. Before, we ran by remote control; growth just
happened. Some of the impact of the aerospace layoffs has been soft so far, by
attrition. But as we go along, we'll see more and more outright layoffs, and
that is very unnerving. People are very concerned.''

The latest blow came in early June when McDonnell Douglas, grappling with delays
and losses in its new MD-80 passenger jet and with falling Pentagon spending for
warplanes, announced budget reductions that were expected to add another 10,000
layoffs to the 7,000 workers it already planned to let go from its Southern
California plants.

Mr. Kyser estimates that the Los Angeles basin suffered a loss of 12,500
high-paying jobs in aerospace, electronic components, navigation and other
high-technology fields in 1989 and predicts a loss of 15,000 more this year.

Tumultuous Years, Then the Downturn

The slowdown comes after what was probably the most tumultuous decade in
California since the Gold Rush. Los Angeles boomed. Spurred in large measure by
the military buildup under the Reagan Administration and the success of the 1984
Olympic Games here, the area blossomed well beyond its origins in the
entertainment industry. By 1988, the Department of Defense was spending a fifth
of its budget, $57.2 billion, in California.

The largest share went to Southern California, where factories cranked out
fighter planes and began work on Stealth bombers and Star Wars projects. Those
programs, in turn, spawned a galaxy of more than 10,000 subcontractors. In 1986,
the Los Angeles basin accounted for 5.6 percent of the jobs in the United
States, but nearly 15 percent of the jobs in military areas.

The basin's economy was further stimulated by a surge in foreign and domestic
migration to the region. In the last decade, its population grew at more than
twice the national rate, to 14.1 million from 11.5 million, making it larger
than any state but California, New York and Texas. At the same time, the region
added 1.3 million non-farm jobs, a 27 percent increase, though its manufacturing
base has been slipping in recent years.

The commercial ports of entry here became the nation's main funnel for cars,
trucks, stereos and other products from Japan, South Korea and the rest of the
Pacific Rim. International trade tripled in value over the decade, to $101.4
billion in 1989, making Los Angeles the second busiest customs district after
the New York-New Jersey area, with $117.8 billion in 1989.

The once-sleepy downtown of Los Angeles exploded with a construction boom, with
Japanese interests owning 30 percent of the skyline's newer structures. In the
last decade, construction permits were issued for $15 billion worth of office
buildings and nearly $9 billion for industrial buildings in the Los Angeles
area.

Meanwhile, housing prices spurted. The median price for new detached houses rose
to $369,000 by mid-1989, from $152,000 in mid-1986, and today only about one in
seven households can afford to buy a median-priced home in Orange and Los
Angeles counties.

Tremors in Europe Shake West Coast

But the tremors caused by world events have shaken the region. Among the
projects under scrutiny by Congress and the Bush Administration are the C-17
cargo plane meant to ferry American troops to Europe, which is being developed
by McDonnell Douglas in Long Beach; the Stealth bomber, which is being built by
Northrop, and Star Wars research.

Also vulnerable are the Long Beach Naval Shipyard, with 4,000 workers, the Los
Angeles Air Force Base, with 3,000 jobs, and the Aerospace Corporation in El
Segundo, a kind of high-technology research organization for Government military
security that employs about 3,000 people.

In all, 10 military bases and installations have been marked by the Defense
Department as candidates for closures or staff reductions.

Lockheed, with its contracts for the Stealth and the P-3 antisubmarine craft
running down, announced it would lay off 2,000 to 2,500 workers and would move
its Aeronautical Systems Company to Marietta, Ga., with a loss of another 4,500
aircraft jobs in the Burbank area. Northrop said it would cut 2,700 jobs in the
area because of likely Federal cuts in the Stealth program.

And San Diego was shaken in June when Defense Secretary Dick Cheney proposed
eliminating 20 ships, or almost one-fourth of the Navy fleet stationed there,
including 11 of the 15 nuclear-class attack submarines based there.

While most of the layoffs among military contractors have not yet begun, effects
are already apparent. The unemployment rate for Los Angeles County was 5.4
percent in April, up from 3.7 percent a year earlier. The Southern California
Gas Company, serving 56 percent of the California population, says new gas
hookups are running 10 percent below last year.

Retail to Realty, A Softer Economy

''Retailers throughout California have seen fairly soft sales for the last
several months,'' said E. Harlin Smith, a vice president of Carter Hawley Hale
Stores Inc., a Los Angeles-based company with 43 Broadway Southern California
department stores in the region. He said sales from February through May were up
a negligible six-tenths of a percentage point, as against an 8.6 percent
increase a year ago. Sales tax receipts in Los Angeles are growing by only a
third of normal this year.

The real estate market has also cooled. ''For the moment, California has priced
itself out; the average guy cannot afford to buy anymore,'' said Michael S.
Salkin, senior vice present of the real estate division at First Interstate Bank
of California in Los Angeles. ''There needs to be a pause so incomes can catch
up.''

Both Mr. Salkin and John Oliver Wilson, senior economist for the Bank of
America, see no overall appreciation in California real estate this year.

In April, the median resale price of a single-family home in California dropped
2 percent from the previous year, to $197,107 from $201,034, according to the
California Association of Realtors, with much sharper drops in high-priced
coastal areas like Santa Barbara, which fell 8 percent. Permits for construction
of new single-family and multifamily housing dropped by 29 percent in April, as
against 1989, according to the Construction Industry Research Board.

Commercial vacancy rates in downtown Los Angeles are about 15 percent and
rising, and they are running about 20 percent in some parts of Orange County, as
against the national average of 21.3 percent. Mr. Salkin said banks are taking a
''good hard look'' at new building projects.

But few expect a fall in real estate like that in New York. ''At the end of the
day, California continues to be tremendously popular,'' Mr. Salkin said. ''Land
is scarce. We do not see a debacle.''

The crucial question is whether the reductions in military spending will
precipitate the kind of downturn brought on by the contraction of the securities
industry in New York.

Southern California suffered a body blow two decades ago when the Vietnam War
ended. Employment in the state's aircraft and missile industries dropped by
120,000 jobs in four years, and unemployment rates swelled to three percentage
points above the national average, drastically slowing migration to the region.

Despite Cutbacks, Some Sign of Hope

But many analysts argue that the region is far more diversified and far less
dependent on the military today, with fewer than 4 percent of jobs directly
dependent on the Pentagon. ''Over all, I see a slowdown in areas impacted by
defense cuts, but those are isolated areas,'' said Mr. Wilson of the Bank of
America. ''But we are not talking about a shakeout like the late 60's or early
70's.''

C. Lance Barnett, chief economist for the California Department of Commerce,
said the local economy will be buffered by strong demand for commercial
aircraft, electronics and space and communications products. ''While caution is
warranted, we are not in imminent danger,'' he said.

A recent study by the Southern California Association of Governments was also
confident. It calculated that if military spending continued at current levels,
the region would create 1.26 million new jobs by 1995. Then it assumed that the
spending was cut back to 1980 levels by 1995, a cut of about $90 billion
nationally, or about one third. Under this scenario, it found that the region
would create only 100,000 fewer jobs that it would have otherwise. And, it went
on, if the ''peace dividend'' were shifted into space programs, the region could
wind up adding 65,000 more jobs than the 1.26 million expected by 1995, even
though 70,000 military-related jobs would vanish.

But others are much less optimistic. While the region is more diversified than
ever, Mr. Hensley of the U.C.L.A. Business Forecasting Project wrote recently,
''We believe there is a risk of being too smug about California's prospects.''

He compares the California aerospace industry to the securities industry in New
York, which has shed more than 25,000 jobs in the last two years.

''In the end,'' Mr. Hensley said, ''we may learn from the case of New York that
a fairly small industry can have a lot of leverage even in a big, well-balanced
economy. For California, which has more of its economic resources tied up in the
military than New York does in the securities industry, the lesson should be
that our 'crash' has not occurred yet, i.e. our unique vulnerability, which has
been and remains defense cuts, has not been tested in twenty years''

No one yet knows how deep the cuts will be. But in a computer simulation based
on an economic model of California, assuming declines in military spending at
2.9 percent in 1990, 9.6 percent in 1991 and 11.5 percent in 1992, Mr. Hensley
concluded that the gross state product of California would fall by $7 billion,
taxable sales would drop by $3.16 billion and there would be 151,000 fewer jobs
than would otherwise be expected. He has also predicted that net migration to
the state would drop sharply, from more than 400,000 last year to 250,000 in
1992.

Mr. Hensley's bearish views find some support in the aerospace industry. Stephen
E. Chaudet, vice president for public affairs at Lockheed, where 39,000 of its
80,000 employees work in California, said that the cutbacks would have ''serious
ramifications'' for the region and that he saw little to keep top aerospace
workers employed for now.

''California has the potential to lose a lot of highly skilled and hourly
employees,'' Mr. Chaudet said.

Lockheed is trying to replace some of its lost military business with a proposal
to modify Boeing 747 passenger jets at two hangars at Norton Air Force Base,
which is to be closed.

But union leaders are not optimistic about finding new jobs for the unemployed.

''The prospects are pretty bleak at this point,'' said Don Nakamoto, spokesman
for District 722 of the International Association of Machinists and Aerospace
Workers, which represents 5,000 workers at the Lockheed plant in Burbank. which
is to be shut, starting with 1,000 layoffs this month.

Living Cost Soars, Style of Life Falls

Further clouding the economic outlook, Southern California has become a costly
and difficult place to do business. The typical house costs 215 percent of the
national average, and some workers are forced to commute 70 miles each way. In
fact, there has been a steady flow of longtime Southern Californians to other
parts of the state and region that are cheaper and less congested.

Also, California is on the cutting edge of environmental regulations. This year,
34 new anti-smog rules are to be imposed in the Los Angeles basin, many of them
putting expensive new burdens on manufacturers. For instance, the Douglas
Aircraft Corporation, a subsidiary of McDonnell Douglas, spent millions of
dollars to build special hangars in Long Beach to control fumes while painting
aircraft, and then almost ended up not being able to use them because the
smog-control authorities said the hangars did not adequately control the fumes.

The ultimate question is whether military contractors can convert to peacetime
pursuits. Mayor Larry Agran of Irvine, in Orange County, has proposed having
contractors build a $250 million, four-mile monorail in the city.

Ruth Galanter, a member of the Los Angeles City Council, has established a
committee to explore the creation of an electric-car manufacturing industry,
with backing from the machinists union. The San Diego Econonomic Development
Corporation has been working with a group called Dollar for Dollar and with
local military contractors trying to find commercial applications for their
skills.

But such efforts in the past have largely failed. After the Vietnam War,
Lockheed tried to diversify into education and computer services, Rohr
Industries of Chula Vista tried building subway cars and the Grumman Corporation
of Bethpage, N.Y., tried to build city buses.

''We all failed,'' said Harry R. Biederman, an economist who retired recently
after 35 years with Lockheed here. ''Defense engineers are brought up in an
environment not like the commercial one.''

He added that under military contracts, they had become accustomed to spending
too much money on products to make them commercially competitive.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: With the easing of the Communist threat and the reduction in the
Federal defense budget, many companies will have to convert their operations for
peaceful purposes. Workers assembled a commercial aircraft at the McDonnell
Douglas Corporation plant in Long Beach, Calif. (George Brich for The New York
Times); graphs of the military spending in California as a percentage of gross
state product. (soruce: California Commission on State Finance); unemployment
rate, nonagricultural-job growth and population growth rates in Southern
California (source: Los Angeles Area Chamber of Commerce Economic Development;
Census Bureau; Bureau of Labor Statistice; U.C.L.A. California Forecast) (pg.
B5)

TYPE: A special report.

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              17 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 4, 1990, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Americans Sense a New Patriotism

BYLINE: By LENA WILLIAMS

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1, Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 2048 words


Blacks are playing a more prominent role than ever in this year's Independence
Day celebration, which comes as blacks seem to be experiencing a growing sense
of participating in the nation's rituals and history.

In Virginia, Gov. L. Douglas Wilder will swear in a group of newly naturalized
citizens at Monticello, Jefferson's home. In cities around the country, black
mayors, of whom there are 326, a national record, will officiate at parades and
festivities. In Philadelphia, for example, Mayor W. Wilson Goode is to present
the Liberty Medal of Freedom to former President Jimmy Carter.

Sensing Identity With America

Such events will remind many lesser-known black citizens that they have a real
stake in America. It is a sense that may overtake the ''dual consciousness'' W.
E. B. Du Bois mentioned in his 1903 book, ''The Souls of Black Folk.'' He wrote
of ''An American, a Negro, two warring ideals in one dark body.'' That has
defined the black experience for much of the 20th century.

In many cities, racial tensions have been heightened, but in dozens of
interviews over the past month, scholars, intellectuals, students and workaday
people expressed a deepening sense of identity with America.

A New Kind of Confidence

John Edgar Wideman, the novelist and essayist who wrote the introduction for the
1990 edition of Du Bois's 1903 work, said in an interview: ''We need to
re-examine Du Bois's metaphor. The confidence that comes from knowledge of our
history means we don't run around feeling this split every day and worrying
about it. The seams have kind of closed and we're getting rid of the
schizophrenia.''

Ada Saunders, a 45-year-old accountant, agrees. She lives in Washington, where,
she said, she is especially aware of blacks in high places, like Gen. Colin L.
Powell, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, and Dr. Louis W. Sullivan,
the Secretary of Health and Human Services. Seeing the Vietnam Veterans
Memorial, she said, makes her think of how many blacks died for American causes.
''America would not have been great without us,'' she has concluded.

Events abroad in recent years have solidified those feelings. The civil rights
anthem ''We Shall Overcome'' was sung in Tiananmen Square, an international
reflection of black achievement. Last month Nelson Mandela brought home to many
black Americans how fortunate they are in the eyes of African blacks. He called
on blacks here, young and old, as Americans, to support the cause of blacks in
South Africa.

''In his visit to Boston, Mr. Mandela said it was important for South Africans
to come to the United States and see how much progress blacks have made,'' said
Henry Hampton, producer of the civil rights documentary ''Eyes on the Prize.''
''We've been so embroiled in our own struggles, it takes someone from the
outside to point out how far we've come.''

Indeed, as American blacks become more affluent and travel abroad, they discover
that others quickly recognize them as American. A black freelance photographer
from Philadelphia, Cassandra Green, told of being in Kenya and seeing an African
woman pointing and saying, ''American, American.'' She looked around for the
American in the crowd, to discover that it was she.

And then there was ''Glory,'' the 1989 movie about the all-black 54th
Massachusetts Volunteer Infantry, formed in 1863. Not since ''Roots,'' by Alex
Haley, has a work of popular culture inspired so many black Americans. ''The
fact that some 200,000 black men fought in the Civil War was never mentioned in
any class I took,'' said Denzel Washington, the black actor who plays a Union
soldier in the movie. ''Making this film has made me more patriotic.''

Patriotism to Be Shared

The historian James M. McPherson said the 1990's might see ''a major transition
to the notion that blacks share and should share as much as other Americans in
patriotism.'' Dr. McPherson wrote ''Battle Cry of Freedom: The Civil War Era''
(Oxford University Press), which won a Pulitzer Prize last year.

Blacks have indeed shared those patriotic feelings, at least as far as
public-opinion surveys can measure. Most polls report few important differences
in how black and white Americans described their feelings about their country.
But those responses are not likely to have reflected the subtle strains and
conflicts that blacks feel about allegiance and identity.

One sign of the shift in consciousness is the growing use of the term
''African-American.'' ''This is our land because we invested labor in it, blood
in it, our youth in it,'' said the Rev. Jesse Jackson, who has been the term's
champion.

But not all embrace that feeling of participating. ''It's hard to feel real
patriotic when you can't get a job in your own neighborhood,'' said Alexander
Hayslett, 18 years old, who was once a member of a gang in San Diego.

But he added that his involvement in a program for youthful offenders named
after the Buffalo Soldiers, the black calvary troops who helped settle the West
in the late 1800's, made him appreciate his country.

''I got into a lot of trouble when I was younger,'' he said, ''but I was given a
second chance and now I'm heading to junior college on a football scholarship.
In some countries, I might have been rotting in jail for some of the things I've
done.''

In cities, icons of Africa - leather medallions embossed with the shape of the
continent, trading beads, tribal cloth - are now popular among many blacks. But
Howard Dodson, chief of the Schomburg Culture Center in Harlem, does not see
that as a revival of African nationalism. He said blacks were simply paying
tribute to their heritage, just as other immigrants once did.

''Blacks are reaffirming the African dimensions of their identity with their
identity as Americans,'' he said.

A Place in History
Serving as Slaves, Then Under Arms

Black history is now in a period of continual discovery and affirmation.

From Gum Springs, Va., to the San Joaquin Valley in California, landmark
designation is being sought for communities that were founded by freed slaves.
Legislation calling for a National Museum of African-American Heritage has been
introduced in Congress.

In 1939, the Daughters of the American Revolution barred Marian Anderson from
singing in Constitution Hall, which the D.A.R. had built, in an action that left
a deep scar on American blacks. In response to the action, Eleanor Roosevelt
resigned from the organization.

Now, the D.A.R., along with the Society of the Sons of the American Revolution,
is supporting efforts to erect a memorial on the Washington Mall to honor the
5,000 blacks who fought in the American Revolution.

''Black people served the nation during the American Revolution,'' said Maurice
A. Barboza, president of the Patriots Foundation in Washington, which is raising
money for the memorial. Mr. Barboza, who traces his ancestry to a soldier of the
Revolution, is one of fewer than 50 black members of the Sons of the American
Revolution.

He said of blacks in this country's history: ''They struggled to break free of
slavery and in the process helped to build the country and its institutions.
It's time for these facts to be memorialized both in textbooks and motion
pictures.''

And in Massachusetts, a group of blacks inspired by ''Glory'' is organizing the
Glory Brigade. The group is led by Maj. George H. Coblyn of the Army, retired,
whose grandfather was the sixth man to sign up for the 54th. Other units are
being organized in Atlanta, Birmingham, Ala., and Washington; among the members
will be some who were extras in the movie.

''We plan to participate in holiday parades and other public events,'' Mr.
Coblyn said. ''The group will serve as a visible reminder of our history, to
teach black youths the truth about their history and to deal with problems like
drug abuse.''

The Buffalo Soldiers program seeks to bring lessons about history and discipline
to young people, especially those in trouble: courts around the country have
remanded youths to the program, which is how Alexander Hayslett got into it.

In navy blue uniforms like those of the original regiment, the Buffalo Soldiers
take part in parades and community ceremonies at conventions, shopping centers
and military bases. And they carry an anti-drug message to schools.

''I get goose bumps whenever I put on the uniform,'' said Isadore Rockmore, 18,
of Franklin, Pa. Before he joined the program, he said, all he knew of Buffalo
Soldiers came from the reggae classic by the Jamaican singer Bob Marley. ''We
weren't taught this history in school,'' Mr. Rockmore said. ''This makes me feel
proud about myself and my people.''

The Second Revolution
Civil Rights: A Call To All Americans
Social historians say that only now is it being recognized how central the role
of the civil-rights movement has been to the identity of America.

''The struggle that we have engaged in, for survival through slavery and the
assertion of our humanness through slavery, has been a struggle for America's
soul,'' said Roger Wilkins, a professor of history and American culture at
George Mason University in Fairfax, Va.

Dr. John Michael Vlach, an anthropologist who specializes in African-American
life at George Washington University, said: ''The civil-rights movement was
looked upon as a black movement, but it was also very much an American movement.
In many ways it was a reform movement, like the American Revolution.''

In the 1968 Olympics, when John Carlos, the bronze medal winner in the 100-yard
dash, stood with his head bowed and a clenched fist raised to defy the national
anthem, he was denounced by whites and blacks alike.

''It wasn't that I wasn't proud to be an American,'' Mr. Carlos said. ''I just
felt the country was telling me I'm an American; I can run for the nation and
fight for it, but when you come home, you can't eat in this restaurant or go to
this school. People saw it as unpatriotic. Fine! I have come to see it as more
patriotic than those who knew of the hypocrisy taking place in America, yet
stood by and did nothing.''

Mr. Carlos is now is a youth counselor for the school system in Cathedral City,
Calif. His militancy, he said, has been ''mellowed'' by both the years and the
accomplishments of other black Americans.

The View From Abroad
In Another Land, Pride in One's Own

For blacks who believe Africa is at the core of their existence, a trip there
can be shocking.

''We are Americans, and that's the first thing that hits us when we are in
Africa,'' said Dr. Niara Sudarkasa, an anthropologist who is president of
Lincoln University in Pennsylvania, the oldest black college in America. ''We
can wear African clothes and we can fit in until we open our mouths. Then
everything about the way we do things in America is there.''

Travel can foster appreciation of American privileges.

''Having been to over half the world's countries and having seen how other
blacks live and other minorities live, I'd much rather be where I am, here, in
the United States,''' said Arthur Ashe, the tennis champion and author of ''A
Hard Road to Glory: A History of the African-American Athlete'' (Amistad-Warner,
1988).

Robin Hines, a black student at the University of the District of Columbia,
surprised herself, she said, when she began a vigorous defense of America while
visiting Paris. She was replying to a student who was attacking her country as
racist, sexist and materialistic.

''I said, Yes, there is racism and sexism, but blacks and women have made
significant gains in America,'' she said in an interview. ''And I pointed out
that those 'materialistic' Americans and their tax dollars provided more foreign
aid than any other country in the world. I mean, really! Like France is
utopia?''

In this country, new immigrants' success has made many black Americans
determined to win a greater stake in their communities. Mrs. Saunders, the
Washington accountant, said:

''We've had to take this stuff from whites; now we've got people who weren't
born or raised here coming in and treating us like we don't belong.

''Our blood, sweat and tears are spread all over this country. We're not about
to leave now, and we expect to be treated like the first-class citizens we
are.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: John Edgar Wideman, Novelist and essayist (The New York Times);
Denzel Washington, Actor in the film ''Glory.'' (Tri-Star Pictures); Maurice A.
Barboza, President of Patriots Foundation (Andrea Mohin/The New York Times) (pg.
A1); A group of blacks in Massachusetts, inspired by the film ''Glory,'' is
organizing the Glory Brigade, led by Maj. George H. Coblyn, right. Working with
Mr. Coblyn, whose ancestor fought in a black regiment, was Robert B. Minton,
whose ancestor led a regiment of black troops. (Jim Bourg for The New York
Times); Howard Dodson, chief of the Schomburg Culture Center inHarlem, said
blacks were simply paying tribute to their American heritage by taking prominent
roles in this year's Independence Day Celebration. (The New York Times) (pg. 12)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              18 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 4, 1990, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

EDUCATION;
For Eastern Europe, U.S. Teachers

BYLINE: Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 2; Page 60, Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 854 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 3


At first glance the people queued in front of Pan Am's ticket counter at Dulles
International Airport looked like college students headed for a summer biking
tour through England or France. A closer look suggested otherwise: their duffel
bags bulged with English textbooks and Shakespeare anthologies, and their
destination was Budapest.

For the first time, Eastern European governments are opening their classrooms to
large numbers of American English instructors, including these 121 Peace Corps
volunteers, who left in mid-June for Poland and Hungary. They were the first
delegation to Eastern Europe in the Peace Corps's 30-year history.

''It's a great way to dip our toes into history,'' said Alison Truitt of Denver,
a 1989 Stanford University graduate in international relations who is headed for
Hungary. ''It will be fascinating to be a witness of the changes in their
political, economic and cultural systems.''

These volunteers are not alone in their mission. More than 600 English-language
instructors, mostly recent college graduates, are planning to teach in
Czechoslovakia, Poland, Hungary, Bulgaria, Romania and East Germany in the fall.


An Explosive Demand

''The demand is exploding,'' said Donna Culpepper, the United States Information
Agency's branch chief for academic exchanges in Europe. ''The Eastern European
countries would like four or five times the numbers of teachers we can send.''

Most students are traveling as part of privately financed projects, like those
sponsored by the American Federation of Teachers' Education for Democracy
International program, and the Charter 77 Foundation, a Czechoslovakian human
rights group that is sending 80 college students and recent graduates to teach
conversational English in Czechoslovakia this summer.

''I'm looking forward to being a firsthand witness to history,'' said John Shea
of Arlington, Va., a May graduate of George Washington University who majored in
international affairs and who will work in yet another program, Education for
Democracy U.S.A., a grass-roots group based in Mobile, Ala., that is sending 300
teachers abroad.

Many others are angling for teaching jobs in Eastern Europe, including 80
graduating seniors from Georgetown University who went to Czechoslovakia last
May.

Such efforts have been discouraged by American and Eastern European officials
because most countries have their own teacher certification requirements.
Opportunities for uncertified and inexperienced people without a plan of action
are likely be limited. About half the Georgetown students are still seeking
teaching positions.

Caution on Having Plan

''Without some sort of plan you are likely to be forgotten or ignored,'' said
Helena Fierlinger, a program coordinator for Charter 77 who was born in
Czechoslovakia.

Programs like that of the Peace Corps are giving volunteers intensive language
and cultural instruction abroad this summer before they begin working in
elementary and secondary schools and in teacher training colleges in September.
Most teachers will live with families and receive $75 a month, commensurate with
local living standards; room and board are paid by the government.

''Despite the pay cut, it seemed like a good idea,'' said Phyllis Stafford, 73
years old, of Indian Harbor Beach, Fla., a widow who taught high school English
for 14 years and is the oldest Peace Corps volunteer in Hungary.

She and fellow volunteers loaded their bags with the works of Hemingway,
Faulkner and occasionally Kurt Vonnegut.

Many also stuffed their luggage with quintessentially American commodities not
readily available in Eastern Europe, like Frisbees and Nerf footballs.

Wanted: English Instructors

Peace Corps officials say Eastern Europe's political leaders have pleaded for
English instructors.

''Among the emerging democracies, there's a uniform thirst for English language
instruction,'' said Paul D. Coverdell, director of the Peace Corps. ''As these
countries reach out and engage in the world, they need the English language to
close the decades spent without commerce or communications with the West.''

Mr. Coverdell said the English-language training program would eventually expand
throughout Central and Eastern Europe. On June 25, the Peace Corps signed an
agreement to send 22 volunteers to teach English in Czechoslovakia in the fall.
For the future, plans include training in small business development and
environmental protection, Mr. Coverdell said .

Meanwhile, six Princeton University students are spending the summer starting
student debating leagues in Poland, Hungary, the Soviet Union and Vietnam, among
other countries. Their group, Global Student Response, was founded last year; it
is devoted to promoting democracy and human rights and is financed with $4,500
from the university.

''Until now, holding a debate was a foreign concept for most Eastern European
students,'' said the group's president, Stephen Wunker of Coral Springs, Fla., a
Princeton senior majoring in international affairs. ''They haven't had any
exposure to these types of democratic traditions.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos:Volunteer English-language instructors were given a White House
send-off by President Bush before heading to Poland and Hungary. The 121 Peace
Corps members were the first to be sent to Eastern Europe. (Associated Press);
''I'm looking forward to being a firsthand witness to history,'' said John Shea,
a George Washington University graduate. (Mike Geissinger for The New York
Times)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              19 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 5, 1990, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Land-Buying Drive by Pentagon Runs Into Stiff Resistance in West

BYLINE: By TIMOTHY EGAN, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1400 words

DATELINE: ELLENSBURG, Wash.


The Pentagon is pressing its biggest land-buying drive since World War II,
seeking to add nearly 4.5 million acres to its 25 million acres nationwide.

But opposition, led by several groups of Western land users that normally do not
get along, has forced the Pentagon to table at least two of the biggest plans
for base expansion and to send several others back to the drawing board.

While it may seem out of place for the military to be trying to expand its land
holdings when the armed forces are being reduced and bases are folding
elsewhere, Pentagon officials say faster, more sophisticated weapons coming into
use require more space for training and war simulation. They add that the
prospect of base closings in Europe means that more air space and public land
will be needed in America for troop training and war exercises.

''We're training for the Super Bowl on a 50-yard field,'' said Capt. Rex
Rackowitz, commander of the Fallon Naval Air Station in Nevada, which is seeking
to expand its bombing range by 181,000 acres. He added that most of the air
station's targets were established in the 1950's and designed for airplanes that
could turn a very tight circle.

The land being fought over is mostly desert and sage country in the West, public
land once considered virtually useless but now prime recreation country for
hunters and hikers, grazing land for cattle and sheep, and valuable wildlife
habitat for species threatened by urban encroachment.

''Years ago, the desert was just the desert and nobody worried about it,''
Captain Rackowitz said. ''When we started out here, Nevada had barely 100,000
people. Now there's more than a million. I wish there was some other
alternative. But we badly need the extra space.''

Under Federal law, a branch of the service cannot add more than 5,000 acres to
its land base without Congressional approval. Most of the land being fought over
is managed by the Bureau of Land Management, a divison of the Interior
Department, and military ownership would require few major purchases.

Critics say the expansion plans, some of which date from the early days of the
Reagan Administration's military buildup, have not changed with the decline of
the cold war. They point out that if the acquisition of 4.5 million acres being
sought by the military is approved by Congress, the Pentagon will control more
land - nearly 30 million acres, roughly the size of Indiana - than the 26
million acres of national parkland in the lower 48 states.

''People are just sick and tired of the military taking whatever land they
want,'' said Robert Fulkerson, director of Citizen Alert, a Nevada-based group
that is fighting the expansion plans. ''This time around, there's no way they
are going to get this land without a fight.''

War Games and Broken Windows

Here in central Washington, as in the 12 other states where proposed base
expansions have stirred resentment, environmentalists and ranchers have joined
forces in an unusual alliance to fight the Pentagon.

For years the ranchers of this arid, wind-scrubbed desert have lived with the
sound of artillery fire and helicopter gunships. War games were as much a part
of the scenery as red mesas and coyotes' yelps.

When world tensions eased, the ranchers expected to share the land with fewer
soldiers and tank columns.

Instead, the Army wants to add 63,000 acres to the 193,000-acre Yakima Firing
Range. The cattle ranchers say the land is valuable for grazing.
Environmentalists say live artillery shells and lumbering tanks threaten
wildlife, increase erosion and bring the thunder of war games closer to the
communities in the Kittitas Valley. Those who live near the range have long
complained of broken windows and pained eardrums from the simulated combat of
the Army's 9th Infantry Division.

Some ranchers, who have fought the Federal Government over wilderness proposals
and wildlife refuges, are against the base expansions because they say the
amount of privately owned land in the West has continued to shrink. In their
view, the Government owns far too much already.

''Somebody has to slow down the land appetite of the United States Government,''
said Steve Hailey, president of the Washington Cattlemen's Association.
''Cattlemen are losing grazing land all over, mainly because the Government is
grabbing it.''

Mr. Hailey, who grazes cattle on land just across the Columbia River from the
Yakima Firing Range, is a decorated Vietnam War veteran and a strong supporter
of the Army. ''We are in no way anti-military,'' he said. ''But the Pentagon
just has this shopping list of land. If they are allowed to take it, our
livelihoods could suffer.''

Some Pentagon officials say cattle and sheep could continue grazing on the lands
once they are under military control. But ranchers have ridiculed that idea,
saying it poses a severe safety hazard for cowboys and their cattle to be in a
war zone.

Several of the transfer proposals have been bottled up this year in the House
Committee on Interior and Insular Affairs' Subcommittee on Public Lands, which
is headed by Representative Bruce F. Vento, Democrat of Minnesota. Most
lawmakers from the states concerned have lined up with those opposing the
expansion plans.

Mr. Vento has accused the military of damaging the land they already use for
bombing ranges and war games. He said tank tracks from maneuvers conducted by
Gen. George S. Patton in the early 1940's still marred the desert of Southern
California.

Mr. Vento also said the Pentagon's expansion plans were out of sync with the
reduction of superpower tensions. ''They need to rethink their entire strategy
before they go ahead with any more of these wholesale withdrawals of public
land,'' he said.

In the last year, the Defense Department has been closing bases near urban areas
and moving many of the troops and training exercises to the open spaces of the
Western bases.

Public opposition has forced the military to delay plans in two of the states
that are targets for the biggest expansions, Montana and Idaho. In the high
plains of eastern Montana, the National Guard sought 718,000 more acres for war
games. But in May, when the state refused to finance a study on the
environmental effects of the proposal, the plan was put aside.

'Threat of Losing Everything'

In Idaho, the Air Force has been seeking to expand its bombing range in the
desert of the Snake River Plateau from 100,000 acres to more than a million
acres.

Environmentalists, ranchers and Idaho politicians of both parties have lashed
out at the plan, saying it would put a huge section of southern Idaho off limits
to most of the public and would litter the land with live ammunition.

''The threat of losing everything has brought all of us together,'' said Bert
Brackett, a fourth-generation Idaho rancher.

Air Force officials said that although the Idaho plan would be re-evaluated they
still needed to at least double their space for bombing raids.

Faster Tanks and Bombers

''Range expansion now is probably more critical than prior to the reduction of
cold war tensions,'' said Capt. Sig Adams, an Air Force spokesman at the
Pentagon.

In World War II, an Army battalion needed only 4,000 acres for adequate
training. But a modern battalion, with its M-1 tanks racing along at 50 miles an
hour, needs more than 80,000 acres, Pentagon officials say.

The Air Force, which uses 7.8 million acres for bombing ranges in 11 states,
says its supersonic bombers and jet fighters are nearly running into each other
in training runs. They say aerial maneuvers that used to require 5 miles with
the old planes now need from 40 to 100 miles because the new jets are so much
faster.

While critics have suggested that Navy and Air Force pilots use more electronic
simulation to train, Captain Rackowitz said there was no substitute for
in-the-air raids. And those require enormous amounts of land.

Other critics say the expansion plans are the last gasp of a dying bureaucracy
trying to protect itself against the tide of history.

''We have here a classic case of a bloated bureaucracy trying to keep its
power,'' said Ken Munsell, who lives here in Ellensburg and is director of the
Small Town Institute, a nonprofit group that monitors issues facing small
communities. ''Because we're a small town, they have this traditional arrogant
attitude that they can bulldoze us.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Steve Hailey, President of the Washington Cattlemen's
Association ''Somebody has to slow down the land appetite of the United States
Government. Cattlemen are losing grazing land all over, mainly because the
Government is grabbing it.'' (Bob Baker for The New York Times); Capt. Rex
Rackowitz, Commander of the Fallon Naval Air Station in Nevada ''Years ago, the
desert was just the desert and nobody worried about it. . . . I wish there was
some other alternative. But we badly need the extra space.'' (Dee Burchett
Savage for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              20 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 5, 1990, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

For Veterans, Wheelchairs Give the Day Somber Tone

BYLINE: By CHRIS HEDGES

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 2; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1105 words


Forget the fireworks, the tricolored bunting draped over picnic tables and the
jostle of the beach crowds.

To some Americans, especially those in veterans' groups, the Fourth of July is a
somber affair. Each year these men and women, who often center their social
lives around the cramped interiors of neighborhood veterans' organizations,
treat this secular holiday with a quasi-religious fervor.

''It is, along with Memorial Day, one of the most important days of the year for
us,'' said Arthur Dunckelman, the commander of American Legion Post 1424 in
Forest Hills, who joined several other veterans as hosts of a picnic at a
Veterans Administration nursing home in St. Albans, Queens. ''We could have all
gone on vacation, but every year we would rather come here.''

Fruit, Cake and Flags

At the sprawling 425-bed center in St. Albans, elderly veterans in dark blue
service hats decorated with military medals and ribbons roamed the corridors,
looking for veterans in wheelchairs who wanted to be taken down to the Jewish
service or Catholic Mass that began the day for those in the home. Many carried
bags full of fruit, cake and other groceries that they were distributing.
Several handed out new American flags, which patients stuck upright into their
wheelchairs.

''I'm the flag man,'' said David Lasky, a 79-year-old World War II veteran who
is a member of the Jewish War Veterans, as he stood outside the door of the
chapel handing out small flags. ''We have to always remember our flag. This
represents us, our country, not those people who burn it.''

To these veterans, questions about the meaning of the Fourth of July are not
taken casually. Without prompting, they railed about the failure to approve a
constitutional amendment to bar flag desecration. Veterans from Legion Post 1424
arrived at St. Albans in T-shirts that pictured a large American flag on the
back and the slogan, ''Just try to burn this one.'' They criticized what they
see as a loss of patriotism and were unabashedly sentimental about America. The
patriotic songs that were piped into the interdenominational chapel yesterday as
veterans were wheeled into the service often seemed to affect the veterans who
were pushing the wheelchairs more than those who were being wheeled in. ''This
fills the void in my life,'' said Jack M. Portnoy, 79, a World War II veteran
who volunteers at the home once a week.

''The Fourth of July reminds me that I am an American,'' Mr. Portnoy said,
wiping away tears. ''Do I need to say anything else?'' The end of the cold war
and the easing of global tensions have had little impact in these circles. The
United States, some of the veterans say, remains a nation threatened from
without and within.

''Russia is going to take us over,'' said Bernard Schrift, a 96-year-old World
War I veteran and former head of the Brooklyn Jewish War Veterans, who wraps his
thin hand tightly around the forearms of those he speaks with. ''They have just
pulled off this stunt to get millions of dollars from us.''

''All these people who don't love America, who burn our flag,'' said Arthur L.
Paterno, a 66-year-old veteran of World War II, ''should get out. We don't need
them.''

Before the annual Fourth of July picnic yesterday at St. Albans, the veteran
volunteers formed a wheelchair parade, yelling at each other in military
language. They put the Queens Village Post 301 youth band in front of the
formation and, to the strains of ''Stars and Stripes Forever,'' marched toward
the picnic grounds. The wheelchairs, many with customized ashtrays and some with
plastic bladder bags, were pushed under a blazing sun to a shady grove of maple
trees.

'Miss That Quite a Lot'

''I used to love to see the parade in Manhattan on 34th Street and the
fireworks,'' said Victor F. Santiago, a 40-year-old Vietnam War veteran who has
multiple sclerosis. ''I miss that. I miss that quite a lot.''

To those who suffered severe war wounds, yesterday's blast of patriotism was
tempered by the knowledge that they never lived normal lives because of their
military service.

A depressed and seriously ill World War II veteran jumped to his death from the
roof of the center last week, an event that colored yesterday's religious
services and festivities.

Daniel Sullivan, a 50-year-old former Marine lieutenant who was badly wounded by
a mortar blast in Vietnam, lives in the nursing home. He is blind and uses a
wheelchair.

''On rainy nights I lie in bed and I think how lucky I am,'' he said. ''I
realize I could have ended up in Grand Central Station or on the subway. But I
am a very angry person because of what happened. It only comes out at certain
times. I always ask myself why it had to be me, that maybe my life wouldn't have
been so freaked up if I wasn't handicapped. My anger used to come out at home,
which is the reason I am not with my wife.''

But to Mr. Sullivan's amazement his two sons opted for careers in the military.
His oldest boy will be commissioned a first lieutenant in August and his other
son just finished his first year at the Naval Academy.

''I tried to discourage them,'' he said. ''I fought so my kids wouldn't have to
fight, but they both insisted. All I could do was put my arms around them and
tell them I loved them, but that they should never expect anyone else to love
them for what they were doing.''

On the southern tip of Manhattan, two Vietnam War veterans in fatigues sat
talking next to the Vietnam Veterans Memorial. Both had their service ribbons
displayed and patches like ''Viet Cong Hunting Club'' sewn on their uniforms.

''We came here to keep the drug dealers away and pay our respects to those that
didn't make it,'' said Leonard E. Schende, 38, as he sat drinking a can of
Budweiser. ''We watch over this place.''

''I had to come down here today,'' said James Hartley, 48, who was wounded in
Vietnam. ''I told my wife and kids I would meet them later in Coney Island.
Veteran affairs come first.''

'All They Talk About'

A Wisconsin tourist, Raymond P. Meysman, watched the two veterans for some time
before conceding that he too had served in Vietnam. ''Some guys can't let the
war go,'' he said, walking away from the memorial with his wife. ''It is all
they talk about. Maybe it's the only important thing that ever happened in their
lives.''

But after a moment Mr. Meysman added that he too was drawn to the war memorials
and said he had first visited the Vietnam Veterans Memorial in Washington on a
Fourth of July.

''We just saw the Statue of Liberty,'' he said, ''and I have just as much
feeling for this memorial, maybe more.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: The Fourth of July was a day for somber celebrations for many
veterans' groups, but for the thousands of bathers yesterday on the beach at
Coney Island, the holiday meant a day to play in the water and cool off as the
temperature soared to 93 degrees. rs were also ejected.(AP) (Jack Manning/The
New York Times); A chance to play in the water was denied to some of the young
visitors to the swimming pool at Astoria Park in Queens because they did not
have proper swimsuits. (Fred R. Conrad/The New York Times) (pg. B1); Police
officers helping three children find their families yesterday on the boardwalk
at Coney Island. (Jack Manning/The New York Times); A Fourth of July pig roast
in East River Park in Manhattan. (Keith Meyers/The New York Times) (pg. B3)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              21 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   July 6, 1990, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Mitch Snyder, 46, Advocate of Homeless

BYLINE: By JASON DePARLE, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 974 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 5


Mitch Snyder, who became a national figure in giving the movement in support of
homeless people a public voice and face throughout the 1980's, was found hanged
today in an apparent suicide.

The police said his body, which was found in a closed room at a shelter for the
homeless that he obtained from the Federal Government after a 51-day fast in
1984, might have been there for several days.

The reason for his suicide was not immediately clear.

In recent months Mr. Snyder, who was 46 years old, had expressed frustration
with what he called waning public interest in the problems of the homeless and
his confrontational style had been under attack by other advocates for the
homeless.

Suicide Note Reported

But the police said Mr. Snyder had left a suicide note, and The Associated
Press, citing police officials who spoke on condition of anonymity, reported
that the note attributed his death to sorrow over a failed love affair. Earlier
in the year, Mr. Snyder said he planned to marry his longtime companion, Carol
Fennelly. But in an interview last month he said his plans were uncertain.

In the interview Mr. Snyder expressed regret over what he called a ''backlash, a
psychic numbing'' over the homeless and said, ''Politically, the issue isn't
there; it's gone.''

Mr. Snyder, whose fasts had been a successful tactical weapon, said he was
searching for new ways to shock and anger the public and thereby attract
attention to homelessness.

''We're ready to take a deep breath and let it go, start pounding away at that
wall head first and see what's hardest, our head or their wall,'' he said.

Monastery Visit Planned

He said he was contemplating visiting a monastery to tighten his ties to God
because ''in the heat of the struggle, day to day, sometimes that relationship
gets neglected.''

Ms. Fennelly, 40, has for more than a dozen years shared Mr. Snyder's work at
the headquarters of the Community for Creative Non-Violence, which administers
the shelter given him by the Government. She wept today as she read a
five-sentence statement in which she vowed to ''continue the struggle.'' Then,
standing on the steps of the shelter under darkening skies that shook with
thunder, she added: ''Mitch always said good things happen when it rains. Today
he was wrong.''

Mr. Snyder rose to national prominence in the Presidential campaign of 1984,
when he began his long fast demanding that President Ronald Reagan intervene to
give an abandoned Federal building in Washington to his group for a shelter.

Two days before the election, on the 51st day of the fast, the Government
acceded to Mr. Snyder's demands. But Mr. Snyder fasted twice more, when $6
million in promised money for renovations failed to materialize on time.

His life and work became the subject of a CBS television movie in 1986 starring
Martin Sheen, called ''Samaritan: The Mitch Snyder Story.'' A year later, Mr.
Sheen, Dennis Quaid, Cicely Tyson and other celebrities joined Mr. Snyder
sleeping on the street to protest Federal policies toward the homeless.

Born in Brooklyn

Mitchell Darryl Snyder was born and reared in the Flatbush section of Brooklyn.
His father, Robert Snyder, left the family when the boy was 9 years old.

As a teen-ager he was repeatedly arrested for breaking into parking meters, and
served a stint in reform school in upstate New York. He later dropped out of
high school.

Mr. Snyder married in 1963, to Ellen Kleiman; they had two sons, Ricky in 1965
and Dean in 1967. He worked selling vacuum cleaners and washing machines, as a
job counselor on Madison Avenue, and as a construction worker.

Imprisoned for Auto Theft

He separated from his family several times, and during one of those separations,
in 1970, he was arrested for auto theft in Las Vegas. He was transferred to
Federal prison in Danbury, Conn., where he met Daniel and Philip Berrigan, the
two anti-war priests who had been imprisoned for destroying draft records. Mr.
Snyder became a follower of the Berrigans' brand of radical Catholicism. It was
in prison that he conducted his first prolonged hunger strike, 33 days
protesting the treatment of prisoners in Vietnam.

After his release in 1973, he moved to Washington to join the Community fo
Creative Non-Violence, then an anti-war group.

He had no further contact with his family until 1985, when his sons and former
wife saw him on the CBS News program ''60 Minutes.''

In the 1970's Mr. Snyder fasted on behalf of a variety of causes. He engaged in
a showdown with a local church over its plans to spend $80,000 on building
renovation, a sum he thought excessive. But the priest refused to back down and
Mr. Snyder ended his fast.

In 1978, he led members of the Community for Creative Non-Violence in parading a
coffin around the District of Columbia Building and doused the walls with blood
to protest what he called the city government's inadequate attention to the
homeless.

Movement's Street Guerrilla

While the movement for the homeless included lawyers, social workers, priests
and politicians, Mr. Snyder was its street guerrilla.

''He dramatized things like no one else, and he used anger as a weapon,'' said
Robert Hayes, founder of the National Coalition for the Homeless. ''He used it
to push, prod, irritate - and ultimately, people did things.''

But recently Mr. Snyder's tactics had begun to irritate others in the movement,
including members of his group who charged in a meeting at the shelter several
months ago that he had grown too authoritarian.

Mr. Snyder angered some homeless advocates when he urged the homeless not to
cooperate with the 1990 census, arguing that any effort by the Government would
result in an undercount.

He was also saddled by reports in recent months that his 1,400-bed shelter was
plagued by widespread drug use.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Mitch Snyder; A Washington detective, about to enter his car,
with evidence found next to the body of Mr. Snyder. (Michael Geissinger for The
New York Times)

TYPE: Obituary

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              22 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   July 6, 1990, Friday, Late Edition - Final

At the Movies

BYLINE: By Lawrence Van Gelder

SECTION: Section C; Page 6, Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1404 words



Figgis in Binghamton

Mike Figgis is summering in Binghamton, N.Y., in the company of Kim Novak, Kevin
Anderson and Pamela Gidley.

Mr. Figgis, the director of ''Stormy Monday'' and ''Internal Affairs,'' got to
upstate New York, where he is filming ''Liebestraum'' (''Love's Dream''), by way
of an eerie cottage in Devon, England, overlooking the sea. The journey took six
years.

''I was in a very frightening cottage in England,'' Mr. Figgis said, recalling
the origins of his film, ''with no electricity, no water; a totally deserted
place.''

And in one inspired evening, he wrote the plot line of his tale. ''It's a cycle
of fate with definite Oedipal overtones in which a son repeats the sins of his
father,'' Mr. Figgis said.

In the atmosphere of the Devon cottage, he said: ''It was very like that thing
of being a child and telling yourself a ghost story. It's a very frightening
story.''

And how did it lead to Binghamton? In two ways. First, Mr. Figgis had to achieve
success as a film maker, which he did in the intervening years with ''Stormy
Monday'' and ''Internal Affairs.'' ''It's very much a director's film,'' he said
of ''Liebestraum,'' ''and I think a studio would really need to trust a director
to pay for this film. You need to prove yourself first.''

After Pathe agreed to back him, he had to find a location that suited the needs
of his script. That effort, he said, consumed three or four months:

''I was looking for a cast-iron building in a small, timeless American town. Of
50 towns I looked at right across America, Binghamton was the only one that had
the perfect building in the perfect setting.''

Mr. Figgis went on to explain the need for such a building by saying, ''The
central character is an architect who is writing a book about cast-iron
buildings.'' And, he added, ''The building has to be in a town that he comes to
by fate, because, having been adopted, he is reunited for the first time in his
life with his mother, who is in a hospital, dying.''

Kevin Anderson plays the architect; Ms. Gidley, the femme fatale, and Ms. Novak,
the mother.

''I heard she was looking for a film, that she was interested in coming back,''
Mr. Figgis said of Ms. Novak. ''I was asked if I would like to meet her, and I
jumped at the opportunity. She read the script, and she jumped at it. It was a
pretty instantaneous mutual desire, I think.''

X Rating Protested

X marks the focus of controversy in another dispute over the ratings system of
the Motion Picture Association of America.

This time the protest centers on a new film by Wayne Wang, the director of the
acclaimed ''Chan Is Missing.'' The film, ''Life Is Cheap . . . But Toilet Paper
Is Expensive,'' about a young Chinese-American adrift in Hong Kong on a
mysterious errand, was rated X last week. The distributors, a small, New
York-based company called Silverlight Entertainment, responded by asking some 40
major directors to subscribe to a petition asking the association to expand its
rating to include a new category to distinguish movies with adult content from
pornography.

Jonathan Marder, a spokesman for the distributor, said the petition had been
signed by such noted film makers as Jim Jarmusch, Paul Mazursky, John Sayles,
Barry Levinson, John Waters, Spike Lee and Abel Ferara in addition to Mr. Wang.

The petition has not yet been sent to the association.

Lloyd in Louisiana

Emily Lloyd? Well, she's been Splendid, thanks. Splendid, it seems, is the name
of the character the versatile English actress has recently finished playing.
Splendid is a spirited young Cajun woman whose wedding is one of the central
events in ''Scorchers,'' the cast of which includes Faye Dunaway, James Earl
Jones, Denholm Elliott, James Wilder, Leland Crooke, Anthony Geary and Jennifer
Tilly.

''Scorchers'' is based on the play of the same title, a trilogy about Louisiana
bayou country written by David Beaird, who directed the film.

The 18-year-old Miss Lloyd, who made a memorable debut as a troubled English
teen-ager in the 1987 film ''Wish You Were Here'' - and went on to play a
Brooklyn gangster's daughter in ''Cookie'' and the Kentucky child of a father
killed in Vietnam in ''In Country'' - turns up as a terrified bride in
''Scorchers.''

''The section I did is about a young girl getting married,'' Miss Lloyd said.
Splendid's mother died in childbirth, and on her wedding night in Bayou La
Teche, Splendid is busy racing around her bridal chamber trying to avoid her
husband, played by Mr. Wilder, who eventually turns to her father, Mr. Crooke,
for help.

Miss Lloyd said she was in Los Angeles reading lots of scripts when she came
across ''Scorchers.'' ''It was quite refreshing,'' she said, ''because so many
scripts you read are very vacuous and you get diluted premises of films that
have done really well. This was great because it was original, and it was
real.''

Miss Lloyd, who will be seen later this summer in ''Chicago Joe and the
Showgirl,'' based on a World War II crime spree involving an American G.I.
(Kiefer Sutherland) and his English girlfriend, said she was planning to settle
down later this year in either Los Angeles or New York and take some classes,
perhaps in writing. She would also love to do some theater in New York.

And naturally, she'll be looking for more film roles. ''Of course, I really want
to work,'' she said, noting, too, that it was essential to find scripts that
inspire her. ''If you're not passionate about it,'' she said of performing, ''it
shows onscreen.''

'Russians' in Moscow

What's hot in Moscow?

Well, a few weeks ago, it was ''The Russians Are Coming, the Russians Are
Coming,'' the 1966 Norman Jewison comedy about a Soviet submarine that throws a
little New England town into a tizzy when some of its crew come ashore.

''It was like the picture was made yesterday,'' Mr. Jewison said, recalling the
reaction of an audience of 2,000 that saw the film in the October Cinema in
Moscow during a retrospective of Jewison movies that took the film maker not
only to the Soviet capital, but also to Leningrad and Tbilisi. ''It's been
screened six times in the Kremlin, and it had never been shown to the public,''
Mr. Jewison said, recalling that he was invited to take ''The Russians Are
Coming'' to the Soviet Union in 1966. ''I think they thought I was some sort of
Canadian pinko,'' he said.

For this latest trip to the Soviet Union, the producer and director took time
out from talking to Michelle Pfeiffer about his plans for ''Other People's
Money'' and from poring over Alvin Sargent's screenplay for the Off Broadway
hit, which Mr. Jewison hopes to put before the cameras in October. He had just
returned, and was still brimming with excitement over his experiences in
connection with the retrospective.

Responding to an invitation from members of the Soviet film industry, Mr.
Jewison said he took over 10 movies, among them ''Jesus Christ, Superstar,''
''In the Heat of the Night,'' ''Fiddler on the Roof,'' ''Agnes of God'' and
''Rollerball.''

''Jesus Christ, Superstar,'' he said, was presented in eight-track stereo.
''They played it at full blast with no translation. It was like opening night
for the rest of the world. They were bopping and laughing. It was just a
tremendous reaction.''

Everywhere he went during his two-week visit, he said, he was honored at dinners
given by film-industry members. ''The sense was they are so anxious for
co-production,'' Mr. Jewison said. ''They are free to make any film they want.
The film workers' union is very anxious to take over, make deals themselves
rather than going through the Minister of Film. They want to get out on their
own. They want to act as entrepreneurs and producers in the true sense of the
words.''

In addition, he said: ''They're all very excited and they feel it's a new world.
There's no going back now. And what I think they really need is some help, some
support, anything we can do.''

He added: ''I hope I can help, in some way, some of these film directors, either
with shooting films in the West or us going there. I don't see any reason why we
couldn't distribute films in the Soviet Union and take the rubles and invest
them in films we'd shoot there or invest them in Russian productions.''

The market is huge, Mr. Jewison observed, and the Russians are avid moviegoers.
''There's no doubt about the business we'd have,'' he said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Mike Figgis (Luke Winne)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              23 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   July 6, 1990, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Pop/Jazz;
A Maverick Upholding Traditional Values

BYLINE: By KAREN SCHOEMER

SECTION: Section C; Page 20, Column 3; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1050 words


Merle Haggard has gone political again. More than 20 years after his hit song
''Okie From Muskogee'' made him one of the most outspoken tongue waggers in
country music, Mr. Haggard, who is to perform tomorrow night at the Ritz with
his 10-piece band, the Strangers, has decided to protest the protesters in a new
song called ''Me and Crippled Soldiers.''

Taken from his latest album, ''Blue Jungle'' (Curb Records), ''Me and Crippled
Soldiers'' is a harsh criticism of the recent Supreme Court decision to allow
flag burning under the First Amendment's guarantee of free speech. In his
timeless robust baritone, backed by steel guitar and military-style snare
drumming, the 53-year-old Mr. Haggard sings: ''After all the wars we've fought
and won to keep Old Glory waving/Today they rule to burn Old Glory down/And only
me and crippled soldiers give a damn.''

Mr. Haggard has toyed with such conservative sentiments in the past. ''Okie From
Muskogee,'' which was released in 1969 amid the heat of demonstrations against
the Vietnam War and which is still a selection on many a country jukebox,
offered wry commentary on the new permissiveness of that era.

The song told of a town, Muskogee, Okla., where citizens upheld the vanishing
ideals of true-blue America.

We don't smoke marijuana in Muskogee
We don't take our trips on LSD
We don't burn our draft cards down on Main Street
'Cause we like living right and being free.

The song caused a furor, despite the fact that Mr. Haggard's chorus (''I'm proud
to be an Okie from Muskogee/A place where even squares can have a ball'') showed
it to be as much a spoof of conservative values as a mouthpiece for them.

It shares a core attitude with ''Me and Crippled Soldiers,'' a sense of
traditionalism that is central to Mr. Haggard's entire body of work. Beyond the
particular issue of flag burning, ''Me and Crippled Soldiers'' makes a complaint
about a deterioration of the moral standards that Mr. Haggard says he feels are
absolutely necessary for human life.

''I know this country needs reform, needs a lot of wounds healed,'' he said in a
recent telephone interview from his home in Lake Shasta, Calif. ''We know that
the overpopulation of this country is going to do us in. Yet we set up rules,
and we can't seem to live up to the things we make as laws.''

Of Outlaw Ways

Mr. Haggard's stance on these issues may seem, on the surface, to contradict
some of the rules that he himself has lived by. Ever since he was 10 years old
and hopped his first freight train away from the constraints of small-town life
in Oildale, Calif., he's had a flair for misbehavior and bucking the system. He
dropped out of school in the eighth grade, and spent a few years bouncing in and
out of various juvenile correction centers.

The adventures and exploits of his early years are described in his 1981
autobiography, ''Sing Me Back Home'' (Pocket Books); the more his widowed mother
and the authorities tried to mend or restrain his wayward course, the more he
rebelled. In 1957, when he was 20 years old, he wound up spending three years in
San Quentin State Prison after being convicted of an attempted burglary.

It was only upon his release that Mr. Haggard began to concentrate on singing
and playing country music, although he had been practicing guitar since he was
10 and performing since his mid-teen-age years. Inspired by the jazzy swinging
two-steps of Bob Wills, the pained honky-tonk of Hank Williams and the classic
ballads of Jimmie Rodgers, he made his first record for the Tally label in 1963,
and scored his first hit, the beautiful ''Sing a Sad Song,'' at the end of that
year.

In 1965, he signed with Capitol Records, and in the next five years had nine No.
1 country hits, including ''I'm a Lonesome Fugitive,'' ''Sing Me Back Home,''
''Workin' Man Blues'' and ''Okie From Muskogee.''

In the 1970's, Mr. Haggard proved himself one of country music's all-time
greats, and his influence began to stretch beyond his own field into the realms
of country rock (he worked with Gram Parsons, the guitarist) and rock-and-roll
(Keith Richards of the Rolling Stones was known to plop down at a piano,
abandoning his usual guitar, in informal settings and sing a cracked, scarred
rendition of ''Sing Me Back Home'').

But during the 1980's, when dance music and slick pop shoved country further
from the mainstream, Mr. Haggard's career slipped a bit. By this time he was
recording for CBS, a business partnership Mr. Haggard speaks of negatively.

''They were always wanting me to use some young producer who was going to do
magic things with me in the studio and change me around,'' he said. ''They'd
say, 'We want you to get into the criteria that's happening today.' I'd say,
'The criteria that's happening today will change tomorrow, so why should I
change?' I'm better at what I do, and do well, than I am trying to chance
trends. There's always an audience that wants to be able to buy a Merle Haggard
record and no, it's not going to sound like Rodney Crowell.''

A New Contract

Last summer, Mr. Haggard had a falling out with CBS when the company delayed
releasing ''Me and Crippled Soldiers.''

In an interview yesterday, Roy Wunsch, the president of CBS Records Nashville,
said: ''Merle Haggard is a legend in country music, and we're proud of our long
association with him. But unfortunately, our different views regarding what
Merle's fans wanted to hear were rather far apart musically.''

Mr. Haggard bought his way out of his contract with CBS and signed with Curb
Records, which has just rereleased the song on the new ''Blue Jungle'' album.
It's typical of Mr. Haggard's willful personality that he is still fighting for
what he believes, even if it means breaking the rules and even at great personal
cost. Perhaps it is this endless striving toward ideals - ideals that can never
quite be achieved - that fuels all his music, right on through ''Me and Crippled
Soldiers.''

''I've never been a guy that can do what people told me,'' he said with a touch
of regret. ''It's always been my nature to fight the system.''

Merle Haggard and the Strangers are to perform tomorrow night at the Ritz, 254
West 54th Street (956-3731). Tickets are $18.50 in advance, $19.50 tomorrow.
Show time is 9 P.M.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Merle Haggard is to perform tomorrow night at the Ritz. (Curb
Records)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              24 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   July 6, 1990, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Review/Photography;
Tracing Photojournalism to Define It

BYLINE: By ANDY GRUNDBERG

SECTION: Section C; Page 22, Column 4; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1449 words


Despite their enormous impact on everyday life, the images that appear in
newspapers and magazines remain relatively unexamined. Even the definition of
photojournalism is still subject to debate. Does photojournalism have an
esthetic and tradition of its own, or is it merely a term for pictures that are
reproduced and seen by a large and largely uncritical public?

The ambitious exhibition ''Eyes of Time: Photojournalism in America,'' which is
at the International Center of Photography Midtown, tries to answer the question
by tracing a historical lineage for photographic reporting. It begins in the
19th century, well before the invention of the halftone process made the rapid
reproduction of photographs possible, and extends to recent times, with vivid
color pictures of the Iranian revolution and of a man with AIDS.

In the opinion of Marianne Fulton, who organized the exhibition for the
International Museum of Photography at George Eastman House in Rochester,
photojournalism is first of all a medium of communication. This may explain why
many of the approximately 150 images in the show seem familiar: they graced the
front pages of newspapers and the covers of magazines soon after they were made.
Robert Capa's gritty image of the D-day landing, Bob Jackson's picture of Jack
Ruby shooting Lee Harvey Oswald, and Nick Ut's view of a naked Vietnamese girl
running from a napalm strike are all etched in the public mind as icons.

In addition to having classic and Pulitzer Prize-winning photographs, however,
''Eyes of Time'' includes pictures seldom seen in the context of
photojournalism. Dorothea Lange's 1932 ''White Angel Bread Line,'' for example,
is usually considered either as a symbol of the Depression or as an example of
the photographer's unique artistry. Lewis Hine's ''Climbing Into America,'' a
1908 scene of Ellis Island immigrants, is customarily thought of as an early
example of documentary photography, not photojournalism.

Unfortunately, neither the exhibition nor the much more comprehensive book that
accompanies it (''Eyes of Time: Photojournalism in America,'' New York Graphic
Society, Boston, $40) explains when or how these two pictures were first
reproduced for public consumption. But their inclusion makes clear that in the
eyes of the curator, at least, photojournalism means something more than
photographs on the printed page.

This is obvious in the section devoted to reporting before the introduction of
halftone reproduction at the end of the 19th century. The Civil War photographs
of Alexander Gardner and Timothy O'Sullivan were not flashed around the country
by wire photo - that technology did not appear until 1930 - but appeared in
albums after the war or, refashioned by hand, as etchings in illustrated
magazines like Harper's Weekly. As if to demonstrate that truth and the press
have always been contesting partners, the show includes an etching of dead
soldiers on the battlefield at Gettysburg that is a composite of three
photographs, two by Gardner and one by O'Sullivan.

Curiously, given its subtitle, the exhibition contains many pictures that were
taken by European photographers and that appeared in European picture magazines
in the 1920's and 30's. While this may exceed the exhibition's stated scope, the
inclusion of European work underlines the fact that American photojournalism, at
least since Life magazine began in 1936, has been based on European antecedents.
Thus while legend in this country has it that Life originated the notion of the
photo essay, the show convincingly suggests that magazines like the Berliner
Illustrirte Zeitung in Germany and Vu in France developed the form first.

''Eyes of Time'' also includes images by many Magnum photographers but does not
give the impression, as did the Magnum-organized exhibition that appeared in the
same space last fall, that the picture agency has been the alpha and omega of
postwar photojournalism. Many of the show's best images of civil-rights
protests, the Vietnam War, starvation in Ethiopia and political assassinations
come from the cameras of newspaper staff photographers, not of globe-trotting
freelancers. This is a welcome antidote to the glamorized image of
photojournalism as a profession of daredevils and white knights, which the
exhibition otherwise does its best to promote.

''Eyes of Time: Photojournalism in America'' remains at the International Center
of Photography Midtown, 1133 Avenue of the Americas, at 43d Street, through Aug.
19.

'Marilyn Bridges: The Sacred and the Secular'
International Center of Photography Midtown
Through Sept. 2

The more than 60 black-and-white pictures in this exhibition were all taken from
the air, which gives them a continuity that overrides the diversity of their
geography (Peru, Egypt, Britain, Greece and elsewhere) and subject matter
(ancient land forms, hillside villages, temples, oil-storage tanks). In most of
the work, Marilyn Bridges combines an interest in describing sites imbued with
ritual significance with a penchant for turning her horizonless pictures into
graphic abstractions.

When she chooses to push abstraction into the foreground, however, the results
suffer from a sense of deja vu. William Garnett, for one, has done better in
this vein, which no longer carries the blood it once did. Her prints, at 16 by
20 inches and larger, reveal too much film grain to look seamless, and they lack
the small details of the sort that would give her images some tooth. Still, what
is described in the pictures is often sufficiently interesting - Nazca lines, a
windmill farm, a golf course overlaid on an Indian mound - that the
peculiarities of style and printing can be overlooked.

Helen Chadwick
Meat Lamps
Burden Gallery
20 East 23d Street
Through Aug. 11

An exhibition of photographs and photographic sculpture devoted to
slaughterhouse leavings laced with electrical cords and light bulbs does not
sound especially appealing. But Helen Chadwick, an English artist known for her
earnest and highly theoretical pictures, manages to pull it off, thanks largely
to a small dose of self-aware humor.

''Meat Lamps'' consists of seven color still lifes (one of them a diptych) made
with a large-format Polaroid camera, two wall constructions with photographic
transparencies lighted from behind, and an installation involving three
projectors, a blue neon light and a cord of human hair. In this company the
plain photographs, which depict the entrails of various animals together with
electric lights and backgrounds of fabric and hide, seem the least interesting.
Primarily this is because they rely on conventional Surrealist shock effects,
which by now have lost their power to provoke. (One is reminded of Henri
Cartier-Bresson's 1932 abattoir image ''La Villette,'' with its gory, bedraggled
animal hide.) The lamp-like sculptures and the installation are more engaging
because they are unusual, hybrid objects and because they complicate Ms.
Chadwick's apparent intentions. ''Philosopher's Fear of Flesh,'' for example,
takes the shape of a figure eight, with a picture of chicken flesh on top and
one of a human stomach on the bottom. The connection between consumer and
consumable is no harder to fathom here than the tension between repulsion and
the sublime that threads throughout the show. Perhaps the title ''Meat Lamps''
is meant as a wry comment on John Ruskin's ''Lamp of Beauty,'' although just how
wry Ms. Chadwick means to be is never entirely clear.

John Maggiotto
Laurence Miller Gallery
138 Spring Street
Through July 27

The 22 images in John Maggiotto's first one-man show in a New York gallery
resemble archeological fragments culled from a mysterious and long-departed
civilization. Like shards from an Egyptian wall inscription, they are discrete
bits of information that invite us to puzzle out a coherent meaning, but the
signs themselves are indisputably modern: a romantic scene from a Hollywood
movie, a baseball player at bat, a sleeping homeless man, Andy Warhol's eyes.

These fragmented and fragmentary photographic images appear, one to a panel, on
irregular plaster shapes that are coated with a layer of translucent paint. The
images are culled from television movies, commercials and news programs, but the
antique and painterly quality of their presentation imbues them with an
ambiguous, tantalizing aura. Mr. Maggiotto, whose work has previously appeared
largely in group shows at artist-run spaces, clearly is on a promising track,
but the message of his work is not especially sanguine. One senses from these
fragmented television messages that our cultural life is fragmented as well.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Bob Jackson's photograph ''Oswald Shot,'' 1963, is one of the
many images in ''Eyes of Time: Photojournalism in America,'' at the
International Center of Photography Midtown.; ''White Angel Bread Line, San
Francisco, 1932,'' by Dorothea Lange, can be seen in the exhibition ''Eyes of
Time: Photojournalism in America,'' at the International Center of Photography
Midtown. (International Center of Photography)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              25 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 7, 1990, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Peru: No Vietnam in the Andes

SECTION: Section 1; Page 22, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 471 words


President Bush's offer of military aid for Peru's antidrug campaign raises fears
that he'll involve the U.S. in another Vietnam. Those fears are unwarranted. A
tough military strategy in the Andes, coupled with substantial development aid,
is essential to antidrug policy.

The Administration sent increased aid to Colombia last summer, after the
Colombians began an aggressive campaign against drug traffickers. In January Mr.
Bush met with the Presidents of Colombia, Peru and Bolivia to discuss a wider
program. Funds are flowing to Colombia and Bolivia, but Peru remains on hold as
its President-elect, Alberto Fujimori, ponders the issue.

Framing U.S. policy is especially difficult in Peru because of a vicious
guerrilla group, Sendero Luminoso, or Shining Path. It has flourished inland,
gaining ground while the national Government is beset by severe economic
problems.

These guerrillas are violent terrorists. But that by itself does not justify
sending U.S. military advisers into the middle of an apparent civil war. What
justifies the military aid is the Shining Path's heavy involvement in sustaining
coca production. It thereby presents a clear threat to the United States.

So why the anxiety about fighting these guerrillas - especially since the aid
would consist only of equipment and training? No one proposes to involve U.S.
troops in combat. Some worry that if U.S. advisers are wounded or killed, the
Administration would face irresistible pressures to escalate. Others fear the
aid would give too much political power to the Peruvian military. Mr. Fujimori's
effectiveness remains unknown. Why take even a small chance?

Because common sense suggests it's a reasonable risk. Drug enforcement agents
have already suffered casualties in the Andes and elsewhere without provoking
military intervention. And the $35 million President Bush wants this year would
finance neither a dramatic U.S. escalation nor a major expansion of the Peruvian
Army.

Mr. Bush's plan is also challenged by drug policy experts who argue that it's
hopeless to attack a single country or regional source of supply, since other
suppliers soon might enter the picture. The experience of recent months suggests
otherwise. The Colombian campaign apparently disrupted trafficking enough to
puncture the market for raw coca leaves in Bolivia. Thousands of growers began
seeking help to plant other crops.

And drug enforcement officials now begin to detect the effects of reduced supply
on the U.S. market. Prices of cocaine products are rising and purity is falling.
Apparently it is not so easy for traffickers to adjust.

The progress in Colombia and Bolivia exceeds anything even the most hawkish drug
warriors might have predicted only months ago. It vindicates the limited help
Mr. Bush offers Peru, and the limited risk.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              26 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   July 8, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

U.S. Weighs a Shift on Cambodia Policy

BYLINE: By CLIFFORD KRAUSS, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 3, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1115 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 7


The Bush Administration is beginning quietly to reconsider its policy of
supporting a guerrilla insurgency against the Vietnamese-backed Government of
Cambodia, officials say.

While a full-fledged policy review is not yet under way, they said that pressure
on Capitol Hill and developments on the battlefield and at the negotiating table
could force other options, including contacts with Phnom Penh or withdrawal from
the conflict altogether.

''Policies have to deal with realities,'' said one official. ''When those
realities change, you have to look at the policy again.''

Washington is giving more than $15 million a year in covert and overt aid to two
small non-Communist guerrilla groups fighting in a loose coalition on the side
of Khmer Rouge, the powerful Communist rebel group, against Prime Minister Hun
Sen's faction.

Some Fear Khmer Rouge Return

Although the aid, described as nonlethal, is small compared with the support
that China and Singapore give to the guerrillas, critics say that United States
policy could help bring Pol Pot and his Khmer Rouge back to power.

Human rights monitors charge that more than a million people died under Khmer
Rouge rule in the 1970's, during a radical restructuring throughout the nation.

The Administration continues to argue that the present policy is the best way to
shore up the non-Communist guerrillas and to restrain an expansionist Vietnam,
which helped install the present ruling faction in Phnom Penh in 1979.

The Administration backs a proposal of Australia and Representative Stephen J.
Solarz, Democrat of Brooklyn, that the United Nations would help administer
Cambodia after a cease-fire until democratic elections.

A Policy From Carter Years

United States policy goes back to the late 1970's, when the Carter
Administration, hoping to improve relations with Beijing, put aside its human
rights concerns and condoned China's support of the Khmer Rouge.

By 1982, Washington had helped persuade the non-Communist forces, whose most
prominent leader is Prince Norodom Sihanouk, to join with the Khmer Rouge to
drive Vietnam and the Hun Sen faction out of Cambodia.

There was little debate on the issue for years, as worries over Vietnamese
expansionism outweighed concern about the Khmer Rouge's returning to power.

But that is changing as a growing number in Congress fear a Khmer Rouge victory
and wonder why the United States needs to involve itself in a struggle of
limited strategic importance.

Such thinking was bolstered when Vietnam withdrew most of its 200,000 troops
from Cambodia last year.

Moscow Reduces Its Support

Administration officials say that the Vietnamese continue to deploy elite forces
and advisers in Cambodia. But they concede that the Soviet Union has cut back
its support for Vietnam and Cambodia and that Moscow will probably continue to
do so.

The waning of the cold war has also affected United States policy thinking.

The policy has not been going well, Administration and Congressional sources
say, because the Khmer Rouge is gaining on the battlefield and stalling at the
negotiating table.

Moreover, a secret vote by the Senate Intelligence Committee to cut an estimated
$10 million in aid to the insurgency late last month was a sign of growing
opposition.

House Approve Overt Aid

The House approved more than $7 million in overt aid two weeks ago, but the
Senate Democratic leadership has pledged to cut it.

''I'm troubled by the reports I'm getting that some of our aid is winding up in
the hands of the Khmer Rouge and I can't support anything that would allow that
to happen,'' said Senator Patrick J. Leahy, Democrat of Vermont, chairman of the
subcommittee that will soon handle the legislation.

''We are on the defensive,'' said a Congressional aide who supports the official
Administration position.

With a push from middle-level State Department and Central Intelligence Agency
officials here and in Thailand, the Administration is beginning to consider
adjustments.

Mitchell Urges Talks

A senior State Department official said that he had asked his aides ''to take a
hard look'' at a statement on June 11 by Senator George J. Mitchell, the Maine
Democrat, in which the majority leader suggested that the United States open
talks with the Hun Sen faction and ease restrictions on development and
humanitarian aid to Cambodia.

The Bush Administration has argued that Prime Minister Hun Sen is illegitimate
because his Government remains dependent on Vietnamese support.

In his statement, Senator Mitchell said: ''The Administration's Cambodia policy
is incredible. It is insupportable. It must be changed.'' Senator Mitchell also
advised that the United States withdraw its support for Khmer Rouge
participation in the delegation that occupies Cambodia's seat in the United
Nations.

Mr. Mitchell also suggested that steps be taken to ''divorce'' the non-Communist
factions from the Khmer Rouge.

A State Department official said the Administration might decide to go a step
further than Mr. Mitchell's proposal by encouraging the Sihanouk forces to join
with the Hun Sen faction against the Khmer Rouge.

Wariness of Offending China

But he said such a policy would have to be pursued quietly. Otherwise, the
Chinese might be emboldened to step up their support for the Khmer Rouge.

The official stressed that such options had not yet reached the policy-making
level of the Administration.

A second State Department official said that Secretary of State James A. Baker
3d, who has focused his attention on Europe and the Soviet Union for the last
several months, will begin to consider Asia policy as he prepares for a meeting
this month of Association of Southeast Asian Nations, or Asean, foreign
ministers.

Such a review, he suggested, could include as an option the opening of talks
with Prime Minister Hun Sen.

Crucial Meeting in Paris

Proponents and opponents of the Administration position say the turning point
for the policy could come if the five permanent members of United Nations
Security Council, scheduled to meet in Paris this month, failed to work out a
framework for an interim government and elections.

Whatever the American policy, it may be difficult to stop the Khmer Rouge. The
Hun Sen faction has had limited success in combating the well-disciplined
guerrillas.

''It is pretty late,'' said Nayan Chanda, a senior associate at the Carnegie
Endowment for International Peace. ''But the only thing that could prevent the
Khmer Rouge from taking power is a united approach by the Western industrial
nations and Asean to urge Prince Sihanouk to form a coalition with the Hun Sen
regime.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              27 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   July 8, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Cazuza, Brazilian Singer, 32

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 18, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 133 words

DATELINE: RIO DE JANEIRO, July 7


Cazuza, a popular singer and composer in Brazil who emerged as a symbol in the
country's fight against AIDS, died in his sleep today after a four-year struggle
with the disease. He was 32 years old.

The singer, whose given name was Agenor Miranda de Araujo Neto, began as a
performer in small clubs. His career took off in 1984 when he joined a hard rock
band, Barao Vermelho, Portuguese for the Red Baron. Then Cazuza left to record
on his own. Mixing bossa nova music with 1960's British and American rock, he
composed and recorded his first solo album in 1985, a record known for its
biting, sarcastic tone and lyrics.

Cazuza's music underwent a transformation after doctors confirmed in 1986 that
he had AIDS. His songs gained a poetic quality, the lyrics focusing on his
struggle to live.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OBITUARY

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              28 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   July 8, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

The Bitter Fight Over the Manville Trust

BYLINE: By STEPHEN LABATON

SECTION: Section 3; Page 1, Column 2; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 3209 words


Hordes of lawyers will fill the benches of a courtroom at the United States
Courthouse in Brooklyn tomorrow to watch what will happen with more than 500
plaintiffs who say they have suffered from inhaling asbestos at the Brooklyn
Navy Yard more than 25 years ago. But the stakes are significantly greater than
for just those former shipyard workers or their families.

The Federal judge supervising the case, Jack B. Weinstein, appears poised to
make a controversial play to use their cases, along with some fancy procedural
footwork, to sweep onto his docket thousands of personal injury claims choking
courts throughout the country. What he does will affect the course not only of
hundreds of thousands of asbestos cases against hundreds of former asbestos
manufacturers, distributors and users, but also probably the handling of most
other kinds of major product-liability cases to be heard in the United States.

The judge's vehicle - target may be the better word - is the trust set up two
years ago by the Manville Corporation. The Denver-based company was for decades
the world's largest asbestos manufacturer and, until the trust was set up, the
largest defendant. The trust was established to assume all of Manville's
liability for the product, which has been found to cause cancer and other
diseases in those who breathed its fibers.

Now the trust, handling what legal scholars call the largest product-liability
disaster in American history, is effectively out of cash, unable to make
payments as it faces more claims than ever.

These experts, as well as some lawyers on both sides, charge that the
once-promising trust, the Manville Personal Injury Settlement Trust, is a
casualty of mismanagement, poor planning and of lack of oversight by the
bankruptcy judge who set it up and had been warned repeatedly about its decline.
These critics contend, and an extensive review of case records confirms, that
the single most important factor in depleting the trust has been the wildly
excessive fees charged by the lawyers for the victims and the trust.

Trust officials, for their part, say they have done nothing improper and have
only followed the trust plan, which they insist is equitable. They say they
never expected so many cases to be handled so quickly, and blame the trust's
problems on the local judges, especially Judge Weinstein, who have been
challenging the trust's management.

''These judges are giving us a pack of troubles,'' John C. Sawhill, chairman of
the trustees, said in an interview. ''They've upset the staff, driven down the
stock and cut off our ability to raise funds.''

''These judges are frustrated,'' Marianna S. Smith, the trust's chain-smoking,
fast-talking executive director said. ''They've had these cases on their dockets
since God was a little girl.'' The bankruptcy judge who established the trust,
Burton R. Lifland, declines comment.

The depleted trust is now a defendant in about 90,000 cases still to be heard
before 500 state courts in 374 different jurisdictions or in each of the 96
Federal courts in the nation. Moreover, hundreds of thousands more cases are
expected to be filed. The trust's difficulties are having an enormous impact,
even on those cases where it is only one of several defendants.

''The trust has been completely looted by the first group of cases that took all
the money, leaving nothing for everyone else,'' said Richard F. Scruggs, a
lawyer from Pascagoula, Miss. Lawson F. Bernstein, a Manhattan lawyer who has
been assisting Mr. Scruggs in representing thousands of shipyard workers in
Mississippi and other Southern states, said: ''It is the classic story of how
the little guys were used for the big guys to make money.'' The Southern workers
have been told by the trust not to expect any payment of valid claims for 25
years, by which time many will be dead.

The critics maintain, and the trust executives deny, that the close relationship
between the executives - many are former officials of the pro-plaintiff
Association of Trial Lawyers of America - and a handful of plaintiffs' lawyers
translated into a policy of doling out unusually large sums of cash to the first
victims.

Whatever the reason, future claimants have been left out in the cold, not only
the former Brooklyn Navy yard workers, but a total of about 130,000 elsewhere in
the country. And the number is steadily growing because asbestos-related
diseases often do not become apparent for decades after exposure. Typical of the
Navy Yard cases is Murray Silver, a retired employee of The Daily News, who
worked at the yard in 1944, when he was 17 years old, withhis bare hands and no
face mask, covering pipes with asbestos. Thirty-six years later, Mr. Silver,
suffering from shortness of breath and tiring easily, was diagnosed with
asbestosis.

A Special Master

Judge Weinstein has secretly lined up a lawyer to fill the role of special
master to begin preparing a detailed record of the Manville trust's problems - a
record he may use as the basis for seizing its remaining assets and for
restructuring it.

The judge, who is 68, is regarded in the profession as one of the nation's most
brilliant jurists, an unconventional scholar who often foresakes the judicial
trappings of robes and his place on the bench to sit in the well among the
litigants in a business suit.

He wrote the definitive text on evidence, helped write procedural rules for New
York State courts and in 1984 played a key role in getting the chemical
companies and veterans to settle the Agent Orange case, a complex litigation
over exposure to a defoliant used in Vietnam.

Judge Weinstein has confided in friends and told an audience at a law conference
in Tel Aviv recently that the only solution to the nationwide problem of
asbestos cases choking the courts is to move them into a single forum before one
judge.

''The key to the asbestos cases is their aggregation,'' the judge said in an
interview Thursday. ''They should be before one judge - centralizing all
plaintiffs and all defendants - who could establish a plan for payment based
upon the needs of the victims.''

One procedural route likely is Rule 23(b)(1)(B) of the Federal Rules of Civil
Procedure, which enables a judge to approve a class action, allowing plaintiffs
to sue collectively when, as a practical matter, a decision in favor of one
plaintiff affects the interests of others.

His ultimate goal is to establish a pattern for dealing with cases of clear
product liability under a system similar to no-fault insurance. Under it, all
victims and their families who need help rapidly can get it, without having in
each case to go through the long process of proving precisely who was at fault
in doing what, and then, if successful, receiving merely a promise of payment in
decades to come.

The system would be similar to the one he devised for disposition of the Agent
Orange cases. But unlike in the Agent Orange cases, several judges have already
denied class-action status to asbestos plaintiffs. Judge Weinstein has said he
is acting, despite the prior rulings, because of his concern with speeding
settlements and controlling the lawyers' fees. He hopes to set up free medical
monitoring and a national asbestos registry of victims, their payments and need
for additional funds.

Judge Weinstein and a colleague, New York State Supreme Court Justice Helen E.
Freedman, have said if no settlement is reached soon in the Brooklyn cases, in
September they will conduct the first trial ever for several hundred parties
whose cases will be governed by a complicated blend of state and Federal laws.
Those knowledgeable in court procedures envision the process as a legal
nightmare.

The empty accounts of the trust, whose money is supplied by Manville's insurers
and periodic payments from the Manville Corporation, are to receive no major new
infusions until September 1991.

The trustees spent all of the trust's first available cash, $974 million, on the
first 22,386 claims - the bulk of them predating the Manville bankruptcy filing
in 1982. At that rate, the trust would have to pay out more than $5 billion,
although its total assets over its lifetime is not expected to be anywhere near
$3 billion. The trust paid an average of $43,509 to settle cases its planners
thought would be settled at an average cost of $25,000. In the vast majority of
these cases, according to the trust's critics and other asbestos defendants,
other companies had already fully compensated the victims.

Asbestos, a white flaky mineral that has natural heat-resistant and
fire-retardant properties, became widely used by the turn of the century as
insulation material in construction projects, at shipyards and in household
appliances. Between 1940 and 1980 alone, an estimated 21 million Americans were
exposed to it at work, and countless millions more are believed to have inhaled
loose fibers at various locations.

After World War II, medical scientists led by Dr. Irving J. Selikoff discovered
the fibers cause lung cancer, asbestosis, mesothelioma and other severely
debilitating and fatal diseases. The research translated into litigation, and by
1982 the Manville Corporation alone faced more than 16,000 lawsuits and
increasingly large jury verdicts. In August of that year, it sought the
protection of a bankruptcy court. ''Surely scholars will write for a long time
about the law that was made in this court and the way solutions were found to
unprecedented problems,'' an ebullient W. Thomas Stephens said from the witness
box of Federal bankruptcy court in Manhattan on Dec. 9, 1988, at the end of the
protracted bankruptcy of the Manville Corporation. ''I believe that surely
history will also acknowledge that we did good work in this case. I am
personally proud of being a part of the process, and I think all the
professionals that made a contribution that I acknowledge should feel proud
also. ''

A Bankruptcy Plan

Mr. Stephens, chief executive of Manville, was speaking at one of the final
bankruptcy hearings, the one in which fees were being apportioned among the
lawyers in the case. He had reason to feel happy, and secure. For under the
bankruptcy plan, Manville believed it would forever be shielded from all legal
liability in connection with asbestos, in exchange for periodic contributions to
the trust. The company had bought its peace, or so it believed.

The supervisor of the case, and a prime architect of the solution, Judge
Lifland, had kind words for many of the lawyers, but he saved his highest praise
for Leon Silverman, a senior partner at Fried, Frank, Harris, Shriver & Jacobson
of New York. In 1984, Judge Lifland had assigned Mr. Silverman the task of
persuading all parties to agree to a mechanism to settle all present and future
claims. The complicated agreement would have to be worked out among present
claimants and their lawyers; future claimants and their lawyers - a group
working on behalf of asbestos-exposed people who are not yet afflicted with
disease but can reasonably be expected to become so; the Manville Corporation
and all other defendant manufacturers of asbestos, and their insurance
companies.

Within two years, Mr. Silverman had forged such an agreement. So impressed with
the performance was the judge that he issued an unusual order that set the tone
for events to follow. Mr. Silverman submitted a bill to the Manville Corporation
for his work, based on total billable hours plus expenses, of $2.3 million.
Judge Lifland awarded him a premium: a bonus for good work of 100 percent -
another $2.3 million. Manville's lawyers had insisted at the hearing that a 10
percent premium for his work would have been more than adequate, prompting a
response from Mr. Silverman that 10 percent would be ''insulting,''
''offensive'' and ''irritating beyond words.'' In an interview, Mr. Silverman
said his fees were justified by the results and that he believes the trust's
current difficulties can be worked out.

The Settlement's Price

The agreement he arranged, it is now clear, came at a significant price. At the
insistence of a committee of plaintiffs' laywers, there was to be no scrutiny of
their compensation. Personal-injury lawyers typically receive a third or more of
individual settlement fees or court awards. But the initial intention was that
fees would be much lower because the volume of cases would be much higher and
the workload per case lower. In fact, the plaintiffs continued to charge high
fees, averaging between 33 percent and 40 percent, all without question from the
trustees, until the trust's funds ran out. Another cost of the original
agreement, from the victims viewpoint, was that they were to be compensated not
on the basis of need or severity of injury, but on when they filed their claims
with the trust. First come, first served. The theory was that the first cases
were the most severe, but that turned out not to be so.

It turned out, too, that the lawyers on the plaintiffs committee who requested
the priority system represented many of the clients who filed earliest. The
majority of the plaintiffs suing Manville were represented by fewer than two
dozen law firms, who stood to earn enormous sums regardless of whether the newer
clients would ever receive a penny, although they had advised all these clients
to approve the plan. What the arrangement meant in practice was that the early
filers have received cash, while the later ones have received promises and
unmarketable notes.

Last month, Judge Lifland called Mr. Silverman back into the case to respond in
the coming weeks to questions by Judge Weinstein and Justice Freedman about high
lawyers' fees and the overall financial difficulties of the trust.

The trust's executives say their predicament is in part a result of the plan,
including the provision that denied them control of lawyers' fees, which was
forged by Mr. Silverman and Judge Lifland. But the critics counter that even
after it became clear that asbestos victims were being ill-served by the trust,
Mr. Sawhill and the other trustees resisted all attempts to try to change it.

In an interview last week, the trust's executive director conceded that that
criticism might be justified.

''If I have any criticism of my trustees, it's that they did not go back to the
court at an early time and ask for some changes,'' Ms. Smith said. ''Maybe they
should have been tougher.''

Possible conflicts of interest between their early clients and later clients or
between attorney and client were not addressed, Mr. Sawhill said.

Mr. Stephens of the Manville Corporation said it bears no responsibility for
bailing out the trust beyond operating according to the terms of the bankruptcy
plan. The company is now highly profitable, producing fiberglass and forest
products.

Whether his position holds up will depend on Judge Weinstein's bold maneuvers
beginning this week - and on the outcome of the inevitable battles they will
ignite.

'CONFLICTING DUTIES' OF LOYALTY?

Lawyers for both the defendants and plaintiffs in asbestos-liability cases
complain about the relationship between plaintiffs' lawyers who handled the
first series of cases and Manville defendants.

One target of such criticism is Stanley J. Levy, a partner at Levy Phillips &
Konigsberg, which represents 132 of the plaintiffs in the Brooklyn Navy Yard
case and has more than 500 asbestos plaintiffs elsewhere. The firm charges 33
percent plus expenses for compensation it obtains for clients. Mr. Levy is on
the board of the Manville Corporation. As a director, he receives $25,000 a
year, plus $1,000 for each board meeting he attends and $750 for each committee
meeting, according to a proxy statement. He also confers regularly with W.
Thomas Stephens, chief executive of Manville. Mr. Levy insists he is not in a
conflicting position, noting the existence of an injunction that protects the
Manville Corporation from asbestos liability and shifts its legal problems to
the separate trust.

Scholars say the corporation's liability will probably become an issue to be
litigated because of the trust's inability to make payments. Stephen Gillers, a
New York University School of Law professor, said, ''If an argument can be made
against the injunction, then I don't see how he could be both a member of the
board and a lawyer for his clients. He has conflicting duties of loyalty.''

THE LAWYERs DID FINE

The books of the Manville Trust show $219.5 million in available cash. Its only
new income due before the end of next year is $7.6 million. Where is that money
going?

According to court papers, the trust has set aside $30 million in liability
insurance for its executives and $76.4 million for its lawyers. It plans $27.5
million for operating expenses. Total projected expenses through most of next
year are $133.9 million, leaving $93.2 million to pay the $112.8 million in
settled claims (it is running a deficit of $19.6 million).

This does not signify that the sick or families of the deceased will see all
$93.2 million. Plaintiffs' lawyers are collecting between a third and 40 percent
of the amounts victims get from the trust, though in most cases theydo little
more than submit clients' medical and work records to the trust. Using an
average of 36.5 percent to calculate lawyer fee, the plaintiffs' lawyers can
expect to receive an additional $34 million.

This means that of the $227.1 million in available cash, the victims who filed
years ago will receive about $59 million. That amount, from which thousands of
victims must be compensated, is only about double the reserves the trust has set
aside to protect a handful of its own executives from potential liability.

THE MANVILLE TRUST: OUT OF CASH

HOW THE TRUST FUND IS FINANCED

Funds received when trust started in 1988:


* $687 million in payments and interest from Manville's insurance companies.


* $155 million in payments and interest from Manville.

Restricted assets which will be available later:


* 24 million shares of Manville common stock (50 percent of the company's
outstanding stock in 1988 when it emerged from bankruptcy).


* 7.2 million shares of Manville series A preferred stock, convertible into 72
million shares of common stock (no stock can be sold for five years unless
certain conditions are satisfied).


* Payments on $1.8 billion face amount of bonds issued by Manville or $75
million per year for a maximum of 24 years beginning in 1991.


* Starting in 1992, up to 20 percent of any profits Manville makes.

WHERE THE MONEY HAS GONE SO FAR


* $974 million spent on first 22,386 claims, $842 million in cash plus promised
payments, or an average of $43,509 a claim; trust's architects had projected
$25,000 a claim. No fresh cash expected until the end of 1991.

WHAT THIS PROBLEM MEANS FOR ASBESTOS VICTIMS


* About 130,00 other claimants, including victims' survivors, get no payments
any time soon. Instead, they get a promise of payment based solely on when they
filed their claim rather than their financial need or the seveity of their
injuries. No interest will be given on these payments.

Source: Manville Personal Injury Settlement Trust.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Jack B. Weinstein: Federal judge who wants to wrest control of
all asbestos cases (Fred R. Conrad/The New York Times); Harry White, Asbestos
Victim: Thousands injured by the fibers won't see money until 2015 Frank C.
Dougherty for The New York Times); Leon Silverman: Charged $2.3 million for
helping set up trust. Court gave him a $2.3 million bonus (Patrick D. Pagnano);
Burton R. Lifland: Manville Corporation bankruptcy judge. Told to solve the
trust's problems (Jim Wilson/The New York Times); Stanley J. Levy: Sees no
conflict as plaintiffs' lawyer and Manville Corporation director (Chester
Higgins Jr./The New York Times); Marianna S. Smith: Trust executive director,
with W. Thomas Stephens, Manville C.E.O. (Lynn Alweis/The Denver Post) (pg. 1);
Former Manville employees and t

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              29 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   July 8, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Americans Should Travel Wherever They Wish;
U.S. Position Is Right

SECTION: Section 4; Page 16, Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 375 words


To the Editor:

In seeking to capitalize on the new rapprochement between the United States and
the Soviet Union, Gene Guerrero and Jeanne M. Woods of the American Civil
Liberties Union blame the United States for continuing restrictions on travel to
Cuba, Cambodia, Libya, North Korea and Vietnam (''Cold War Mentality: Alive and
Well,'' Op-Ed, June 3). They do so without a word of criticism about the nature
of these hideous regimes, nor without mentioning that the Soviet Union is faced
with resistance from these totalitarian regimes in its own efforts to expand
perestroika and glasnost.

Each of the nations singled out is in the bottom rank of every human rights
assessment. Each sponsors direct military and terrorist activities aimed at
United States interests and citizens. If the cold war mentality is alive and
well, it is precisely in the countries singled out by Mr. Guerrero and Ms.
Woods. There is every indication that Cuba is not only moving to restrict Soviet
publications, but also intensifying repression against any semblance of change.

As for Cambodia, Libya, North Korea and Vietnam: we probably have the four worst
offenders in civil liberties. Each restricts travel in its own country or
outside. None admit of peaceful association and assembly. None permit open
monitoring of human rights violations. Each has wide incidences of torture and
coercion by state authorities. Each admits of capital punishment. None permit
political opposition, elections by secret ballot and independent press,
television and publishing. Legal and personal rights are virtually nonexistent.

In the face of such conditions, the official United States position on travel
restrictions could hardly be different. This is especially the case with Cubans,
who are on the verge of basic changes in their homeland. An indicator of the end
of the cold war is that the Soviet Union increasingly has come to share in such
concerns. The cold war mentality is alive and well - but more in the offices of
the A.C.L.U. than either the United States or the Soviet Union.

IRVING LOUIS HOROWITZ
  New Brunswick, N.J., June 15, 1990

The writer is Hannah Arendt Distinguished Professor of Sociology and Political
Science, Rutgers University.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              30 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   July 8, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Americans Should Travel Wherever They Wish;
Cuba Wants Tourists

SECTION: Section 4; Page 16, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 327 words


To the Editor:

In ''Who's Afraid of Foreign Ideas?'' (editorial, June 16), in support of
Representative Howard Berman's bill, you state, ''it's scarcely surprising that
Communist regimes in Cuba, North Korea and Vietnam now worry about infection
from Western visitors.''

Not true of Cuba, which is expanding its tourist industry. Cuba needs the hard
currency and welcomes tourists from the West. I met great numbers of tourists in
Havana this year from Canada, West Germany, Britain, Ireland and France. The few
United States citizens I met were not tourists. They had been permitted to go
because they fulfilled certain United States Government criteria.

Your statement that United States citizens may travel legally to Cuba is
misleading. My credentials as a journalist enabled me to go to Cuba this year
and four years ago. Before I left for Cuba this year, I received a pamphlet,
''What You Need to Know About the U.S. Embargo,'' issued by the Office of
Foreign Assets Control, Department of the Treasury. An excerpt should dispel any
notion that it is easy for United States citizens to travel legally to Cuba:

''Spending money related to Cuban travel is restricted. This restriction
includes spending money in connection with tourist, business or recreational
trips, whether travelers go di-rectly to Cuba or via a third country . . .
Penalties for violating the sanctions range up to 12 years in prison, $500,000
in corporate and $250,000 in individual fines.''

The United States Government has also denied ABC permission to televise the
Pan-American Games scheduled for Havana next year for rebroadcast to the United
States.

Representative Berman's bill would restore the rights of citizens to travel to
Cuba and could lead - one would hope - to lifting the trade embargo against Cuba
and the normalization of relations with Cuba. It is time Washington's Berlin
Wall came tumbling down!

SYLVIA KORNREICH ORANS
  New York, June 19, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              31 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   July 8, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Americans Should Travel Wherever They Wish

SECTION: Section 4; Page 16, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 364 words


To the Editor:

Your support in ''Who's Afraid of Foreign Ideas?'' (editorial, June 16) for
Representative Howard Berman's bill to end ideologically based restrictions on
travel, now applied to Cuba, North Korea, Vietnam, Cambodia and Iran, is most
welcome. It would be an unnecessary mistake, however, to replace ideological
restrictions with new ones based on physical danger.

Identifying regions of imminent danger is problematic. I just returned from
three weeks in Colombia, a country widely portrayed as the Lebanon of South
America. I don't want to minimize Colombia's problems, but aside from the
occasional car bomb, political violence is concentrated in a few regions (such
as Medillin and Cordoba) and against such people as government officials and
wealthy landowners.

What then is the test for ''likely physical danger''? Should I have been
prevented from traveling to Colombia, and kept from firsthand knowledge of that
country's situation, because of the remote chance that I might have been blown
up?

Surely, the issue is not risk of bodily harm. If it were, most United States
cities would be no-go zones. You do not specify what motivates your endorsement
of restrictions on travel to countries where ''Americans are in actual danger.''
I presume, however, that you wish to protect the United States Government from
extortion by foreign hostage takers.

While the goal is laudable, the means could allow reintroduction of
ideologically based travel restrictions under a different name. The vagueness of
''likely physical danger'' would allow the executive branch far too much
discretion.

The United States Government can be shielded from possible extortion without
threatening the right of Americans to travel freely. The Administration need
only implement its avowed policy of not dealing with terrorists. Were the
Government to ignore kidnappers' demands, international extortion would vanish.
Americans abroad might still be kidnapped, but the Government at home would not
be bowed.

Americans should be able to travel wherever they wish. They simply shouldn't
expect the Government to ransom them.

ANDREW TAUBER
  Cambridge, Mass., June 18, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              32 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   July 8, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

About Men;
Reunion In Da Nang

BYLINE: By NGUYEN QUI DUC; Nguyen Qui Duc is a commentator for National Public
Radio; he lives in San Francisco.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 12, Column 3; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 1238 words


We are four of us, men in our early 30's, squatting on crude stools on a
sidewalk in Da Nang, a perpetually sunny city on the central coast of Vietnam.
At midmorning, the streets are crowded, noisy. The heat is unbearable. All four
of us order iced coffee. For long moments, we stay silent, awkward. It has been
15 years since we were last together.

We were once teen-agers going to the same high school. In 1975, I fled the
country when the Communist North took over South Vietnam. I have since lived
safely in various American cities. I have traveled freely and held interesting
jobs in many parts of the world. All this time I have never written to friends
who stayed behind in Vietnam, isolated in a postwar country that has not found
peace and prosperity. But now I am back home and I unexpectedly run into my
friends and I find no way of explaining why I had never written. Not having an
address is too weak an excuse, however truthful that may be.

Out on the sidewalk I toy with my glass of iced coffee, finding few words to
carry on a conversation that can hide the differences in our lives. Around us
hundreds of people rush by on foot, on bicycles, on motor scooters. Everyone's
out on the street, selling newspapers, loose cigarettes or a few oranges.
Everyone's trying to make ends meet. A friend keeps saying, ''We're still
dealing with putting food on the table.''

During the war, Da Nang prospered as a port city, and thousands of American
soldiers were stationed just outside of town. On weekends, friends and I would
go to the open-air market to bargain for an army jacket or a Jimi Hendrix album
stolen from the American bases. We were a couple of years shy of draft age,
young enough not to worry too much about a war fought by somebody else far away
in the countryside.

As a refugee in the United States, I've never stopped thinking about the war.
Many nights it comes back in disjointed scenes in a dream about a place, a time
long ago and far away. No matter where I have lived, I have always longed to see
again my former school and the quaint old house of my childhood. For years I
resisted becoming an American citizen, as if that might be theJU ultimate act,
forever severing my ties to the homeland. As a journalist, I write about the
places to which I have traveled, but it is still easiest to write about the
things kids do in a third-world country at war.

Now I have found myself in the humbling position of having to use an American
passport to go back home. I landed in Ho Chi Minh City a bit alienated. As a
youth, I had never spent much time in this city, which everyone still calls
Saigon. Now in my official capacity as a ''foreign journalist'' on a tour of
Vietnam, I have been assigned guides from the Foreign Ministry. They make all my
arrangements, and take me to endless meetings with none-too-friendly officials.
I'm happy to speak Vietnamese again, but the joy is tempered since I don't know
people here. They think of me as a tourist. I have dollars.

Once in Da Nang I feel much more at home, fitting in relatively well. I bicycle
over known streets, overwhelmed again and again by places I recognize and times
I remember. With old friends in a coffee shop, the return trip becomes complete.

For a moment, we talk about more youthful days. A memorable Christmas party in
1974, an arrest and a night in jail for having long hair in 1973. Then another
friend shows up on a scooter. We stop talking, but none of us help him as he
struggles to stand his bike up on the sidewalk. He lost a leg fighting in
Cambodia in the early 80's.

Years as a journalist do not help me ask a simple question about his injury, and
I don't know how to acknowledge his artificial leg, his limp or my own emotions.
My friend asks why I had not bothered to get a Ph.D. Had I stayed in Vietnam I
would not have been allowed to go to college. My parents, who also fled to the
United States, worked for the ''puppet'' government of South Vietnam, and our
family would have been classified as ''enemies'' of the revolution.

Few of my friends in Vietnam finished college; we had similar family
backgrounds. Many simply had to give up school to work. A couple of them are
pedicab drivers, the disabled veteran is a tailor. Another sells whatever he can
find to sell, but most of his earnings go toward corruption. In order to buy and
sell things, most nights he must treat local officials to several rounds of
beer. ''I always come home drunk, crying in front of my hungry little sisters
and brothers,'' he says.

Friends with a job earn about $10 a month. ''Enough for my wife and me to have
breakfast for two weeks,'' says one. Like many in Vietnam, he depends on
financial support from relatives abroad. Another classmate stops by the coffee
shop for a few minutes, then dashes off to write a letter for me to take back to
the United States. An overseas stamp costs a fourth of an average monthly
salary.

I show my former classmates pictures of mutual friends now living in California.
''Look how fat everyone is,'' says someone. The glossy surface of the
photographs intensifies the opulence in the pictures. My friends turn their eyes
to the houses and cars in the photograph of a dream world.

I can't explain to my friends that in such a world, one's life is controlled by
a job, a mortgage and by credit-card payments. They keep talking about a life
controlled by the state, the security police, or the local authorities. Being
seen with me puts my friends at risk.

At 6 that morning, a friend had slipped into my hotel room. The night before,
two public security agents interrupted us in an interview at his home about his
activities since leaving the army. In my hotel room he was more at liberty to
complain about treatment of veterans. He had had to bribe officials to earn his
compensation pay, a minuscule amount that did not last long. A year after his
discharge from the army, he has not found a job.

I listened to his stories, and knowing I needed to help, reached for my wallet.
For a while, I sat with it on my hotel bed. He couldn't bring himself to ask for
help, and I couldn't find a delicate way to hand him the dollar bills.

Later, as we prepared to leave the coffee shop, I ask my old friends what I can
send back from the United States. They say not to ask, nor to promise. ''Do what
you can, but we won't expectJU anything. Not even a letter.''

I mumble a few words about how everyone's really busy in the United States. Many
of us who left in 1975 now live in California or Texas, successful in our
business or our profession. We are Asian yuppies, comfortable with our
achievements as immigrants and refugees. But perhaps the price to pay for
fulfillment of the American Dream is an inability to look back toward Vietnam,
to pay attention to friends left behind. I've come back to my country, but in a
few weeks, I'll return to the United States. My friends don't have such a choice
and it seems unlikely that their life will ever improve.

They ask whether I will come back for another visit. ''Next year,'' I say; I
also promise I'll write. Now that I have their addresses, it shouldn't be too
difficult. Writing will also be easier after this sidewalk reunion, even with
the long moments of silence. After all these years apart, words can only
acknowledge how awkward it is. Silence is what we choose to acknowledge, and
accept, the differences between our lives.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              33 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   July 8, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Post-Poughkeepsie

BYLINE: By JILL MCCORKLE; Jill McCorkle's fourth novel, ''Ferris Beach,'' will
be published this fall.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 18, Column 3; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 749 words



THE GOD OF NIGHTMARES
By Paula Fox.
225 pp. San Francisco:
North Point Press.
$18.95.

When a novel is set in a period of great turmoil, there is always the risk that
its characters will speak as prophets, giving voice to all the issues and
beliefs that we, with perfect hindsight, know to have been significant in the
time that followed. In ''The God of Nightmares,'' Paula Fox, the author of
several previous novels, skillfully avoids this oracular awkwardness by allowing
the setting of her story - a harshly segregated New Orleans in 1941, just prior
to America's entry into World War II - to work naturally. There are inescapable
threats here, but they are not manipulated or magnified. Instead, they remain in
the background, highlighting the finely drawn details of the characters' lives.

The novel opens when Helen Bynum, soon to turn 23, receives a letter reporting
the death of her father. Although he abandoned his wife and daughter 13 years
earlier, Helen's mother, a onetime Ziegfeld girl, has clung to the belief that
he would return. In the years since then, Helen and her mother have continued to
live on the family's decaying horse farm outside Poughkeepsie, N.Y., where they
rent out cabins to tourists.

Helen's memories of her father, who lost a fortune as a trainer and breeder, are
filled with strong masculine images. Ms. Fox gives us wonderfully rich
descriptions of him in the stables working with his beloved horses; these
recollections vividly conjure up Helen's aching sense of loss.

Helen's experience of the world beyond the farm is limited; in fact, she has
difficulty imagining herself away from it. And yet, while listening to her
mother reminisce about the man who left them, Helen finds herself longing for
something different: ''In a nameless city, I imagined my hand reaching for a
cord to turn on a light in a place entirely my own.''

After the letter arrives, Helen's mother must finally confront the truth of her
circumstances, and she insists that her daughter leave home to find a life of
her own. As a first step, Helen, who doesn't even own a suitcase, is instructed
to go to New Orleans and try to persuade her mother's sister, Lulu, to come
north for a visit.

Lulu is also a former Ziegfeld girl, but bears no other similarity to her
sister. She is an alcoholic who sobers up just long enough to collect her
monthly check from a trust fund and plunge back into her futile plans for
establishing a repertory theater before dropping everything for yet another
binge. When Helen finds her, she is passed out in bed, naked, being looked after
by a young man named Len.

Only temporarily disconcerted, Helen quickly settles into the liberating,
bohemian world of New Orleans, renting a room at a boardinghouse in the French
Quarter and making a place for herself within a circle of eccentric friends.
Among them is Gerald, a physically frail poet who lives with his lover,
Catherine, Helen's landlady, because his wife won't grant him a divorce. And
there is Claude, a wealthy homosexual who routinely drinks what he calls ''a
libation to the god of nightmares.'' Also present is Nina, a young woman who
becomes Helen's best friend, and the aforementioned Len, who is destined to
become Helen's husband. We learn of these people's lives slowly, in elusive bits
and pieces, as Helen collects the knowledge that will permanently remove her
from the cabins in Poughkeepsie.

There is a sense of completion at the end of Part One of ''The God of
Nightmares,'' and at first glance the single chapter that forms Part Two seems
merely an afterthought. Here the tone shifts as the languid, rhythmic language
Ms. Fox employs in the bulk of the book is speeded up to summarize the
intervening years. Here, as well, the references in the text to Vietnam, to
civil rights marches, do not carry the same subtleties as did the earlier
references to World War II and segregation.

However, once the scene has been set, Ms. Fox's prose returns to its earlier
pace and texture; the break, if not fully justified, is certainly easily
forgiven. For at the close Ms. Fox brings Helen full circle, back to the very
spot where she stood in 1941 and heard of her father's death. And at last Helen
learns another truth, a secret that takes the book to its powerful conclusion.
With this final scene, Paula Fox makes ''The God of Nightmares'' something more
than a well-crafted coming-of-age story, opening it out and spreading it across
a much wider canvas.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              34 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   July 8, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

New & Noteworthy

BYLINE: By GEORGE JOHNSON

SECTION: Section 7; Page 28, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 958 words



NEW YORK 1913: The Armory Show and the Paterson Strike Pageant, by Martin Green.
(Collier/Macmillan, $14.95.) In 1913, just about the time that the famous show
at the 69th Regiment Armory on Lexington Avenue was introducing New Yorkers to
the likes of Picasso and Duchamp, Big Bill Haywood and the Wobblies were
organizing a different kind of insurrection: a march up Fifth Avenue by 1,200
New Jersey millworkers striking for an eight-hour day. By drawing parallels
between these two events, Richard Snow said here in 1988, Martin Green has
created a book that is ''full of fascinating things, and alive with the vigor of
the eloquent men and women who were so sure they were about to create a
renaissance through the fusion of art and politics.''

NICE WORK, by David Lodge. (Penguin, $7.95.) Robyn Penrose, a feminist literary
critic who specializes inteasing out the hidden codes of the gray novels of the
Industrial Revolution, discovers that there is life outside the text - in the
form of Vic Wilcox, a real live member of the British managerial class. David
Lodge ''wears his learning lightly and shares it generously,'' Joel Conarroe
said here last year. ''One fringe benefit of his campus satires is enrollment in
a kind of crash course on structuralism, metafiction and related subjects that
interest him. Other common denominators in his novels include the improbable
happy ending, the obligatory brief affair between a liberated young woman and a
repressed older man and the unexpected windfall for a particularly deserving
character.''

THE GOOD TIMES, by Russell Baker. (Plume, $8.95.) In a sequel to ''Growing Up,''
the New York Times columnist tells how he made his way from the Baltimore police
beat to the Washington press corps. Last year our reviewer, Ward Just, called
this ''a superb autobiography, wonderfully told, often hilarious, always
intelligent and unsparing.'' The same publisher has also reissued THE RESCUE OF
MISS YASKELL: And Other Pipe Dreams ($8.95), a collection of Mr. Baker's
Observer columns.

THE ANTIPEOPLE, by Sony Labou Tansi. Translated by J. A. Underwood. (Marion
Boyars, $9.95.) Dadou, a former soccer star who has become principal of a
teachers' college in Zaire, finds his life unraveling after a student leaves a
suicide note implying that he is the father of her child. ''Dadou's falling star
touches off some powerful lights on its path to oblivion,'' Leonie Caldecott
said here in 1988. ''It is these lights that constitute the essential beauty of
this novel, illuminating the truth not only about one man's life but about
Africa as a whole.''

IT'S ALWAYS SOMETHING, by Gilda Radner. (Avon, $4.95.) Cancer, it seems, was
just about the only thing that Gilda Radner's laughter could not overcome. When
this book was published last year, around the time of her death, our reviewer,
Joanne Kennedy, called it a ''testimony from the cancer wars by a courageous and
much-loved entertainer who liked herself enough to share her suffering in her
own style.''

SOLDIER'S JOY, by Madison Smartt Bell. (Penguin, $8.95.) Returning home to
Tennessee from Vietnam, Thomas Laidlaw hopes for a quiet life playing banjo in a
bluegrass band; the last thing he wants is to become involved in a conflict with
the Ku Klux Klan. ''In a world where jangling minimalism and the staccato of
action and injury are excessively rewarded, Madison Smartt Bell has had the
craftsmanship, courage and artistic integrity to search for something less
fashionable,'' David Bradley said here last year.

CIRCUS OF AMBITION: The Culture of Wealth and Power in the Eighties, by John
Taylor. (Warner, $12.95.) In the last decade, the author writes, money so
dominated culture that the Metropolitan Museum of Art became known as ''Club
Met,'' a place where the rich could rent out rooms for their parties. Last year
our reviewer, Joanne B. Ciulla, said John Taylor ''aptly illustrates the psychic
distance that Americans traveled from the 60's to the 80's by comparing the
movie 'The Graduate' to 'Risky Business' and 'American Gigolo.' He says the 60's
attitude was 'business-as-prostitution,' while the 80's attitude changed to
'prostitution-as-business.' '' In FLUCTUATING FORTUNES: The Political Power of
Business in America (Basic Books, $11.95), David Vogel traces the successes and
failures of corporate America's attempts to persuade the public that what is
good for business is good for the commonweal. ''Mr. Vogel misses little and
understands much,'' Diana Henriques said here last year.

THE FOOL'S PROGRESS: An Honest Novel, by Edward Abbey. (Avon, $9.95.) Henry
Holyoak Lightcap is a typical Edward Abbey protagonist: a heavy-drinking,
semiphilosophical anarchist and nature lover, who in this novel sets off on a
cross-country pilgrimage to his ancestral home in West Virginia. ''It is when he
is sappy that Mr. Abbey is at his best,'' Howard Coale said here in 1988. ''When
he writes of a boy dreaming of 'the ghosts of Shawnee warriors' watching 'from
the shadows of the red oaks,' he is stirring something real in himself.'' Edward
Abbey died in 1989.

DEATH OF A GOD, by S. T. Haymon. (Crime Line/Bantam, $3.95.) A British superstar
whose specialty is biblical rock is found crucified in a town square. In 1987
our reviewer, Newgate Callendar, called the novel ''an unusually rich, sensitive
piece of work.''

SILENT THUNDER, by Loren D. Estleman. (Fawcett, $4.95.) The private eye Amos
Walker tries to find out why a rich murder victim left behind an arsenal in his
basement. ''Mr. Estleman turns in a tight, well-oiled plot and some catchy
characterizations of the leading local merchants in the illegal weapons trade,''
Marilyn Stasio said here last year.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: David Lodge (Mark Gerson/Camera Press)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              35 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   July 8, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

BEST SELLERS: July 8, 1990

SECTION: Section 7; Page 26, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1463 words




$

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Fiction

 1     14   4    THE BURDEN OF PROOF, by Scott Turow.
                 (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $22.95.) An attorney
                 tries to unravel the mystery of his wife's death
                 while defending his wheeler-dealer brother-in-law.

 2      2   3    MESSAGE FROM NAM, by Danielle Steel.
                 (Delacorte, $21.95.) A woman journalist's coming
                 of age in the years between the assassination of
                 John F. Kennedy and the fall of Saigon.

 3      4   9    THE STAND, by Stephen King. (Doubleday,
                 $24.95.) Doomsday brings horrors to America; the
                 uncut version of a novel first published in 1978.

 4      3   20   OH, THE PLACES YOU'LL GO! by Dr. Seuss.
                 (Random House, $12.95.) The problems of finding
                 your way through life; in verse and pictures.

 5      5   9    DRAGON, by Clive Cussler. (Simon & Schuster,
                 $21.95.) In 1993, Dirk Pitt moves fast to save
                 America from a Japanese extremist.

 6      7   12   SEPTEMBER, by Rosamunde Pilcher. (Dunne/St.
                 Martin's, $22.95.) Guests from many parts of the
                 world encounter their often unexpected destinies
                 during a get-together in a small Scottish town.

 7      6   17   THE BOURNE ULTIMATUM, by Robert Ludlum.
                 (Random House, $21.95.) Jason Bourne plans to
                 infiltrate the ruthless Medusa Brigade.

 8      9   9    AN INCONVENIENT WOMAN, by Dominick
                 Dunne. (Crown, $19.95.) Manners, morals and
                 murder in Los Angeles's high society.

 9     12   3    SULLIVAN'S STING, by Lawrence Sanders.
                 (Putnam, $19.95.) The ordeals of a female cop
                 assigned to track down a Florida con man.

10     10   8    THE GOLDEN ORANGE, by Joseph Wambaugh.
                 (Perigord/Morrow, $19.95.) Murder and chicanery
                 amid Orange County's yachts and mansions.

11            1  COYOTE WAITS, by Tony Hillerman.
                 (HarperCollins, $19.95.) The murder of a Navajo
                 tribal policeman turns out to be a surprisingly
                 complex crime involving an ancient artifact.

12      8   6    THE OUTLAWS OF MESQUITE, by Louis
                 L'Amour. (Bantam, $16.95.) Eight short stories
                 about the American frontier.

13     11   45   CLEAR AND PRESENT DANGER, by Tom
                 Clancy. (Putnam, $21.95.) The C.I.A.'s Jack Ryan
                 fights Colombian drug lords.

14     15   12   SKINNY LEGS AND ALL, by Tom Robbins.
                 (Bantam, $19.95.) The horror and humor of the
                 upcoming apocalypse are played out at a
                 restaurant near the United Nations.

15            8  FAMILY PICTURES, by Sue Miller.
                 (HarperCollins, $19.95.) The good and bad times of
                 a large Chicago clan during the past 40 years.

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Nonfiction

 1      1   13   MEN AT WORK, by George F. Will. (Macmillan,
                 $19.95.) The political pundit and baseball buff
                 describes the craft of the game as practiced by
                 three players and a manager.

 2      2   6    DAVE BARRY TURNS 40, by Dave Barry. (Crown,
                 $16.95.) Reflections on the crises of middle age by
                 the syndicated humorist.

 3      4   5    FATHER, SON & CO., by Thomas J. Watson Jr. and
                 Peter Petre. (Bantam, $22.95.) The autobiography
                 of the man who succeeded his father as head of
                 I.B.M.

 4      3   5    DON'T SHOOT, IT'S ONLY ME, by Bob Hope with
                 Melville Shavelson. (Putnam, $19.95.) The
                 comedian reminisces about more than 50 years in
                 show business.

 5      6   24   MEGATRENDS 2000, by John Naisbitt and
                 Patricia Aburdene. (Morrow, $21.95.)
                 Prognostications about political, economic and
                 social developments in the next decade.

 6      5   24   BARBARIANS AT THE GATE, by Bryan
                 Burrough and John Helyar. (HarperCollins,
                 $22.95.) The 1988 battle for control of RJR Nabisco.

 7     11   3    PERIL AND PROMISE, by John Chancellor.
                 (HarperCollins, $17.95.) Observations about
                 contemporary America by a television newscaster.

 8      8   42   IT WAS ON FIRE WHEN I LAY DOWN ON IT, by
                 Robert Fulghum. (Villard, $17.95.) A new collection
                 of inspirational essays.

 9            1  CAPTAIN SIR RICHARD FRANCIS BURTON, by
                 Edward Rice. (Scribners, $35.) The strange and
                 remarkable career of the 19th-century British
                 explorer.

10      9   87   ALL I REALLY NEED TO KNOW I LEARNED IN
                 KINDERGARTEN, by Robert Fulghum. (Villard,
                 $17.95.) Inspirational essays.

11      7   11   IN THE ARENA, by Richard Nixon. (Simon &
                 Schuster, $21.95.) The 37th President reflects on his
                 public career and private life.

12     10   35   LIAR'S POKER, by Michael Lewis. (Norton,
                 $19.95.) Wall Street's tumultuous 1980's, as
                 witnessed by a young bond trader.

13 *   14   22   HEAD FIRST, by Norman Cousins. (Dutton,
                 $19.95.) How the brain affects the body's endocrine
                 and immune systems.

14            3  MY LIFE IN THREE ACTS, by Helen Hayes with
                 Katherine Hatch. (Wolff/Harcourt Brace
                 Jovanovich, $19.95.) The actress's memoirs.

15     12   15   MEANS OF ASCENT, by Robert A. Caro. (Knopf,
                 $24.95.) Lyndon Johnson's seven-year pursuit of a
                 seat in the Senate, won in 1948 by 87 votes.

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous

 1      1   73   WEALTH WITHOUT RISK, by Charles J. Givens.
                 (Simon & Schuster, $19.95.) A Florida
                 entrepreneur's advice about how to make a
                 personal fortune.

 2      2   30   THE GREAT WALDO SEARCH, by Martin
                 Handford. (Little, Brown, $10.95.) A book of
                 illustrations in which the game is to find a
                 ubiquitous chap named Waldo.

 3      4   27   WEBSTER'S NEW WORLD DICTIONARY.
                 (Simon & Schuster, $17.95.) The Third College
                 Edition of a standard work, revised in 1988.

 4      3  183   WEBSTER'S NINTH NEW COLLEGIATE
                 DICTIONARY. (Merriam-Webster, $16.95.) A
                 standard reference work, revised and updated.

 5      5   20   BEWARE THE NAKED MAN WHO OFFERS
                 YOU HIS SHIRT, by Harvey Mackay. (Morrow,
                 $19.95.) Advice on how to get ahead in business.


These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,000
bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 28,000 other
retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets. The figures are
statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United
States.

*An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect
the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of
the book above.

AND BEAR IN MIND
(Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)

AS THOUSANDS CHEER: The Life of Irving Berlin, by Laurence Bergreen. (Viking,
$24.95.) A vivid and impressive portrait of the phenomenon who was part
songwriter and part industry, set against the panorama of 80 years of American
show business.

THE FOLKS THAT LIVE ON THE HILL, by Kingsley Amis. (Summit, $18.95.) The comic
novelist serves up a cast of assorted suburban Londoners in various shades of
distress, with much of the noisy fun softened by a note of rueful melancholy.

AS I SAW IT, by Dean Rusk as told to Richard Rusk. (Norton, $29.95.) A joint
memoir, written with his son, presents the once inscrutable and remote former
Secretary of State as eloquent, funny, moving, devilish and even earthy.

ALTERED LOVES: Mothers and Daughters During Adolescence, by Terri Apter. (St.
Martin's, $24.95.) An analysis of 65 mother-daughter pairs in Britain and the
United States blows away some old misconceptions - including the belief that
adolescents achieve identity through rebellion, turmoil and separation.

LETTERS TO FREYA: 1939-1945, by Helmuth James von Moltke.

Edited by Beate Ruhm von Oppen. (Knopf, $24.95.) Moving and eloquent letters to
his wife by a German count, a Nazi resister who was executed by the Reich in
1945.

FADE OUT: The Calamitous Final Days of MGM, by Peter Bart. (Morrow, $19.95.) How
a corporate raider bought a going movie company and bled it dry; a cautionary
tale of the 1980's.
SLIM: Memories of a Rich and Imperfect Life, by Slim Keith with Annette Tapert.
(Simon & Schuster, $22.95.) A high-powered, experienced wife (of a film
director, an impresario, a British banker) tells what fun charm, brains and
beauty were to have.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: LIST

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              36 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   July 8, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

ART;
>A Show of Shapes, From 10 Sculptors

BYLINE: By VIVIEN RAYNOR

SECTION: Section 12WC; Page 24, Column 1; Westchester Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 833 words

DATELINE: THE BRONX


AT Krasdale Foods here is a show by the 10 artists who inaugurated the Food
Center Sculpture Park last summer. The selection of 44 works - several of them
prints and drawings - complements the outdoor display, and a good thing too, for
this is scattered like a treasure hunt over the Hunts Point Food Distribution
Center's 329 acres.

Krasdale itself can not be explored without an appointment (call 212 378-1100
Ext. 2106); but at least the art is confined to the offices and corridors on the
second floor. The exhibition starts in the lobby with sculpture and drawings by
Jeff Brosk. On paper, Mr. Brosk works in acrylic, combining geometrical shapes
in dark green and reddish-black with checkerboards in lighter tones of red, blue
and green.

The geometry continues in a relief made of paper lithographed with triangles and
curved shapes in bright hues. But in the other sculptures, Mr. Brosk combines
rectangles and rhomboids of wood, polished to show off the grain, with irregular
slabs of stone whose figured surfaces may or may not come naturally. The pieces
- rocks with wings of wood - are suspended against the walls and the effect is
quite elegant.

Walter Jackson contributes to the outdoor show a 13-foot-tall aluminum and wood
construction that, in the photograph, looks like an isosceles triangle bisected.
Indoors, he has only black acrylic and conte crayon images to speak for him -
shaded geometrical shapes that have the look of proposals for Egyptian-style
mausoleums.

Making for a lighter mood in the reception area are the efforts of Tim Watkins
and Elizabeth Egbert. Mr. Watkins could be taken for a crafts artist with his
predilection for dried grass. He uses it to ''camouflage'' two large bowls - one
of them covered with blue paper pulp - that are inverted like coolie hats. He
also uses it as a ''corona'' for a disk faced with a mixture of peat moss and
straw.

Contrasting with these is Ms. Egbert's ingenious construction of slender wood
beams each with a crest of shapes like tusks. Although the underlying structure
is triangular, the overall effect is of a Catherine's Wheel. Whether Ms. Egbert
has Celts in her family tree, her preoccupation with maze-like shapes is Celtic
and it can be seen again in the color photographs of ''Corinthian Bench.'' An
outdoor installation, but not in the park, it suggests a pineapple sliced into
vertical sections; the Corinthian part is the volutes that do duty as both bench
and supports.

Proceeding into a nearby conference room, the show takes a more macho turn with
Terry Lee Dill's model for a public sculpture. Similar to but more complex than
those in the outdoor show, this is a kind of gasometer supported by I beams and
girdled by walkways, and it is accompanied by an elevation drawn on graph paper
together with an on-site vision of another sculpture involving six globes poised
high on a network of metal struts.

In the corridor, the visitor comes upon the works of Peter Dudek, the best of
which is a small squarish panel painted with a herringbone pattern involving
blue verticals, black diagonals and an orange background. After these comes a
wall filled with Christy Rupp's 10 leaping fish made of painted carboard.

The first four are in good shape but the rest are either disintegrating or
developing mysterious appendages, hence the title ''Acid Rain Brook Trout.''

Farther down the corridor are six prints by Maren Hassinger, a sculptor known
for the trees made of rope wire that she plants in concrete blocks.

Three of the images are etchings - faintly tinted rectangles flecked by trees;
the rest are woodblock prints with chine colle, each of them a checkerboard of
six different wood grains.

All the squares are pocked with rows of white dots and the center one is colored
- yellow, green or blue. Art that might soothe anxious executives, it hangs
opposite its opposite, extrovert gestures in crimson acrylic by Bob Rivera.

The figural implications of these grow clearer in Mr. Rivera's steel cutout that
hangs in the adjoining conference room. This jaunty piece, called ''Voyager,''
has the head and tail of a bird and a body that is indented with all manner of
shapes, some of them pulled forward and most of them colored. And those along
the bottom edge are coated with sand.

Also in this room are sculptures by Bill Barrett - two silver figurines that can
be read as three-dimensional hieroglyphs; ''Arch I,'' a small bronze that looks
like a crooked R; and, in wax, a proposal for a Lower Manhattan monument to the
war in Vietnam.

This consists of the letters NAM arranged so that they can also be read as MAN.
In all of these works, Mr. Barrett uses what amounts to a module, a bone shape
with faceted sides and spatulate ends. But in the memorial design, the shapes
acquire a character that is simultaneously macabre and humorous, a mixture that
might gratify some observers and appall others.

The show remains through July 27; Krasdale is at 400 Food Center Drive in Hunts
Point.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos of works on display at Krasdale Foods

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              37 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   July 9, 1990, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Chronicle

BYLINE: By SUSAN HELLER ANDERSON

SECTION: Section B; Page 4, Column 6; Style Desk

LENGTH: 166 words


Since February, KATIE KELLY has been teaching English to Amerasian children in
Saigon. She left her job as television critic and commentator on WNBC-TV in
December. She had been a schoolteacher in the 1960's and after vacationing in
Vietnam in 1988, decided to return to Saigon.

''When I saw all these Amerasian kids, I realized we walked out in 1975 and left
tanks and helicopters, and we also left these kids,'' recalled Ms. Kelly, who
was in New York City briefly to pick up some teaching tools. ''I came back but I
couldn't forget about them.''

Her first tutoring session was in the bar of the Rex Hotel. ''I bought them a
round of milk and we got to work,'' Ms. Kelly said. There were seven youngsters.
Now she teaches hundreds of youngsters daily at the Amerasian Transit Center.

She intends to stay for the rest of the year, at least. The experience has been
both an adventure and a fulfillment. ''People are so grateful,'' she noted,
''I'm getting as much out of it as they are.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              38 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 10, 1990, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

ABROAD AT HOME;
After The Cold War

BYLINE: By Anthony Lewis

SECTION: Section A; Page 19, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 749 words


''The walls that once confined people and ideas are collapsing.'' With those
words the leaders of the Western alliance celebrated the end of the cold war.
They pledged their efforts to ''overcome the legacy of decades of suspicion.''

NATO's London declaration responded to the new realities in Europe in terms more
forthright and more eloquent than the usual official prose. It challenged the
countries of NATO and the Warsaw Pact to adapt and act as people who are no
longer adversaries.

Can the United States be as forthright in facing the end of the cold war in its
own attitudes? The question is a profound one. In numberless ways American law
and policy are built on fear of Communism. As Communist ideology disintegrates,
we too are challenged to ''overcome the legacy of decades of suspicion.''

An example is the ideological test imposed on foreigners who wish to visit the
United States. Since 1952 American law has barred aliens who are Communists,
anarchists or supporters of radical doctrine. Eminent authors and others have
been excluded on suspicion of being in that category, to this country's repeated
embarrassment.

The State Department and the Immigration and Naturalization Service keep a list
of suspected characters who may try to enter. It is called the National
Automated Immigration Lookout System, or Nails. The astonishing dimensions of
Nails were uncovered last month in a Freedom of Information Act suit by the
Lawyers Committee for Human Rights.

Since 1980, 238,140 listings have been put into the system, most of them in the
category of ideological exclusions. There are some duplications, but it seems
that more than 200,000 people were designated as ideologically unfit to enter
the U.S. in the last 10 years.

In the first three months of this year alone, the State Department added 4,390
new entries reflecting denial of visas on ideological grounds. Even as the
perceived Communist threat in the world faded, the ideological guardians were
evidently intensifying their efforts.

In February Congress passed and President Bush signed a law providing that no
one may be denied a visitor's visa because of beliefs or associations that would
be protected here by the Constitution. But suspect aliens are still being
excluded, then required to seek a waiver. A first step in recognizing the end of
the cold war should be to stop that humiliating process and simply take no
account of visitors' ideas.

Americans also face restrictions on their travel abroad. Executive orders forbid
most travel to Cuba, Vietnam, North Korea, Cambodia and Iran. Warning travelers
about their safety is fair enough. But it is long past time to stop limiting
Americans' right to travel for ideological reasons.

The cold war has badly compromised the American constitutional premise that
government is accountable to the people. Vast areas of government activity are
now cloaked, for asserted reasons of national security, in a secrecy that
prevents effective discussion of policy.

The classification system is a scandal that weary generations of sensible
officials have decried, imposing unnecessary secrecy on millions of documents.
Worse yet, there has been increasing pressure since the start of the Reagan
Administration for officials to sign lifetime secrecy agreements that forever
hobble their ability to blow the whistle on waste and bad policy.

Even the courts have not been immune from the obsession with secrecy.
Increasingly in recent years judges have allowed the Government to impose
restrictions on hearings, often denying citizens a real opportunity to challenge
official policy.

Then there is government surveillance. Under guidelines that are themselves
secret, the, F.B.I. investigates Americans who it suspects have links to agents
of a foreign power. That has led to gross abuse in harassment, notably in the
case of people protesting U.S. policy in El Salvador.

All those areas cry out for a re-examination of cold war premises. President
Bush would do well to ask for advice from a special committee of his
Administration or a commission. The kind of hard look that is needed is not
likely to come from administrators who are used to the existing system and to
the protection that secrecy gives them.

American ideals of freedom and openness had a good deal to do with inspiring the
revolution in Eastern Europe. They are in the minds of the true democrats in the
Soviet Union. And we should be renewing our commitment to them as the cold war
ends.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              39 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 10, 1990, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Telling Nation's Fortune: Does Consensus See All?

BYLINE: By ROBERT D. HERSHEY Jr., Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section D; Page 1, Column 4; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1188 words

DATELINE: SEDONA, Ariz.


In the mid-1970's, as Robert J. Eggert was about to retire as chief economist
for RCA, he figured the company would want to continue his practice of
conducting regular private surveys of what economic forecasters thought about
the future. After all, he had begun the surveys with the encouragement of RCA's
chairman, David Sarnoff.

Mr. Eggert was wrong - and mildly offended - but, as it turns out, hardly sorry.
He took the idea with him and in the last 14 years the erstwhile agriculture
specialist has built his Blue Chip Consensus newsletter into a publication that
provides a six-figure income and has made him the nation's best-known tabulator
of prevailing business sentiment.

Polls 51 Analysts

From an office overlooking spectacular red-sandstone buttes here in
north-central Arizona, Mr. Eggert, who is 76 years old, polls his stable of 51
business, bank and academic analysts at the end of each month on the outlook for
the gross national product, inflation and a dozen other economic gauges. He
mails the results to reach his roughly 1,500 subscribers by about the 10th of
the next month.

The newest report, dated Tuesday, July 10, finds the consensus predicting that
the G.N.P. will expand 1.9 percent this year, the same pace that had been
forecast last month. That is two-tenths of a point higher than the 1.7 percent
consensus given when the group took its first stab at 1990 growth in January of
1989.

Such a lackluster output has been predicted for more than four years now. The
top of Blue Chip's cover has been yellow - indicating caution -since the spring
of 1986. The top of the cover may also be red or green, depending on the
analysts' view.

As it happens, the Government's first-quarter figure for the annual rate of
expansion - after a large downward and a large upward revision - was 1.9
percent. The Government's first estimate for the second quarter will come out on
July 27.

The latest issue also forecasts that G.N.P. will grow 2.2 percent next year, a
tenth of a point lower than expected last month. If that comes to pass, an
economy that looks fragile today will set a record late next year for
uninterrupted expansion, breaking the 1961-69 mark, which was helped by the
Vietnam War.

But like many other economists, Mr. Eggert's group has for several years
predicted a recession just over the horizon. After seeing the economy move ahead
for nearly eight years, the group sees the so-called inevitable downturn two
years from now, in 1992. In most past surveys, a recession was seen in the
following year.

Record Hard to Assess

It is hard to verify conclusively, but Mr. Eggert calls his newsletter's record
a good one, with an average miss on inflation-adjusted G.N.P. during his first
13 years of one percentage point.

In the 1977-83 period, the difference between the G.N.P. as predicted in October
and the actual outcome 14 months later averaged 1.1 points. This included an
embarrassment in 1982, when the consensus failed to anticipate the 1981-82
recession, the worst of the postwar era. Blue Chip predicted a 2.2 gain and the
result was a 2.5 percent decline - a 4.7-point disparity.

For the 1984-89 period, the performance improved to an average miss of
nine-tenths of 1 percent.

In seven years Blue Chip was too low, in five too high and in 1980 it hit G.N.P.
right on the nose. G.N.P. is generally considered the most important single
broad indicator of economic strength.

While the markets do not quiver in anticipation of the Eggert surveys, which
cost subscribers $439 a year, there appears good reason to take them seriously.
Considerable evidence in economic literature indicates that over time, the
consensus of a large group of forecasters outperforms the predictions of any
individual.

''The consensus seems to have that uncanny ability,'' said Mr. Eggert, who has
been forecasting one thing or another, including livestock prices and automobile
sales - since 1936. He includes his own independently calculated predictions in
the survey.

Missed 1981-82 Recession

But many of Blue Chip's readers say they do not rely heavily on the numbers it
publishes. Some use the 8-to-10-page survey mainly as a benchmark against which
to measure their own views or to see what people they hold in particular esteem
are saying.

That list includes such Blue Chip Consensus participants as Stuart G. Hoffman,
head economist for the Pittsburgh National Bank.

''You can scan the list of those with a good track record and see how they stack
up,'' Mr. Hoffman said, adding that he also looks at the forecasts of some other
people or institutions that have been wrong, hoping they have a different
outlook than he does.

This is one of the features that sets Blue Chip apart from most other forecast
tabulations, like the quarterly finds of the National Association of Business
Economists, whose respondents are more numerous but anonymous. Another
publication, the twice-yearly Livingston Survey, identifies its participants but
reports their aggregate expectations.

Some Criticism

But despite Blue Chip's frequency and specificity, some subscribers, like
Elliott Platt of Donaldson, Lufkin & Jenrette, are not totally enthusiastic. In
Mr. Platt's case that is partly because the consensus figures shift so slowly
that he says they fail to pick up, for example, quarter-to-quarter swings vital
to people managing stock or bond portfolios.

He says he feels no need to be reassured that he is swimming with the crowd.
''Being part of the consensus is not a major factor in my thinking,'' Mr. Platt
said.  Mr. Eggert, who grudgingly succumbed to requests and added quarterly
breakdowns about 10 years ago, says he is not fond of them himself. Another
disagreeable practice, he says, is the increased use, particularly at the White
House, of presentations showing economic performance from fourth-quarter to
fourth-quarter rather than year-to-year, which he says further complicates
analysis.

Policy Counters Excesses

Critics also suggest that the records of Mr. Eggert and other consensus-reliant
forecasters may appear more praiseworthy than is deserved. This is because
Government policy makers are constantly tugging at the economy in ways that tend
to counter excesses, pulling actual results back toward the consensus.

Mr. Eggert draws on a long career as a college professor, associate director of
marketing for the American Meat Institute, wartime Government price controller,
and forecaster and market researcher for the Ford Motor Company leading up to
his eight-year stint at RCA.

He says Lee A. Iacocca, the Chrysler Corporation chairman, was not the father of
the Mustang when he was at Ford. Mr. Eggert says that his wife suggested the
Mustang name after reading a book on horses and that he did much of the market
research for the hugely successful car aimed at a new generation of youthful car
buyers.

When not polling his ''cooperators'' by telephone or facsimile machine, which
allows Mr. Eggert to boast of the highest telephone bill in this town of 12,000,
he is breeding quarter horses, making speeches or playing tennis.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Robert J. Eggert runs his Blue Chip Consensus newsletter from
north-central Arizona. (Jeffrey Muir Hamilton); graph of the forecasts by the
Blue Chip Consensus for 1989 inflation rate and growth of gross national product
compared with the year-end rates. (source: Blue Chip Consensus)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              40 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 12, 1990, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1285 words



INTERNATIONAL    A3-15

Coal miners held a protest strike in the Soviet Union to demand the resignation
of the Soviet Government and greater local powers for industry and labor.
Page A1



President Gorbachev's top adversary in the Communist Party, the orthodox Marxist
Yegor K. Ligachev, failed in an attempt to win the powerful new post of deputy
party leader.    A12



Albanian refugees in Czechoslovakia said a desire to escape Communist rule and
the success of earlier asylum seekers prompted them to scale embassy walls in
Tirana in hopes of settling in the West.    A12



Farmers in Poland block roads to press demand for aid    A12



News analysis: The summit meeting turned out to be a kind of coming-out party
for Chancellor Helmut Kohl of West Germany, reflecting the more subtle balance
of power in the world.    A1



The leaders at the summit meeting wrapped up by proclaiming their united goal of
fostering worldwide prosperity, but they hardly resolved the three main economic
issues that had divided them at the outset.    A14



The personal means a lot these days    A14


Bush defends blocking of environmental plan    A14



The House Intelligence Committee plans to investigate a report that 25 years ago
U.S. officials supplied up to 5,000 names of Indonesian Communists to the
Indonesian Army, which was then engaged in a campaign to wipe out the Communist
Party.    A13



The President of Nicaragua said she would reopen negotiations with Sandinista
unions and political leaders if they acted to end recent protests and restore
public order.    A5



Israel declines to study Rabin tie to beatings    A8


Syrian says Israeli raids hinder hostage release    A6



A meeting on Vietnamese refugees was postponed when it became apparent that
differences between the U.S. and Vietnam and between the Southeast Asian nations
and Hong Kong have not been bridged.    A3



Fear of chaos grows as China's leaders age    A11


Officer dies as Mohawks and Quebec police clash    A3


U.S. and U.N. food agency head for a clash    A10


Protests in Haiti shut businesses    A13


Rio journal: Bodyguards? Don't leave home without them    A4



NATIONAL    A16-22, B6, D19

The Hanford atomic weapons plant in Richland, Wash., produced doses of radiation
in the 1940's and 1950's that were high enough to cause illnesses, including
cancer, in residents of the Pacific Northwest, the Energy Department said.    A1



President Bush defended his son Neil, who has been charged with violating
conflict-of-interest rules in a Denver savings and loan case and may be facing a
$200 million negligence suit, but the President promised to stay out of the
proceedings.    A1



Neil Bush says regulators hid clearing proof    D6


Deal maker indicted in savings fraud case    D1



The Senate approved a crime bill that includes a temporary ban on the sale and
manufacture of certain semiautomatic assault weapons and an expansion of the
number of Federal crimes for which the death penalty can be imposed.    A1



U.S. says arrest might aid in bomb investigation    A22


Mitchell draws line in budget talks    B6



Families of nursing home patients whose last years were blighted by neglect at a
home run by the nation's largest nursing home chain were awarded damages in a
case hailed as a legal breakthrough.    A1



Clinic settles malpractice suit by parents who had septuplets    D19



Washington is reinventing itself, politically, demographically and economically.
For 12 years, a regional economic boom has transformed the metropolitan area
into an archipelago of shinning high-rises and mini-urban centers.    A16



Two more of Mayor Barry's friends testified that he had frequently used illegal
drugs, and one told of a frantic attempt to cover up that use in January 1987
when Mr. Barry was hospitalized for what the witness said was tainted cocaine.
    A17



Whales once had hind legs and feet and retained smaller but functional versions
of them for more than 10 million years after they left the land for a life at
sea, scientists now believe. Their conclusions are based on direct fossil
evidence.    A19



Ecuador's debt is used to create scholarships    A18


U.S. to seek seat belt rule for all workers who drive    B6


South Florida journal: New zeal takes aim at official vice    A16



REGIONAL    B1-4

New York City school custodians are negotiating a new contract to replace the
one that expired on June 30 amid complaints that woeful conditions in schools
have not improved.    B1



The 1992 Democratic convention will be in New York, the party formally
announced. Mayor Dinkins pledged to make it a ''glorious pageant of progress''
that will ''renew America's progressive values.''    B1



Democratic chief considers cutting convention for TV    B4



A killing of a New Jersey teen-ager in 1971 by a Paramus police officer
continues to haunt the youth's father. He has uncovered evidence that he says
suggests his son may have been shot in the back while running, unarmed.    B1



Hoboken warns of tax increase after plan dies    B2


Brooklyn drug boss gets life term    B2


Jogger hard to identify in hospital, friend testifies    B2


Runaway stolen car kills boy, 4, and Brooklyn men are seized    B3


Grieving for two children killed by car    B3



A new president of Covenant House was named to succeed the Rev. Bruce Ritter.
The new leader, Sister Mary Rose McGeady, is a senior Catholic Charities
official in Queens who has more than two decades of experience working with
troubled youths.    B1



New York City is urged to buy big Trump site    B2


Judge halts H.U.D. project on Ninth Street    B4


Company plans medical-waste plant in Brooklyn    B3


Cuomo hoping to force a cut in price of milk    B4



BUSINESS DIGEST    D1



THE HOME SECTION

Summer, children and 'war of the exes'    C1


On the park, a place fit for Ben Hur    C1


Design Notebook: Architects expand use of glass art    C1



ARTS/ENTERTAINMENT

Hollywood's bloody summer    C17


An author releases his characters    C17


Dance: Bolshoi's ''Swan Lake''    C17


Word and Image: ''Northern Exposure''    C22



HEALTH PAGE    B8

A study conducted on osteoporosis has confirmed that a new treatment can
strengthen elderly women's brittle bones and greatly reduce the risk of painful
and deforming spinal fractures.    A1



Studies of empathy challenge old assumptions    B8



SPORTS

Baseball: Brewers beat White Sox in unusual setting    B9


Mets surging to top    B11


Yanks have little hope    B11


Canseco powers A's to victory    B11


Boxing: King's remarks on bout scrutinized    B12



OBITUARIES    D20



Joe Appiah, a Ghanaian political figure
Richard B. Bernstein, pioneer in studying chemical reactions

EDITORIALS/LETTERS/OP-ED

Editorials    A20



Summit promise - and shame
A torpedo for China policy
The health of hospitals?

Letters    A20



A. M. Rosenthal: Breakfast in New York    A21


Tom Wicker: Quebec est serieux    A21


Robert Bazell: Rapid employment force    A21


Alair A. Townsend: After City Hall - job limbo    A21


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              41 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 12, 1990, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Amid Discord, Talks on Boat People Are Put Off

BYLINE: By HENRY KAMM, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 919 words

DATELINE: GENEVA, July 11


A 28-nation conference on Vietnamese boat people was postponed today when it
became apparent that differences between the United States and Vietnam on one
side and the Southeast Asian nations and Hong Kong on the other have not been
bridged.

At the headquarters here of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
under whose auspices the meeting was to be held, the indefinite postponement was
considered a setback to the principle of first asylum.

Hong Kong, Thailand, Malaysia, the Philippines and Indonesia have reluctantly
allowed the Vietnamese to land on their shores since the refugees began leaving
in 1975. There they are maintained, in camps that are Spartan or worse, at
international expense until they can find permanent refuge. The United States is
the principal final refuge; others include France, Canada and Australia.

No Longer Willing Hosts

Increasingly, however, as the flow of refugees shows no signs of ceasing and the
readiness of final-refuge countries to accept the refugees has slowed, the
countries that bear the initial brunt of the exodus have balked at continuing to
play that role.

The Vietnamese refugees, who at the outset were automatically and widely
accepted as political refugees, are now divided into those to whom this status
is conceded and a majority, who are classified as economic migrants, suspected
of leaving simply to achieve richer material lives and therefore subject to
forcible repatriation.

Britain, the colonial power in Hong Kong, followed by the Southeast Asian
countries, established cutoff dates, saying that all Vietnamese arriving
afterward would be screened to determine which category they fall into. The
economic migrants would be subject to deportation back to Vietnam.

The United States, however, opposes any involuntary return of Vietnamese who are
classified as illegal economic migrants. Paradoxically, the American position
coincides with that of Vietnam, which has so far refused to accept the return of
those who fled unless they volunteer to do so.

Deterrent Wanted

Hong Kong and the Southeast Asian nations have been pushing for a policy that
will clear out their camps and dissuade more Vietnamese from coming.

Today, Malaysia and Vietnam asked the High Commissioner to postpone the meeting,
which was scheduled for Monday and Tuesday. No reasons were announced, but
senior officials assumed that the two countries, which are on opposite sides of
the dispute, were motivated by a desire to prevent a meeting that appeared to
have no chance of achieving consensus and might formalize a split that all seek
to avoid.

A recent visit to Washington by the High Commissioner, Thorvald Stoltenberg,
which included a meeting with President Bush, has apparently failed to bring
about a significant softening of the American position, believed to originate in
the White House rather than at the State Department.

Officials and refugee relief workers of many nations, including the United
States, are skeptical about the rationale for the American stand as to who is
entitled to refugee status. They point out that the United States does not
hesitate to intercept those fleeing Haiti by boat and return them to their
country or deport them if they reach American shores.

Still Fighting Vietnam

These specialists attribute the American stand to a continuing harsh attitude
toward Vietnam, more than 15 years after the Communist victory in the Indochina
war. The United States regards Vietnam as an oppressive country to which no one
should be forced to go against his will.

Whatever the motivation, American opposition to forcible return has led Britain
and the Southeast Asian nations, all traditionally friendly to the United
States, to threaten to end their commitments to allow the boat people to land.
In effect, Malaysia stopped doing so last year and since March 1989, has pushed
off 8,700 boat people. Most have reached Indonesia with the help of supplies and
equipment provided by the Malaysian Navy.

But Indonesia has told the United Nations refugee commissioner's office that it
will not indefinitely continue to allow them to land. Even the Philippines,
which has been the the most tolerant of the Southeast Asian nations, has begun
to adopt a more severe stand, particularly toward freighters that seek to put
ashore refugees whom they have rescued at sea.

The United States has rejected a compromise proposal, which would permit sending
the ''screened-out'' Vietnamese to a holding center on a Pacific island, such as
the American territory of Guam, while a solution less severe than forcible
repatriation is sought.

Those Who Remain

About 125,000 boat people remain in camps in Southeast Asia and Hong Kong. About
25,000 arrived before the dates on which their unwilling host countries
instituted screening and are assured of permanent resettlement before the end of
this year. Of those remaining, only 25,000 are considered likely to be granted
refugee status.

Refugee officials now fear that the Southeast Asian countries may formalize
their refusal to continue granting first asylum when their Foreign Ministers
meet later this month in Jakarta in the annual conference of the six-member
Association of Southeast Asian Nations.

According to the High Commissioner, as of April 30, there are 107,802 Vietnamese
boat people in camps in Asia. More than half, or 54,718, are in Hong Kong, with
18,404 in Malaysia, 12,370 in Thailand, 12,205 in Indonesia and 8,459 in the
Philippines.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              42 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 12, 1990, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

C.I.A. Tie Asserted in Indonesia Purge

BYLINE: By MICHAEL WINES, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 13, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1765 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 11


A dispute has developed over a report that 25 years ago, United States officials
supplied up to 5,000 names of Indonesian Communists to the Indonesian Army,
which was then engaged in a campaign to wipe out the Communist Party in that
country.

The House Intelligence Committee plans to investigate the report, which said
that State Department and Central Intelligence Agency officials who served in
Jakarta ''described in lengthy interviews how they aided Indonesian Army leader
Suharto'' in his attack on the Indonesian Communist Party.

Gen. Suharto, now Indonesia's President, took control of the Government in
October 1965, days after Communist insurgents launched an unsuccessful coup and
killed six senior military officials. His army later encouraged and joined in a
nationwide massacre of known and suspected Communists, which the C.I.A. has said
claimed 250,000 lives before it ended in early 1966.

The article, distributed by the Washington-based States News Service on May 17,
first appeared in The Spartanburg (S.C.) Herald-Journal on May 19, and has been
published by other papers, including The Washington Post, in somewhat abridged
form.

The author of the article, Kathy Kadane, quoted Robert J. Martens, who from 1963
to 1966 was a political officer at the United States Embassy in Jakarta, as
saying that he had headed an embassy group of State Department and Central
Intelligence Agency officers who for two years compiled lists of as many as
5,000 Communist Party members and sympathizers.

He was quoted as saying that the lists were turned over to an aide to the
Indonesian Foreign Minister, who was known as an anti-Communist, once the
massacre of Communists and others had begun.

The article also said that approval for the release of the names came from the
top officials at the Embassy, including Ambassador Marshall Green.

Release of a List: Who Approved It? There is no question that a list of names
was provided to the Indonesians. The dispute has focused on whether the decision
to turn over the names was that of an individual American Embassy officer, or
was coordinated with the Central Intelligence Agency and approved by senior
embassy officers.

Also, there is some disagreement over the significance of the action -whether
the turning over of several thousand names was important information for the
Indonesian Army.

Mr. Martens, who is retired from the Foreign Service and now lives in Maryland,
acknowledged in an interview that he had passed the lists of names to the
Indonesians. But he contended in a letter to the editor of The Washington Post
that ''I and I alone decided to pass those 'lists' to the non-Communist
forces.''

''I neither sought nor was given permission to do so by Ambassador Marshall
Green or any other embassy official,'' he said in the letter.

''I also categorically deny that C.I.A. or any other classified material was
turned over by me. Furthermore, I categorically deny that I 'headed an embassy
group that spent two years compiling the lists.' No one, absolutely no one,
helped me compile the lists in question.''

He said in the letter that the lists were gathered entirely from the Indonesian
Communist press and were available to everyone.

Mr. Green, who later became Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and
Pacific Affairs, called the Kadane account ''garbage.''

''There are instances in the history of our country, and specifically in the Far
East, where our hands are not as clean, and where we have been involved,'' he
said in Washington, where he lives in retirement. ''But in this case we
certainly were not.''

Ms. Kadane said tape-recorded interviews support ''every point of the story that
was published,'' and the editor of States News Service, Leland Schwartz, said:
''The news service stands behind the story and we feel that there is no question
that what we said took place, took place. This comes from principals at the
time.''

Responding to a New York Times reporter's request, States News Service, which
provides articles on Federal Government activities to local and regional
newspapers, furnished transcripts of several key interviews used to prepare the
article. They appear ambiguous on the central accusation: that Mr. Green and
others approved releasing to the Indonesians a list of Communist Party members.

What Was U.S. Role In Frenzied Killing? The Indonesian coup attempt and the
massacre occurred against a backdrop of political intrigue and virulent
anti-Americanism in Jakarta, where the Government was then controlled by a
charismatic pro-Communist dictator, President Sukarno. Mr. Sukarno had actively
supported the three million-member Indonesian Communist Party, also known as the
P.K.I., as a counterweight to General Suharto's growing influence as head of the
military.

In October 1965, one day after a coup attempt by Communist forces was beaten
back by General Suharto, Communist forces killed six senior military officers.
In response, army units marched into Communist strongholds and, joined by
anti-Communist civilians, began a frenzied round of killing. Mr. Sukarno
retained titular control for another six months before being ousted by General
Suharto.

In an interview, Mr. Martens said he told Ms. Kadane that he acted without
approval because he wanted to avoid embassy red tape at what he believed was a
critical time.

''I felt it necessary and useful to provide people standing up to this Communist
takeover the means to understand what was happening,'' Mr. Martens said. ''If we
had any purpose in the world except to be bureaucrats, that was the sort of
thing I felt we ought to be doing.''

Ms. Kadane agrees that Mr. Martens told her that he acted alone, but contends
that Mr. Green and two other officials then at the United States Embassy - the
deputy chief of mission, Jack Lydman, and the political section chief, Edward
Masters - acknowledged in interviews that they approved Mr. Martens's action in
advance.

In interviews with The New York Times, Mr. Lydman, Mr. Masters and the two
senior C.I.A. officials in Jakarta at the time of the coup denied any
involvement in Mr. Martens's action.

According to the transcripts of Ms. Kadane's tape-recorded interviews, Mr. Green
said he had no recollection that Mr. Martens had compiled lists of Communist
Party members. Asked whether he had approved the transfer of such a list to the
Indonesians, he replied, ''I have no recollection of such a thing.''

When Ms. Kadane said that others had confirmed it, he replied, ''Well, I
wouldn't gainsay it,'' and added, ''I told you I couldn't remember it.''

Role of 'Top People': One Memory Fails But the transcripts do not show
conclusively that others confirmed Mr. Green's involvement. Indeed, they suggest
that some embassy officials did not see the lists as sensitive or of great value
to the Indonesians.

Mr. Masters at first replied, ''Oh, sure,'' when asked if Mr. Martens told him
about passing the list, the transcripts show, and he later added, ''We knew
where the names were going.'' But when asked several times if Ambassador Green
or C.I.A. officials also knew or approved, he replied: ''I'm not sure anyone
could remember at this late date. Let's face it, an awful lot of things were
going on out there. This was not No. 1.''

Mr. Masters, now head of the Washington-based National Planning Association,
later told Ms. Kadane that the Indonesian military was not a group of ''village
idiots'' and that he believed they knew how to find Communist leaders without
American help.

In a final conversation with Ms. Kadane, when he became aware of what would
later appear in print, Mr. Masters said: ''I certainly would not disagree with
the fact that we had these lists, that we were using them to check off, O.K.,
what was happening to the party. But the thing that is giving me trouble, and
that is absolutely not correct, is that we gave these lists to the Indonesians
and that they went out and picked up and killed them.''

''I don't believe it,'' he said. ''And I was in a position to know.''

The transcript of an interview with Mr. Lydman includes an assertion by Ms.
Kadane that ''top people'' in the embassy coordinated the release of the list.
Mr. Lydman replied, ''Oh, yes, absolutely.''

But in an interview last week in Washington, where he is retired, Mr. Lydman
said his response was ''absolutely not what I intended.''

''I certainly wasn't focusing on the impact of what she was saying,'' Mr. Lydman
said. He said many issues were coordinated at daily staff meetings at the
embassy, but that he had no knowledge of any approval for the release of the
lists.

C.I.A. Involvement: Ex-Officers Speak When interviewed for her article, the
deputy C.I.A. station chief in Jakarta at the time, Joseph Lazarsky, told Ms.
Kadane that the Jakarta C.I.A. station ''contributed quite a bit'' to Mr.
Martens's lists, contradicting Mr. Martens's assertion that the lists were
assembled only from press clippings.

But the C.I.A. station chief in Jakarta at the time, B. Hugh Tovar, denied that
his office gave any classified information on Indonesian Communist officials to
Mr. Martens.

The article also said that William Colby, a former Director of Central
Intelligence who headed the C.I.A.'s Far East division in 1965, ''compared the
embassy's campaign to identify the P.K.I. leadership to the C.I.A.'s
controversial Phoenix Program in Vietnam.'' Phoenix was a C.I.A.-sponsored
effort to identify Communist agents within the South Vietnamese civilian
population, some of whom were later killed by South Vietnamese Army units.

Mr. Colby said in a telephone interview that his remarks were
''misappropriated.'' He noted that he had repeatedly stated publicly that the
C.I.A. had no covert involvement in the Indonesian coup or its aftermath.

One observer removed from the controversy is John Hughes, a former editor of the
Christian Science Monitor who won a Pulitzer Prize for his reporting on the
Indonesian coup and later wrote a book on the subject.

Reached in Maine, where he now edits The Camden Reporter and The Free Press in
nearby Rockland, Mr. Hughes said the notion that the United States Embassy would
have assisted the army in locating Communists seemed ''pretty far out'' to him.

''I don't think the Indonesian Army needed any help in going after Communists in
Indonesia at that time,'' he said. ''It sort of boggles the mind that the
embassy would need to be giving out lists. There wasn't any problem about
killing people. There was an abundance of names and targets. Everybody knew who
was a P.K.I. cadre.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: President Suharto of Indonesia, who may have been aided by
American officials in a campaign to massacre Indonesian Communists 25 years ago.
(Bob Nicklesburg/Gamma-Liaison)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              43 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 13, 1990, Friday, Late Edition - Final

ABROAD AT HOME;
After The Cold War (2)

BYLINE: By Anthony Lewis

SECTION: Section A; Page 27, Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 737 words


Through most of its history this has been an unmilitarized country. The Framers
of the Constitution wanted it that way. To prevent a large standing army
becoming a habit, they provided that Congress could not appropriate money for
the military ''for a longer term than two years.''

In the time of the cold war the unmilitarized tradition has been abandoned. For
four decades the United States has had millions of men under arms. Much of our
resources and our scientific intellect has gone to build expensive new weapons.
The country has been transformed into a national security state.

Right now we have the greatest opportunity in two generations to shed the
burdens of militarism and return to the older American tradition. The crumbling
of the Warsaw Pact and the changes in the Soviet Union dramatically lessen the
threat that was the premise of our militarization. But will we seize the day?
Last week in London the leaders of the Western alliance declared the cold war
over. That declaration surely indicates that the time has come to rethink
American national security policy, to focus on how to reduce the military
burden. But in the last week newspapers have told us of these developments:

* The armed forces are pressing ahead with plans to buy 4.5 million more acres
of land in this country, to add to the 25 million they already have for bombing
ranges, bases and the like.

* An all-out enthusiast for the Strategic Defense Initiative, Henry Cooper, was
named to head the star wars program, whose planners want between $55 billion and
$69 billion to put a first phase in space in the next 10 years.

* The Pentagon is insisting on buying a $4 billion radar-jamming device, the
Airborne Self-Protection Jammer, that has failed its flight tests.

All of those, and much else, tell us that it is business as usual in the
national security state. NATO may announce the end of the cold war, political
pressures may force cutbacks here and there, but the minds of Washington are not
thinking about fundamental change in the direction of policy. The aim is to
preserve as much of the status quo as possible.

To go on that way, unthinkingly, would be profound folly. For the militarization
of the cold war years has done terrible damage to the real sources of American
security, our constitutional system of government and our economic strength.

Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan spelled it out, movingly, in a piece last month
in The New York Review of Books. He wrote about the costs to this country of
becoming ''a national security state, geared for war at all times.''

''As everything became secret,'' Senator Moynihan said, ''it became ever more
difficult to correct mistakes. Why? Because most of the people who might spot
the mistakes were kept from knowing about them because the mistakes were
classified. . . .

''The national security state began to threaten the Constitution itself. From
the time of the Vietnam War . . . the executive branch has been more and more
tempted to use secrecy to avoid responsibility, even legality. The Iran-contra
affair was only the latest such episode. . . .

''The national security state consumes the Presidency. It grows more and more
insulated from the people. . . .''

That the United States has paid a heavy economic price for cold war
militarization is hardly necessary to argue - not when we see the boom in the
two countries that avoided most of that burden, Japan and Germany. We have a
military-industrial-scientific complex that limits our ability to compete in the
civilian goods the world wants.

The interests that fed on the cold war will fight change. That is only natural.
No one gives up money and power easily. The question is whether the national
interest can prevail over the parochial, and that is a question of political
leadership.

It is not a conservative-liberal issue, or should not be. Conservatives do not
like big government and concentrated power, which have been by-products of
militarization. It is not suggested that we rush into massive demobilization;
there are still uncertainties. But we have to change direction, and there should
be no pain in thinking about that. Senator Moynihan put it:

''How do we now demobilize? How do we move from a national security state to a
government that merely asks what are our interests abroad and our needs at home,
and calmly and openly pursues them? What a wonderful challenge!''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              44 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 13, 1990, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Economic Scene;
Deep Divisions At Summit Talks

BYLINE: By Leonard Silk

SECTION: Section D; Page 2, Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 819 words


The Houston summit conference was a successful holding operation. In the face of
conflicts over aid to the Soviet Union, the elimination of agricultural
subsidies and actions to deal with environmental pollution and global warming,
the leaders of the seven major industrial countries preserved their civility and
produced a set of compromises that will enable them to go on working together a
while longer.

On Soviet aid, they papered over their differences by adopting a laissez-faire
position. If the Germans and French and Italians want to give substantial
financial aid to the Soviets, so be it; and if the Americans and British do not,
so be that, too.

That outcome was inevitable. The United States could no longer prevent the
Germans from doing what they had already decided to do. Their $3.1 billion in
bilateral aid is just a first installment in what will be a continuing flow of
loans and investment to the Soviet Union. The Germans see Soviet aid as crucial
to the politics of incorporating East Germany into the new Germany and into
NATO.

By contrast, the United States, hard pressed for funds by the budget deficit and
its external deficit, was not in a position to commit large amounts of money to
the Soviets. And it would have forced President Bush to confront his party's
right wing with help for the country they still regard as the now and future
leading Communist threat, the Government that is still giving aid to Cuba, North
Korea, Vietnam and other foes of the United States.

In this bind, Mr. Bush made an adroit move in proposing American technical
assistance to the Soviets. There is truth as well as diplomatic finesse in his
position that, unless President Mikhail S. Gorbachev moves faster and more
decisively to turn the Soviet Union into a market economy and cut its still
enormous military expenditures, Western aid is likely to be money down the
drain.

But there is also truth in the position that all the summit participants share,
including the United States: Foreign aid can play a crucial role in helping Mr.
Gorbachev make internal reforms and keep moving toward a more democratic, more
open society. The spirit of the Houston summit meeting was to stress the
potential for a new economic and political relationship between the Soviets and
the industrial West, and Mr. Gorbachev and his supporters appear to have
accepted it in that spirit.

The proof of the pudding is still to come. Much will depend on the thoroughness
and realism of the study of Soviet needs, to be conducted with the help of
International Monetary Fund and World Bank experts. If the Soviets do their
part, this can bring them, in the words of the summit's communique, ''meaningful
and sustained economic assistance.'' The Western leaders see the opportunity for
long-term peace and prosperity presented by the Soviet Union's movement toward
economic and political freedom. But the question is whether they can seize it in
time.

The accord on cutting agricultural subsidies looks less meaningful. The
Europeans did not interpret the agreement as committing them to any specific
goals or timetable. And, given continuing strong support for farm subsidies as
part of the five-year farm bill before Congress, Mr. Bush will have trouble
delivering on his part of the bargain.

Yet the deal, however vague, provides a means of holding open the possibility of
a successful outcome of the Uruguay Round of trade negotiations, with the stress
on intellectual property and services just as important to this country as to
any other, perhaps more so. Keeping the alliance from splitting into rival
trading blocs depends crucially on this negotiation under the General Agreement
on Tariffs and Trade, which needs to hit pay dirt by the end of this year.

The patched-up agreement on the environment resolved nothing. As the Europeans
had argued that eliminating farm subsidies would cost them millions of jobs, so
Mr. Bush, accepting the position of his chief of staff, John H. Sununu, argued
that meeting the anti-pollution standards urged by Chancellor Helmut Kohl, Prime
Minister Margaret Thatcher and others would wipe out millions of American jobs.
This argument left out the jobs that would be created by cleaning the
environment and protecting the global climate, as well as the very real costs of
poor health and death if one does not.

Although the national leaders avoided an irreparable split on any of the key
issues, the talks demonstrated the depth of the conflicts among them.
Self-interest and the more equally distributed economic power are pulling them
apart, without fear of the common enemy, the Soviet Union, to hold them
together. But the good will and intelligence shown by the seven leaders in
Houston held forth the hope that enlightened self-interest may triumph over
myopic self-interest and the centrifugal forces that threatened at their first
post-cold war summit meeting.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              45 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 14, 1990, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Days of Fruit Tramp's Painful Harvest Fade

BYLINE: By PETER T. KILBORN, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1, Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 1892 words

DATELINE: WEST COLUMBIA, S.C.


Luther Henry Tindal, who is 45 years old and looks 60, and his wife, Linda, 34,
rest on a dust-caked couch outside their $125-a-month cinderblock shack here,
smoking discount cigarettes and drinking discount beer.

Their four children, ages 2 to 15, play in the sandy soil under a walnut tree
with Buck, the pet goat, and Tramp Two, the pet mongrel. (An alligator in
Florida ate Tramp One.) ''L. H.,'' as people know Mr. Tindal, had all his teeth
pulled years ago, and Mrs. Tindal has lost most of hers. He is 5 feet 6 inches
tall and once weighed 125 pounds. He says he is now down to about 95; he
speculates that this is because of - a bout with tuberculosis four years ago and
working among pesticides in fruit orchards.

Poverty and Hard Work

Mr. Tindal's poverty, his hard living and the toll of both on his health are
emblems of a disappearing strain of migrant farm workers. He is a one of a huge
clan, current and former migrant workers all, that includes his four other
children from a previous marriage, his 10 brothers and sisters, Mrs. Tindal's 15
brothers and sisters, along with scores of cousins, other relatives and
unrelated hangers-on.

These are ''Grapes of Wrath'' people, native-born Americans, who follow the
fruit and vegetable harvests in jalopies from Florida through Georgia and the
Carolinas to Michigan and upstate New York. Unlike most migrant workers who are
bound to a crew chief, these are independent operators who take pride in their
skills, covet their freedom and exist in the shadows of public scrutiny. They
call themselves ''fruit tramps'' to distinguish themselves from other migrant
workers. Some others call them ''freewheelers.''

Fruit tramps are hard to spot because they try to live outside the law and
contemporary conventions. Few have gone beyond junior high school. Mr. Tindal
said he stopped at the 5th grade and his wife in the 10th. They say they have
never voted, had a bank account, saved any money or owned a home and had a
telephone only once, for a few months. Like some of the other men in his family,
Mr. Tindal has never had a driver's license, although until recently he did
drive.

They put up with Social Security tax deductions when they work for big farmers,
who have too much to lose in evading the law. But they seek payment in cash,
without deductions, from small farmers and people who give them part-time jobs.
On rare occasions and when produce prices were higher, a family could earn $500
to $600 a week, but often with the help of their children in violation of the
child labor laws. Now they say it would be hard to earn $400.

A Dying Breed

Clans like the Tindals and his wife's family, the Moteses, did most of the
nation's migrant labor until 30 or 40 years ago, when teams made up only of men
began moving in. More recently Hispanic, Haitian and Jamaican workers began
taking the jobs once claimed by American families. Like Mr. Tindal's health, the
American migrant clans are fading, victims of the way they live and the brutal
economics of farm work.

Officials at the Census Bureau and the Department of Agriculture say they have
stopped trying to count migrant workers because they are too elusive. Unofficial
estimates range from hundreds of thousands to several million, but families
hardly show up. Certainly there are a few hundred fruit tramps, possibly a few
thousand; most of them are white. That fruit tramps persist is in part the
discovery of a photojournalist, Herman Emmet, who came upon the Tindals in the
late 1970's. He lived and worked with the Tindals off and on for more than a
decade and wrote about them in a book of photographs called ''Fruit Tramps,''
published last year by the University of New Mexico Press.

Mrs. Tindal's 58-year-old mother, Betty Motes, who like her husband, Leroy, and
her parents was an itinerant fruit picker, said a dozen families around her
neighborhood in Fort Pierce, Fla., are fruit pickers. Everette W. Noel, one of
the many peach growers 50 miles from here in Johnston, S.C., which calls itself
''The Peach Capital of the World,'' has employed the families for years. He
turned them away this season, however, because storms and a March freeze
mutilated his crop.

Mr. Noel prefers to hire migrant families because, he said, they are relatively
stable and seem not to use hard drugs. ''They're not bad,'' Mr. Noel said.
''Just kind of defeated. Their problem is alcohol.''

Picture of Southern Poverty

Mr. Tindal's arms and emaciated torso are covered with primitive tattoos. He
said he got most of them while on a prison chain gang when he was 18. On his
left shoulder is a tattoo that says ''Live hard'' and on the right one that says
''Die young.'' He got his latest tattoos some weeks ago, little crosses on his
neck to align a radiation machine for treating his throat cancer.

The Tindals have lived here for almost a year, longer than any place else, so
that Mr. Tindal can be treated 20 minutes away in Columbia. At Lot 100C, beyond
the Silver Lake trailer park, the house presents a stereotypical picture of
Southern rural poverty, with light bulbs hanging from wires, a decrepit washing
machine resting in a puddle outside the kitchen door, the hulk of an abandoned
car on one side of the house and the hulk of another beyond the clothesline in
front.

The Tindals bought their current car, a 1982 compact Pontiac station wagon, some
three months ago for about $1,500, and they still owe $1,300 on it. It has a
license plate on the front that says ''Jesus,'' and a bumper sticker in back
that says, ''Good girls go to Heaven, bad girls go everywhere.'' The children
leave the doors open, and the goat gets in and eats the seats.

The Tindal home is a scene of coping and pulling together. Most days, relatives
and friends come to check on Mr. Tindal and to chat, smoke, drink beer and help
out.

The Tindals say their sole income is Mr. Tindal's $371 monthly Social Security
disability check. They were cut off from food stamps in March because Mrs.
Tindal earned too much last year, at $35 a day at a produce stand. She says she
cannot work now because she is caring for Mr. Tindal. She reapplied for the
stamps but says she has heard nothing.

L. H.'s brother Lewis Tindal, 49, found the house for them and stops by
frequently. He is the trailer park's full-time maintenance man, having stopped
picking fruit three or four years ago, and he seems the most prosperous of the
lot. The father of eight children, he owns his own home, a four-bedroom trailer
about 20 minutes away, that he bought for $15,000 in cash.

The Tindals' most essential prop, however, is a lifelong friend: David Langston,
a gangling, gregarious, heavy-drinking 43-year-old Vietnam War veteran who
sleeps on the couch in the living room. Mr. Langston spends much of the $40 that
he earns each day at an open air market on beer and cigarettes for himself and
the Tindals, and he brings them the market's excess produce. Mrs. Tindal drives
him to work and does his laundry and cooking. He stopped picking fruit regularly
a year ago, he said, to care for the Tindals. Is It Freedom or a Trap?  Most
migrant workers sign up with sometimes unscrupulous crew leaders, and are herded
by vans and old buses from farm to farm. The crew leaders provide meals and keep
track of each person's production, and the farmers provide barracks-like
housing. Fruit tramps, by contrast, drive straight to the farm and make their
own arrangements. When conflicts arise with a farmer or a crew leader, they head
for another farm.

The Tindals say their way of life is liberating, but they don't often calculate
its cost. ''They have their gypsy life,'' said Mr. Emmet, the photographer.
''But that's all they have. Is it freedom, or is it a trap? It's a trap.'' Fruit
tramps are constantly alert to the presence of the law. Mr. Noel said that when
the police appear at his farm, whatever the reason, the workers scatter.

L. H. Tindal said he went to jail for ''not minding my own business,'' but
declined to elaborate. Lewis Tindal said he had gone to jail ''a hundred times''
but never for more than 30 days. Mrs. Tindal's 38-year-old brother, Leon Motes,
said he had served 12 years: 5 for trying to kill a policeman, 7 for auto theft.

Another brother, 29-year-old Terry Motes, cited a time when he went in for nine
months. ''Illegal tags, no license, eluding a police officer,'' he said. He said
he did not have a license because he couldn't read well enough to take an
examination. ''I knew I was going to jail anyway, so I tried to get away,'' he
said.

Prisoner of the Elements

Evading conventional payment arrangements can also cause problems. Mr. Langston
recalled a Miss Hurd in upstate New York, who invited the Tindals, Mr. Langston
and three other men to work for a day picking raspberries. ''She gave us $5.50
for the whole day - a dollar for the men and 50 cents for Linda,'' he said. They
had no recourse.

But if these people are in a trap, it is not entirely their own design.
Consumers benefit from abundant, cheap fruit and vegetables. Peach pickers
typically get 35 cents for each sack they pick; orange pickers about 55 cents.
They are assured the minimum wage of $3.85 an hour if they pick too little to
earn more. But the minimum wage no longer provides a standard of living above
the poverty level, and migrant workers earn less than other minimum-wage workers
because they can't work in the rain or when there's nothing to pick.

Other economic forces work against them. St. Clair Guess, publisher of The
Citizen-News in Edgefield, S.C., near Johnston, said that in the
low-interest-rate era of the 1970's, fruit growers, like many other farmers,
planted more land and overexpanded, leading to today's often abundant harvests.
Large supplies of fruit help keep prices down, he said, leaving growers little
room to pay their workers more and still earn enough to pay off their loans.

The influx of foreign workers makes matters worse, Mr. Guess said. Mexicans will
pick the fruit at rock-bottom wages, holding down the pay the fruit tramps might
otherwise get. ''Without inexpensive labor,'' Mr. Guess said, ''the farmers
can't survive.''

'It's in the Past'

The children of fruit tramps, unlike their parents when they were children, have
set their sights on other careers. James Tindal, a cousin of L. H.'s, is 52 and
said he had had three heart attacks in five years after a life of picking fruit.
''I raised four children and got all mine out of it,'' he said.

Tina Tindal, at 15 the oldest of Mr. and Mrs. Tindal's children, told Mr. Emmet
that half of her wanted to carry on as a fruit tramp. But she has ruled that
out. She says she wants to be a model or a teacher. ''See, Daddy's sick,'' she
said. ''I liked it at first, but it's in the past. I don't see no life in fruit
picking no more.''

Shannon, 9, the next oldest, said: ''It gives me the chills. All them bugs that
got on me. No way I'll pick fruit.'' Mr. Tindal said, ''I'm glad of it.''
''Fruit picking is a freedom job: Nobody's hollering at you, cussing at you,
telling you what to do.'' But he added:

''You got to be a damn nut to pick fruit now. You got have a weak mind, a strong
back and alcohol to put up with it.''

As long as the children are under her roof, Mrs. Tindal added, ''they're staying
in school.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Luther Henry Tindal, left, and his wife, Linda, are among a
disappearing strain of hard-living migrant farm workers. They sat on the porch
of their home in West Columbia, S.C., with their four children; Christine
Angelica Tindal, 2, eating boiled peanuts with the family goat, Buck, on her
porch in West Columbia, S.C. She is part of a clan of migrant farm workers who
call themselves ''fruit tramps'' and independently follow harvests from Florida
to Michigan. (Wade Spees for The New York Times)(pg8); Map of South Carolina
showing location of West Columbia.

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              46 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 14, 1990, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

U.S. Policy on Cambodia Shifts a Bit

BYLINE: By CLIFFORD KRAUSS, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 641 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 13


In a break from past policy of shunning the Cambodian Government, the Bush
Administration announced today that it had accepted an offer by Phnom Penh to
cooperate in examining what could be the remains of Americans missing in action
from the Vietnam War.

The State Department announcement comes at a time when the Bush Administration
is reviewing its policy of aiding a rebel insurgency fighting the
Vietnamese-backed Government of Prime Minister Hun Sen. Washington is currently
sending more than $15 million a year in covert and overt aid to two small
non-Communist guerrilla organizations fighting in a loose coalition with the
Communist Khmer Rouge against the Government.

The policy review has been pushed by rising concern in Congress that the Bush
Administration could inadvertently help the Khmer Rouge retake power. In the
1970's, the Khmer Rouge radically restructured Cambodian society, clearing the
cities of intellectuals and professionals and breaking up families. More than a
million people died under their rule.

''We appreciate the support of the Phnom Penh authorities for this undertaking,
which we consider an important humanitarian endeavor,'' said Richard A. Boucher,
deputy spokesman of the State Department. Mr. Boucher said the Cambodian
Government proposed that American forensic experts travel to Phnom Penh on July
24 to inspect an undetermined number of bodies there. #83 Americans Believed
Lost Of the 2,302 American personnel still missing or unaccounted for from the
Vietnam War, 83 were lost in Cambodia, the United States Government believes.

Efforts to cooperate with the Cambodians to identify the bodies gained ground
last February when Senator Charles S. Robb met with Mr. Hun Sen in Phnom Penh
and expressed his interest in the issue. Since then, the Virginia Democrat and
the Cambodian Prime Minister have exchanged a series of letters in which they
worked out an arrangement that the Administration eventually agreed to.

A senior State Department official said the Administration is treating the
agreement to cooperate ''as a humanitarian process.''

But the official, who spoke on the condition that he not be identified, added
that there ''would be some prospect of dealing with Hun Sen'' politically if the
Cambodian leader showed greater flexibility in regional peace talks.

Democratic Elections the Goal

The Bush Administration hopes the talks will organize an interim government to
rule until democratic elections can be held under international supervision.
Such an interim government would either be administered by the United Nations or
by a coalition consisting of the three guerrilla groups and the current
Government.

The announcement appeared to ease the rising tension between Congress and the
Administration on the Cambodia issue. Rep. Chester Atkins, Democrat of
Massachusetts, said, ''I am just delighted they are sending over this team.''

Mr. Atkins, who is a leading critic of the Administration's Cambodia policy,
said he hoped the new cooperation between Washington and Phnom Penh would
''create a better environment for relations between our two countries.''

In a related development, Vice President Dan Quayle called on Vietnam to step up
its efforts to account for American soldiers missing since the war.

The Vice President, speaking at the annual meeting of the National League of
POW/MIA Families, said the Vietnamese Government ''must realize that cooperation
now, to clear up this issue of tremendous national concern, can remove the last
vestige of the war and lay the groundwork for improved relations with the
context of a comprehensive settlement in Cambodia.''

He characterized his speech as ''an important message, a message Hanoi should
understand'' so that the two nations ''can move forward together toward a day
when relations can be normal.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              47 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 14, 1990, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

News Summary

SECTION: Section 1; Page 2, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1324 words


International    2-5

The Communist Party defections continued as the Moscow and Leningrad City
Council leaders quit the party and insurgent forces began moving slowly toward
forming a national opposition coalition.    Page 1

Thousands of Albanian refugees sailed into Western Europe and, they were
certain, to a better life. The largest contingent crossed the Adriatic Sea in
the dead of night aboard four ships, and celebrated the new day in Brindisi,
Italy.    1

State-owned companies in Poland may be privatized soon. The country's lower
house approved a plan that would give every citizen a share in any of several
thousand companies now owned by the state.    1

A decision to deny aid to Romania has stung the Government in Bucharest.
Officials assert that the punishment by 24 Western nations will help keep
Romanians impoverished while hurting the nation's efforts to set up a market
economy.    4

20,000 in Bucharest demand release of student    4

Czechs are said to be evacuating Cuba    5

Chancellor Kohl will visit Moscow today for some personal diplomacy with
President Gorbachev, hoping to convince him to drop his remaining objections to
German unification within the NATO alliance, West German officials said.    5

Aide's words on Germany prompt Tory crisis    5

China's most prominent dissident, Fang Lizhi, said he planned to study in the
U.S. for at least six months beginning in January and, while there, meet with
exiled Chinese dissidents and speak out against his country's Government.    5

39 Haitians lost at sea were being towed by Bahamians    3

Emigration of Ethiopian Jews was part of the agreement between Ethiopia and
Israel when the two countries resumed relations last November after a gap of 16
years. But in the last several weeks the authorities have stopped issuing exit
permits.    3

The U.S. accepted a Cambodian offer to cooperate in examining what could be the
remains of Americans missing in action from the Vietnam War. The move
represented a break from past policy of shunning the Government in Phnom Penh.
    3

Oka journal: A Quebec community has been transformed after a four-month standoff
between local authorities and armed Mohawk youths trying to block expansion of a
local golf course.    2

National    6-8, 22

Prices for cable television service would be modestly regulated under proposals
being considered by Congress. But disputes over proposals aimed at fostering
competition could derail the legislation and leave the cable industry a winner
by default.    1

A civil rights bill for the disabled was approved by the Senate. The
far-reaching measure, which was already approved by the House, bars
discrimination against people with physical and mental disabilities.    6

A Senate committee approved a plan that cut $18 billion from the
Administration's military budget proposal, and called for sharp troop reductions
in Europe and cuts in the ''Star Wars'' antimissile program.    7

A nervous group of Republicans was told by Vice President Quayle that President
Bush did not simply kick away one of their best campaign issues when he
acknowledged that tax increases would be needed to reduce the Federal budget
deficit.    7

Barry prosecutors close to completing case    22
  Workers known as ''fruit tramps'' follow the fruit and vegetable harvests
across the U.S. Unlike most migrant workers, these are independent operators who
take pride in their skills, covet their freedom and exist in the shadows of
public scrutiny.    1

About 1,200 alcoholic airline pilots have been treated and have returned to the
cockpit since the Government began a rehabilitation program for such pilots 15
years ago.    6

A man questioned in two bombings in the Southeast last December was ordered held
without bail after his indictment earlier this week on unrelated charges of
perjury and obstruction of justice.    6

Inmate executed in Alabama for 1976 murder of woman    7

The fuel leaks on two space shuttles appear to stem from two entirely different
problems in the fuel line, and space agency officials said the leaks should be
relatively simple to fix so that the shuttle fleet can start flying again soon.
    7

Regional    23-26

The Starrett City housing complex in Brooklyn has as many as 400 vacant
apartments, despite a long waiting list of black and Hispanic families who have
sought apartments there for years, critics contend.    1

Efforts to reduce airborne asbestos in buildings have set off a furious debate
in New York City, which already has some of the toughest asbestos regulations in
the country.    23

A melee at a Rikers Island prison left 39 correction officers and at least 17
inmates injured. They were trying to prevent 48 Muslim inmates from storming the
cell of an inmate.    23

A scientific expert from the F.B.I. testified that a DNA analysis of semen found
in the Central Park jogger did not match any defendants charged with her rape
and attempted murder.    25

Bail denied for dart-case suspect    25

Santucci heads for Italy in legal battle over a slaying    24

The Census Bureau was criticized by Mayor Dinkins and Senator Moynihan of New
York. They charged that the accuracy of the 1990 census was imperiled by the
agency's reluctance to correct its tally to make up for millions of uncounted
Americans.    23

New York school board shifts application costs to teachers    25

Counterfeit car-inspection stickers are turning up on cars in suburban New York
counties in what motor-vehicle officials say is the largest scheme they have
seen.    23

A state report urges lowering New York Telephone's rates    24

O'Neill recalls triumphs in Hartford address to Democrats    26

Married priests could be bishops under a proposal being considered by
representatives of the clergy and laity of the Greek Orthodox Church in the
Western hemisphere.    25

Business Digest    29

Sports

The owner of the New York Yankees, George Steinbrenner, apparently concerned
that he will suffer a lengthy suspension from baseball, is preparing a legal
attack based on the charge that baseball's investigation of him was biased.    1


Auto Racing: Ribbs riding high    43

Baseball: Reds beat Mets    41

Mets end Strawberry talks    41

Yanks lose again    43

Pirates beat Padres    43

Basketball: Newman signs Hornet offer sheet    41

Column: Moran on Jim Bouton    41

Golf: Rain slows Women's Open    43

Results Plus    42

Sports People    43

Consumer's World    46

Concerns about the marketing of personal medical alarms

The diaper debate: cloth or disposable?

Coping with a change in doctors

A dead battery that still starts

Guidepost

Obituaries    27

Robert McKay, legal scholar and head of 1971 Attica panel

Arts/Entertainment

Library reaps Communist harvest    9

Tanglewood in Japan    9

Theater: Pop star as Romeo    10

A ''Village'' music festival    13

Book: ''Every Spy a Prince''    13

Editorials/Letters/Op-Ed

Editorials    20

Yes to Yeltsin on pluralism

Sandinista democrats' test

Right role for the school board

Letters    20

Flora Lewis: The people threat    21

Russell Baker: Neil Bush, meet Mr. Kafka    21

Gordon C. Thomasson: Liberian disaster - made in the U.S.A.    21

Lesley Hazleton: Adieu, Deux Chevaux    21

George Black: Soccer's disease - commercialism    21

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              48 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 15, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

FORUM;
Too Many Bosses, Too Few Workers

BYLINE: By RICHARD ROSENCRANCE; Richard Rosecrance, a professor of political
science at the University of California at Los Angeles, is author of ''America's
Economic Resurgence: A Bold New Strategy.''

SECTION: Section 3; Page 11, Column 3; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 766 words


Before Americans can celebrate the decline of Communism, we should ponder why a
Japanese eighth grader typically knows more mathematics than an American with an
M.B.A., and whether our own decline can be far behind the Soviet Union's. I
believe we can avoid that fate, but we need to make a number of fundamental
changes in business, government and education if we are to continue to prosper.

First, we must recognize that most of our organizations - public and private,
military and economic - have too many chiefs and not enough Indians. We have
embraced Max Weber's bureaucratic society with a vengeance, with overstaffed
corporate headquarters in which specialization has been narrowed to a pinpoint.
Committees proliferate, but the job does not get done. It is almost as if
leading American businesses were run by a series of ganglia but not by a single
brain.

In all too many of our organizations, management specialties - not production
and meeting the needs of the consumer - are the way to the top. More than half
of the modern American corporation consists of workers uninvolved in operations
or production work, an astounding fact. At the General Motors Corporation, 77.5
percent of the work force is white collar and salaried, while only 22.5 percent
are hourly blue-collar workers. At Mobil Oil, 61.5 percent of the staff is white
collar; at General Electric, 60 percent; at Dupont, 57.1 percent; at
International Business Machines, 91.5 percent. (Because I.B.M. does much of its
manufacturing overseas and most of its strategic planning at home, this is not
surprising.) At Exxon, the figure is 43 percent; at Ford, 37 percent; at
A.T.&T., 42 percent; at Chrysler, 44.4 percent. The ratio in typical
corporations in Japan is about one-sixth of the American figure.

This tendency toward bureaucratization in modern American life is not confined
to business; it also applies to our military and school districts. At the peak
of our Vietnam effort only about 60,000 troops formed the maneuver battalions
doing the actual fighting, but nearly 500,000 more military personnel supported
this fighting. The number of America's most senior military officers -
three-star officers, full generals and admirals - is now considerably greater
than at the peak of World War II even though they have roughly one-sixth the
number of combat forces to command.

In school districts the number of service and supervisory personnel has
increased relative to the number of teachers. In Los Angeles, teachers make up
only 50.6 percent of the total school district's employees; in New York, the
figure is 46.3 percent; in Philadelphia, 47.6 percent, and in Denver, only 24
percent. In universities the number of administrative personnel has risen
relative to the number of professors. In every area, there is a great surplus of
captains over sergeants and lieutenants, and the result is a reduction in
American productivity. America's manufacturing productivity now limps along at 1
percent per year, far less than historic figures of 2.5 or 3 percent.

Over time, corporate, government and educational bureaucracies must be
ruthlessly pruned. The industry of the future needs fewer, but much more broadly
trained executives. Workers should take on some management tasks. Many companies
are already experimenting with self-managing work teams. Under one approach, 5
to 12 workers rotate jobs and take responsibility for an entire product or
service with only limited supervision.

If the United States is to arrest its decline, two developments need to occur in
the near future: first, American business will need to increase the ratio of
operators to managerial staff, giving management a much wider purview; second,
workers will increasingly come to fulfill a management function. In the more
distant future, the distinction between white and blue collars may disappear.

But an increase in American white-collar productivity will not itself lead to
economic resurgence. Corporate survival must become an objective beyond that of
return to shareholders. Chief executive officers must manage for the long term
and that means longer than the 6.1 years top officers stay on the job. The
United States must invest more in its most important asset: human capital.
American workers are undereducated. Schools need an infusion of talent, from
universities, businesses and government. We need new tax incentives to encourage
consumer saving. But if this country makes the necessary reforms and is willing
to face difficult days, and perhaps difficult years, it will see a long-term
economic resurgence.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Richard Rosencrance (Bart Bartholomew for the New York Times);
drawing

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              49 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 15, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Hampshire College

SECTION: Section 6; Page 6, Column 4; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 94 words


Education at Hampshire College encouraged a personal focus. Certainly, not
everyone could handle the questions: What do you want? What interests you? In
fact, many, for whatever reason -parents, Vietnam, economic status or
self-indulgence - found they couldn't handle the absence of structure.

I had days and months of self-doubt. But college is always a time of wonder and
doubt about the future and the world and our place in it. Personally, I found
Hampshire to be a place that nurtured the individual and his vision.

ELENA PHIPPS
  New York, N.Y.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              50 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 15, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

BEST SELLERS: July 15, 1990

SECTION: Section 7; Page 30, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1470 words




$

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Fiction

 1      1   5    THE BURDEN OF PROOF, by Scott Turow.
                 (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $22.95.) An attorney
                 tries to unravel the mystery of his wife's death
                 while defending his wheeler-dealer brother-in-law.

 2      2   4    MESSAGE FROM NAM, by Danielle Steel.
                 (Delacorte, $21.95.) A woman journalist's coming
                 of age in the years between the assassination of
                 John F. Kennedy and the fall of Saigon.

 3     11   2    COYOTE WAITS, by Tony Hillerman.
                 (HarperCollins, $19.95.) The murder of a Navajo
                 tribal policeman turns out to be a surprisingly
                 complex crime involving an ancient artifact.

 4      4   21   OH, THE PLACES YOU'LL GO! by Dr. Seuss.
                 (Random House, $12.95.) The problems of finding
                 your way through life; in verse and pictures.

 5      6   13   SEPTEMBER, by Rosamunde Pilcher. (Dunne/St.
                 Martin's, $22.95.) Guests from many parts of the
                 world at a get-together in a small Scottish town.

 6      3   10   THE STAND, by Stephen King. (Doubleday,
                 $24.95.) Doomsday brings horrors to America; the
                 uncut version of a novel first published in 1978.

 7      8   10   AN INCONVENIENT WOMAN, by Dominick
                 Dunne. (Crown, $19.95.) Manners, morals and
                 murder in Los Angeles's high society.

 8      5   10   DRAGON, by Clive Cussler. (Simon & Schuster,
                 $21.95.) In 1993, Dirk Pitt moves fast to save
                 America from a Japanese extremist.

 9      9   4    SULLIVAN'S STING, by Lawrence Sanders.
                 (Putnam, $19.95.) The ordeals of a female cop
                 assigned to track down a Florida con man.

10      7   18   THE BOURNE ULTIMATUM, by Robert Ludlum.
                 (Random House, $21.95.) Jason Bourne plans to
                 infiltrate the ruthless Medusa Brigade.

11            1  MOUNTAIN LAUREL, by Jude Deveraux.
                 (Pocket, $18.95.) An Army officer's assignment, on
                 the eve of the Civil War, to escort a glamorous
                 singer during her tour of the Colorado gold fields.

12     10   9    THE GOLDEN ORANGE, by Joseph Wambaugh.
                 (Perigord/Morrow, $19.95.) Murder and chicanery
                 amid Orange County's yachts and mansions.

13     15   9    FAMILY PICTURES, by Sue Miller.
                 (HarperCollins, $19.95.) The good and bad times of
                 a large Chicago clan during the past 40 years.

14    14    13   SKINNY LEGS AND ALL, by Tom Robbins.
                 (Bantam, $19.95.) The horror and humor of the
                 upcoming apocalypse are played out at a
                 restaurant near the United Nations.

15            2  SECOND CHILD, by John Saul. (Bantam, $14.95.)
                 A horrible crime committed 100 years ago comes
                 back to haunt a quiet Maine village.

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Nonfiction

 1      1   14   MEN AT WORK, by George F. Will. (Macmillan,
                 $19.95.) The political pundit and baseball buff
                 describes the craft of the game as practiced by
                 three players and a manager.

 2      2   7    DAVE BARRY TURNS 40, by Dave Barry. (Crown,
                 $16.95.) Reflections on the crises of middle age by
                 the syndicated humorist.

 3      6   25   BARBARIANS AT THE GATE, by Bryan
                 Burrough and John Helyar. (HarperCollins,
                 $22.95.) The 1988 battle for control of RJR Nabisco.

 4      3   6    FATHER, SON & CO., by Thomas J. Watson Jr. and
                 Peter Petre. (Bantam, $22.95.) The autobiography
                 of the man who succeeded his father as head of
                 I.B.M.

 5      8   43   IT WAS ON FIRE WHEN I LAY DOWN ON IT, by
                 Robert Fulghum. (Villard, $17.95.) A new collection
                 of inspirational essays.

 6      5   25   MEGATRENDS 2000, by John Naisbitt and
                 Patricia Aburdene. (Morrow, $21.95.)
                 Prognostications about political, economic and
                 social developments in the next decade.

 7      9   2    CAPTAIN SIR RICHARD FRANCIS BURTON, by
                 Edward Rice. (Scribners, $35.) The strange and
                 remarkable career of the 19th-century British
                 explorer.

 8      4   6    DON'T SHOOT, IT'S ONLY ME, by Bob Hope with
                 Melville Shavelson. (Putnam, $19.95.) The
                 comedian reminisces about more than 50 years in
                 show business.

 9 *   12   36   LIAR'S POKER, by Michael Lewis. (Norton,
                 $19.95.) Wall Street's tumultuous 1980's, as
                 witnessed by a young bond trader.

10      7   4    PERIL AND PROMISE, by John Chancellor.
                 (HarperCollins, $17.95.) Observations about
                 contemporary America by a television newscaster.

11     10   88   ALL I REALLY NEED TO KNOW I LEARNED IN
                 KINDERGARTEN, by Robert Fulghum. (Villard,
                 $17.95.) Inspirational essays.

12     13   23   HEAD FIRST, by Norman Cousins. (Dutton,
                 $19.95.) How the brain affects the body's endocrine
                 and immune systems.

13     14   4    MY LIFE IN THREE ACTS, by Helen Hayes with
                 Katherine Hatch. (Wolff/Harcourt Brace
                 Jovanovich, $19.95.) The actress's memoirs.

14            1  THE WORST YEARS OF OUR LIVES, by Barbara
                 Ehrenreich. (Pantheon, $19.95.) Essays on the
                 1980's, ''a decade of greed.''

15 *          1  BEHIND THE MASK, by Dave Pallone with Alan
                 Steinberg. (Viking, $18.95.) The memoirs of the
                 controversial former National League umpire.

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous

 1      2   31   THE GREAT WALDO SEARCH, by Martin
                 Handford. (Little, Brown, $10.95.) A book of
                 illustrations in which the game is to find a
                 ubiquitous chap named Waldo.

 2      1   74   WEALTH WITHOUT RISK, by Charles J. Givens.
                 (Simon & Schuster, $19.95.) A Florida
                 entrepreneur's advice about how to make a
                 personal fortune.

 3      4  184   WEBSTER'S NINTH NEW COLLEGIATE
                 DICTIONARY. (Merriam-Webster, $16.95.) A
                 standard reference work, revised and updated.

 4 *          1  LIFE 101, by John-Roger and Peter McWilliams.
                 (Prelude Press, $18.95.) Advice about coping with
                 the human condition.

 5      5   21   BEWARE THE NAKED MAN WHO OFFERS
                 YOU HIS SHIRT, by Harvey Mackay. (Morrow,
                 $19.95.) Advice on how to get ahead in business.


These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,000
bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 28,000 other
retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets. The figures are
statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United
States.

*An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect
the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of
the book above.

AND BEAR IN MIND
(Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)

EVERY SPY A PRINCE: The Complete History of Israel's Intelligence Community, by
Dan Raviv and Yossi Melman. (Houghton Mifflin, $24.95.) A fascinating account of
an intelligence establishment to which nearly supernatural powers are often
attributed, but which has suffered from fits of arrogance, complacency and
clumsiness much like all the others.

LYING TOGETHER, by D. M. Thomas. (Viking, $17.95.) The final novel of the
author's ''Russian Nights'' quintet purports to be an improvisation by
characters from the other four; the engaging, witty result grapples with big
issues like meaning and truth.

AN OPEN ADOPTION, by Lincoln Caplan. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $17.95.) Part
research paper, part thriller, this case study broadens to examine a form of
placement in which biological and adoptive parents are well known to one
another.

MY LIFE AS A DOG, by Reidar Jonsson. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $17.95.) The
uncannily deft narrative about a boy's coming of age (basis of the 1985 film),
finally translated from the Swedish.

REBUILDING THE HOUSE, by Laurie Graham. (Viking, $17.95.) An affecting record of
loss endured and life reconstructed after the death of the elder partner in a
remarkably fortunate transgenerational marriage.

WRESTLING WITH THE ANGEL: A Memoir of My Triumph Over Illness, by Max Lerner.
(Norton, $18.95.) The experiences of a New York intellectual, now in his 80's,
with three mortal diseases, which he has so far beaten with luck, pluck and
modern medicine.

TAKING HEART, by A. C. Greene. (Simon & Schuster, $18.95.) A veteran essayist
and commentator examines the experiences of the first patient in a new
heart-transplant center - himself.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: LIST

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              51 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 15, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

MUSIC;
Bridgeport Celebrates Its Diversity

BYLINE: By ROBERT SHERMAN

SECTION: Section 12CN; Page 21, Column 1; Connecticut Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 898 words


TRUMPET fanfares will introduce the 50th anniversary gala of the Norfolk Chamber
Music Festival in Norfolk this afternoon at 3, followed by opera arias and vocal
duets, short instrumental works of Bartok and Schumann, a Mozart String Quartet
and other compositions. The performers, all members of the Norfolk faculty,
include the trumpeters Allan Dean and Robert Nagel, the pianists Donald Currier,
Ward Davenny and Joan Panetti, the oboist Ronald Roseman, the Tokyo Quartet and
others.

Friday evening at 8:30, strings and clarinet will fill a program bracketing
Mozart's String Divertimento in E-flat (K.563) with the Brahms Clarinet Quintet.
Saturday at 8:30, the brasses will sound again, with Mr. Dean, the Meridian Arts
Ensemble and the Norfolk Brass Quintet contributing antiphonal pieces of the
Renaissance to an otherwise all-Baroque evening of works by Vivaldi, Torelli,
Bach and more. For reservations, call 542-5537 Three other Quintets fill out
this week with programs spanning several centuries of music for trumpets,
trombone and horn: at 8 P.M. on Tuesday, the Eastern Brass plays for the
Starlight Festival in the Yale Graduate School Courtyard (or indoors, if it
should rain) in New Haven, their program ranging from Monteverdi and Palestrina
to a set of American marches and ragtime pieces (624-6405).

Thursday evening at 8:30, the Epic Brass Quintet gives a free recital at the
Levitt Pavilion in Westport, with Bedford Middle School the rain site
(226-7600), and at the Summer Music Festival in Harkness Park in Waterford, the
Empire Brass will return at 8 P.M. on Saturday for its fourth annual visit with
selections from the Baroque to pops (442-9199).

Today and next Sunday are good times to visit Music Mountain outside Falls
Village. At 3 this afternoon, the Manfred String Quartet has scheduled Mozart's
Adagio and Fugue (K.546), the Beethoven Opus 95 Quartet, and, with Jodie
Gelbogis DeSalvo as guest pianist, the Schumann Quintet. Next Sunday at the same
hour, the Chester Quartet will arrive with more Mozart and Beethoven: the D
Major (K.499), and the third Razoumovsky, plus the rarely encountered Fifth
Quartet of the late Austrian-American composer Karl Weigl.

Last summer, a concert at the Charles Ives Center for the Arts in Danbury
honored the world-renowned contralto Marian Anderson and established an award
fund in her name to help young artists. Next Sunday at 8 P.M., a benefit program
for the awards project brings two other great performers to Danbury for the
Tchaikovsky B-Flat minor Concerto, the pianist Andre Watts and the conductor
James DePriest (who is Miss Anderson's nephew). ''Decoration Day,'' from the
Charles Ives' Holiday Symphony, will be the curtain-raiser, with Beethoven's
Seventh Symphony completing the program. Lawn admission (available only on the
day of the concert) is $15, while reserved-seat tickets range from $25 to $500.
Danbury High School is the rain site (797-4002).

A six-week series of free concerts to honor the city's ethnic and cultural
riches is underway in Seaside Park in Bridgeport. ''The Gorbach Performing Arts
Festival is a celebration of the invaluable contributions all immigrants have
made to our city,'' said Mayor Mary Moran. Dozens of artists and ensembles are
participating in this premiere festival summer, culminating Aug. 12 with an
appearance by the Irish band the Chieftains.

Today at 4, visitors can see and hear various soloists and the Khmer Performing
Arts Ensemble presenting the music and dance of Laos, Cambodia and Vietnam.

At 8 P.M. on Wednesday (and every subsequent Wednesday at that hour, extending
even a little past the official festival finale to Aug. 15), there will be
another installment of the Mayor's Cup Talent Competition. Open to
professionals, as well as amateurs ''who can offer evidence of performance
skill,'' the range of entertainment is restricted only by the proviso that the
material must have a major ethnic orientation.

Friday at 8 P.M., Paul King and his 18-piece orchestra will recreate the big
band sounds of Glenn Miller, Count Basie and other jazz greats. On Saturday
morning at 11, a children's series will present ''Tales of the First World,''
the storytellers' authentic costumes and instruments enhancing the folklore
legends from Africa and the Caribbean.

Saturday evening at 8, it will be another complete turnaround, as Kool and the
Gang bring their driving beat and pop syncopations to the festival. For that
evening only, there will be a limited number of ticketed, reserved seats up
front, sold through Ticketron, with proceeds benefiting the Bridgeport Area Arts
Council; otherwise there is no admission charge.

Bringing the Bridgeport week full circle is a fascinating bit of historical
pageantry. Next Sunday, from noon until about 3 P.M., there will be a
re-creation of a Revolutionary War battle, with members of the Second
Continental Light Dragoons costumed in copies of Revolutionary War uniforms. At
4, however, music carries the day once more, with performances by Allison Krauss
and her bluegrass band.

Scheduled to come in later weeks: ballets to Copland and Gershwin scores (July
27), Russian choral music (July 27), Italian opera (Aug. 4), Polish folk songs
and dances (Aug. 5) and more. Starting times vary, and there are alternate rain
sites; call the Gorbach Organization at 367-7727 for further details.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              52 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 15, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

CRAFTS;
Fiber Art: Beyond the Mundane

BYLINE: By BETTY FREUDENHEIM

SECTION: Section 12NJ; Page 15, Column 1; New Jersey Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1151 words


THERE is a surprising harmony among some plastic baskets, Op Art quilts and the
154-year-old converted gristmill where they are now on display at the Hunterdon
Art Center. Both the center and the work in the ''Fiber as Art'' exhibition bear
witness to their more mundane beginnings.

While the stream that rushes by outside no longer turns a millstone, it provides
a soothing background murmur. And the heavy overhead beams and low ceilings of
these well-lighted galleries help the visitors to focus on small objects in this
show without being distracted by a plethora of competing colors and shapes.

Some of the fiber works also echo their traditional functions, but the delicate
baskets in the show will never be used to tote strawberries, nor will a $2,000
quilt ever warm chilled toes.

''Historically, fiber works can trace their origins to the manufacture of cloth
or, ethnographically, to the production of housing, ritual objects, baskets,
etc.,'' said Lewis Knauss, a Philadelphia fiber artist and juror of the
exhibition. When fiber works become art, the ''restrictions of function
associated with the craft are removed, allowing the artist to concentrate on
purely visual expressions.''

He selected 61 works by 43 artists from across the country; eight live in New
Jersey. Although this is the 37th annual Juried Exhibition at the Hunterdon, it
is the first to diverge from an established pattern of rotating among painting,
drawing, small sculpture and photography shows.

The switch is not so radical; many parallels exist between fiber arts and the
so-called fine arts. For years, painters and sculptors like Rauschenberg and
Christo have included textiles in their work. And some fiber artists use paper -
but not for sketching or painting. They make their own and then mold, tear,
stitch or glue it into new forms.

Jill A. Powers achieves the mysticism of the Orient with handmade paper that she
casts into starkly simple forms. ''Perilous Journey'' is a dark, shallow boat
afloat in a ''sea'' of white Angora foam. The cargo resembles a row of inverted
mussel shells. Or are they tents?The title suggests the refugee ships that
braved the rugged trip from Vietnam.

The serene oblong shape of Ms. Powers's ''Reverence'' has the essence of an
Oriental reliquary. A single dried okra pod hangs down in front like a
ceremonial tassel.

''Bnety,'' by Carole S. Weisman, might be the detritus left by nature after a
storm has passed. Shreds of paper cling to a group of tall reeds. There are
blobs of transparent rabbit skin glue that glisten like water dripping from the
broken branches.

Louise A. Ewing's paper was shredded into amorphous shapes and then stitched and
interlaced with a fine cobweb of threads. In the process this ''Fragmentation''
becomes a unified wall hanging.

And there are the unexpected, the unconventional materials. Nancy Koenigsberg
interlaces telephone wires and tiny glass beads through layers of black
industrial mesh to achieve her glittering ''Galaxies.'' They scintillate like
microcosms of a starry night. Emily Marks crocheted a Cinderella-like slipper
from gold metallic yarn and imitation pearls. A red, red rose is affixed to the
toe. ''If the Shoe Fits...'' she calls it, but there is only one, so don't be
tempted.

Although most of the quilts are cut from cotton fabrics, the designs are far
from traditional block patterns used in granny's day. Helen Giddens's ''Blue
Study 1'' features rows of black triangles in varigated sizes. These are
silhouetted against background shades of blue and green. The quilting is worked
in random stitches that move up and down and circle about in a doodling fashion,
a dynamic contrast with the repeated angularity of the motif. African art might
have been her inspiration.

Dorcas Kraybill's design for her ''Bleeding Emblems'' suggests architecture, but
not the familiar ''log cabin'' design so familiar to quilt collectors. This
series of curved shapes resembles the ornate stone balustrade of a Renaissance
castle. The warm glow of a hazy sunset is barely visible through the apertures.
If this is the correct interpretation, the title is an enigma.

Caryl Bryer Fallert's multihued quilts are precise and geometric, but what
movement and depth they convey. The three she has named ''Refraction N1, N2 and
N3'' spiral in whirlwind-like spectrums of vibrant colors. But they are not
duplicates. The eye of the storm is slightly off center in each one.

For her ''Checking Over the Rainbow N8,'' the same graduated range of colors
alternates with black squares: a checkerboard in rainbow tones. It is not
difficult to imagine the hours of patient labor required to hand-dye these
cloths before the cutting and stitching can even begin.

''What You Remembered Is Saved,'' by Linda Levin, is a ''crazy quilt'' of
irregular pieces. But the typical bright clashes of color and pattern are
absent. The work is muted and restrained. Off-white, irregularly shaped pieces
of fabric were textured with brushstrokes of dye that crisscross, zigzag and
leave drops of muted tones. Several segments bear the imprint of a screen.

Those ''isms'' favored by painting connoisseurs. Surrealism, Impressionism,
Pointillism and Minimalism - are well represented in a selection of loom-woven
wall hangings.

Unlike the case with painting, artistic impulse does not play a role in tapestry
weaving. These artists cannot stand back to appraise the composition and then
rush forward to add a flower or ribbon to a vacant space. A detailed drawing of
the entire composition must precede any winding of yarn on the bobbins.

Several of these tapestries depict solid objects floating in space. The forms in
Audrey Moore's ''Magic From a Red Robe'' appear to be a belt, buckle, ribbons
and dress button loops. She assembled the symbols; interpretations are left to
the individual viewers.

''A Gathering of Light,'' by Betty Vera, glows with color. Shafts of red and
blue bend and sway like sea grass on a windy dune. But all is worked in small
dots of varied hues. Minute color changes take place across the whole surface;
each square inch represents a prismatic range of tones.

The only male artist in the show is represented by a piece that contains no
visible fiber. Its association with ancient books explains the exception. Sean
Fletcher's ''Notebook'' is made of slabs of galvanized steel, held together with
screws. Its dimensions are even greater than the medieval missals that were used
by an entire church choir. However, rather than the elegantly etched clasps of
those manuscript books, Mr. Fletcher closes his with two hardware store
padlocks.

The show runs through July 29. The Hunterdon Art Center is at 7 Center Street in
Clinton. Hours are noon to 4:30 P.M. Tuesday through Friday and 1 to 5 P.M.
Saturday and Sunday. Admission is $1.50, or $1 for students and the elderly;
children under 12 are admitted free.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos; ''Fragmentation'' wall hanging, far left, by Louise A. Ewing,
''Bleeding Emblems'' quilt by Dorcas Kraybill and ''Bnety,'' above, by Carole S.
Weisman, in exhibition, ''Fiber as Art,'' at the Hunterdon Art Center in Clinton
(Hunterdon Arts Center)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              53 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 15, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

OUR COSTLIEST WAR

BYLINE: By JAMES AXTELL; James Axtell, the Kenan Professor of Humanities at the
College of William and Mary, is the author of ''The Invasion Within: The Contest
of Cultures in Colonial North America.''

SECTION: Section 7; Page 14, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 991 words



THE RED KING'S REBELLION
Racial Politics in New England, 1675-1678.
By Russell Bourne.
Illustrated. 273 pp. New York:
Atheneum. $22.95.

Popularizing history is a tricky business at the best of times, but particularly
in these days of professional specialization. To sell their books but not their
souls, popularizers must steer between the rocks of half-baked research and the
shoals of academic prose. The best have been either readable professors like
Garrett Mattingly and Samuel Eliot Morison or scholarly journalists like Allan
Nevins and Barbara Tuchman. They all did their homework but wrote for the
elusive general reader rather than the professoriate.

The publication most responsible for popularizing America's history has been
American Heritage, a Nevins brainchild. The accessible magazine and the highly
visual American Heritage books have put our history within reach of every
library-card-carrying citizen in the country. So it is a good omen that Russell
Bourne, the former editor of American Heritage Books, has written a short,
eminently readable retelling of the bloody tragedy known as King Philip's War.

The war was the deadliest and costliest, proportionately, in American history,
worse than the Civil War or Vietnam in terms of lives lost, communities
destroyed and economic dislocation. It had no winners, only losers. Named for
the unregal chief of the Pokanokets, a Plymouth Colony tribe, the conflagration
engulfed all of New England between 1675 and 1678, when it burned itself out in
Maine.

Philip (or Metacom) was the younger heir of Massasoit, the Wampanoag sachem who
befriended and allied himself with the Pilgrims in a treaty in 1621. For Mr.
Bourne, this treaty inaugurated an exemplary era of good feelings, a period of
''biracial harmony'' when Native Americans and newcomers lived side by side with
equity and cooperation. But he never examines its provisions, which were, in
fact, tipped heavily toward the English, the self-appointed policemen of
America's allegedly lawless forests.

The only reasons for Plymouth's relatively benign behavior in the early decades
were the Pilgrims' demographic disadvantage and their lack of interest in
converting the Indians to Christianity. After the great migration of 1630-42,
their pugnacious Puritan neighbors to the north operated from no such weakness.
When English land lust, sharp trading practices and disdain for Indian
sovereignty pushed the New England Indians to the wall by the 1670's, Philip's
local insurrection ignited discontent the length and breadth of New England.

A heedless attack by the settlers on the neutral Narragansetts, the most
populous and powerful tribe, drove them and the rest of the region's tribes into
furious resistance. Canonchet, the able Narragansett chief, became the field
commander of the uprising. Before it was over, the war had claimed 9,000 victims
(two-thirds of them Indian) and destroyed most or all of nearly 50 English
towns. Homelessness, starvation, crushing taxation and our earliest veteran
problem preyed on New England for years afterward.

Mr. Bourne blames the breakdown of political accommodation on both sides for the
war. Men of the caliber of Roger Williams and Massasoit were replaced by hotter
heads whose basic distrust of the other culture precipitated pre-emptive acts of
aggression rather than bold initiatives of peace. Maj. Richard Waldron, for
example, disarmed the Indians on the New Hampshire-Maine border out of fear that
they might be seduced into war by the ''rebels'' just south of them. The only
result was winter starvation for many Indians, who depended on their guns for
hunting, and the destruction of Maine's coastal towns in angry reprisal.

Any student of the war has an unbeatable cast of characters to direct: Benjamin
Church, the most effective and most principled Indian fighter in the colonies;
Mary Rowlandson, the minister's wife who, captured by One-Eyed John (Monoco),
sewed her way to freedom; Weetamoo, the mercurial and much-married ''queen'' of
the Pocassets; Stone-Wall John, the Indian mason who built impressive walls
around the Narragansett swamp fort; Thomas Gardiner, arrested for treason for
suggesting that Massachusetts caused the Eastern war by disarming the Abnakis;
and Mugg Hegone, the Abnaki war captain, who planned to capture a navy of
English fishing boats and attack Boston. Mr. Bourne makes a lively job of it.
Actors on both sides of the buckskin curtain come alive as engaging, fallible
human beings, not cardboard stereotypes.

But ''The Red King's Rebellion'' is only a mixed success as popular history. Mr.
Bourne, descended from the minister who founded the town of Mashpee, where his
converts, or ''praying Indians,'' lived, aimed at a ''personal narrative'' of
the war rather than a new interpretation. Yet his text is pockmarked with
dutiful bows to the ''competing professionals'' who have fought over his
historical turf. The reader is subjected to confusing references to
''conservatives,''

''revisionists'' and ''scientists'' (or ''ethnohistorians,'' his favorites), and
surprisingly Mr. Bourne comes to a revisionist conclusion that ''an ineluctable
sense of guilt'' is our major legacy from the war.

This gets us no farther than do his discredited references to New England's
''theocracy'' (the Puritans practiced strict separation of church and state),
Indian ''braves'' (only on the 19th-century Plains), ''French and Indian Wars''
(not from French or Indian viewpoints) and particularly the ''racial'' nature of
the conflict between ''red and white.'' The meeting of Native Americans and the
English was a cultural encounter in which boundaries were permeable and values
transferable; race played no part until after 1689.

Nevertheless, this is a good and largely reliable rendition of a cautionary tale
that cannot be heard too often by modern Americans, especially after Vietnam,
Grenada and Panama.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing: engraving of King Philip, chief of the Pokanokets. (The
Bettmann Archive)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              54 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 16, 1990, Monday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

Nixon Library Set to Open, With Disputes Old and New

BYLINE: By SETH MYDANS, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 1813 words

DATELINE: YORBA LINDA, Calif., July 11


There was one small wrinkle in the planning for the Richard Nixon Library and
Birthplace here, one week before its dedication, and it involved a familiar
question: What did Mr. Nixon know and when did he know it?

The question, a refrain from the days of the Watergate scandal, arose during a
debate over whether the $21 million complex would open its archives to people
deemed unfriendly to Mr. Nixon.

''I don't think we'd ever open the doors to Bob Woodward,'' the library's
director, Hugh Hewitt, said recently in an interview, referring to the
Washington Post reporter who helped uncover the scandal that began with the
break-in at the offices of the Democratic National Committee in the Watergate
complex in Washington on June 17, 1972. He said researchers would ''obviously,
certainly'' be screened.

As Mr. Nixon's staff hurried this week to assure the public that the library
would indeed be open to everyone, Mr. Hewitt accepted the blame for the
misunderstanding. He said the former President had known nothing of the
restrictions at the time he announced them.

''I put my personal opinion out there, which is irrelevant,'' Mr. Hewitt said of
his statement to The Los Angeles Times that Nixon critics would be barred. ''The
President did not know about it. R. N. got to it for the first time on Monday.''

The museum, which opens to the public the day after the dedication on Thursday,
and the underground library, scheduled to open next year, will be run entirely
with private funds, rather than with government support like most other
Presidential libraries.

The question of access to the archives pointed up the sensitivity of Mr. Nixon's
supporters about his image as they prepared to open a library that cannot avoid
the rough spots in his long and bumpy career.

Along with Soviet detente and the diplomatic opening to China, there will be
exhibits on Watergate and the disgrace of resignation and an elaborate taped
question-and-answer display in which Mr. Nixon's voice will respond to such
persistent questions as, ''Why didn't you burn the tapes?''

They are questions that Mr. Nixon is still answering, almost 16 years after
resigning the Presidency on Aug. 9, 1974, as he continues to tend to his legacy
in interviews, articles and books, most recently ''In the Arena: A Memoir of
Victory, Defeat, and Renewal'' published by Simon & Schuster in April.

'Full and Fair Treatment'

Mr. Hewitt said the museum's Watergate exhibit, which was still being completed,
would be a ''full and fair treatment,'' in chronological order, of Mr. Nixon's
fall. But he said it would be framed in the former President's words, a
perspective that has consistently played down the significance of the episode
and the culpability of Mr. Nixon. The former President wrote in ''In the
Arena,'' for example, ''In retrospect, I would say that Watergate was one part
wrongdoing, one part blundering and one part political vendetta by my enemies.''

Mr. Hewitt said more than $27 million had already been pledged or contributed to
the library and museum from more than 5,000 donors. Notable among these are
William E. Simon, the former Treasury Secretary and president of the library
foundation; and Walter H. Annenberg, the publisher and longtime supporter of Mr.
Nixon. He declined to identify other contributors.

Mr. Nixon has earmarked the royalties from ''In the Arena'' for the library, and
additional money will come from souvenirs and ticket fees.

Gathering of Presidents

The pink limestone Spanish-style library and museum shares a nine-acre hillside
plot with Mr. Nixon's restored boyhood home in this small city 30 miles
southeast of Los Angeles.

When the building is dedicated, Mr. Nixon will be joined by President Bush and
former Presidents Ronald Reagan and Gerald R. Ford, the first time four American
Presidents have met in public since a gathering at the White House after the
death in 1981 of President Anwar Sadat of Egypt. Citing a previous engagement,
former President Jimmy Carter will not attend the dedication.

Mr. Hewitt said that because the complex's annual $2 million to $3 million cost
would be covered with private funds, Mr. Nixon would have the freedom to decide
policy questions. But he denied that this would result in any restrictions on
the library's contents or on access to its materials.

Mr. Nixon has resisted access to White House documents since the Senate first
requested his tape recordings of calls and conversations in the Oval Office
during its hearings on Watergate. His campaign against disclosure has continued
in the years since his resignation, and he is currently opposing efforts by the
National Archives to make public hundreds of thousands of pages of White House
''special files,'' the documents with which he dealt directly while in office.

Documents in National Archives

In 1974 Congress passed the Presidential Recordings and Materials Preservation
Act, seeking to thwart the destruction of files from Mr. Nixon's Presidency. The
legislation transferred official custody of the Nixon materials to the Archivist
of the United States, and the National Archives will continue to house them
unless Congress gives the former President custody.

The Nixon library will have space for 10 million documents and could expand to
hold 25 million, Mr. Hewitt said. The Nixon records at the National Archives in
Alexandria, Va., amount to more than 40 million documents.

Mr. Hewitt said the library would house original documents from before and after
Mr. Nixon's Presidency. It will have photocopies of the documents in the
National Archives, he said.

Tapes From Watergate Scandal

Exhibits at the museum will reward both lovers and haters of Mr. Nixon, the two
categories into which Mr. Hewitt said most Americans are divided. They will be
able to listen to the televised address of Sept. 13, 1952, in which Mr. Nixon
saved his Vice Presidential candidacy by defending himself against charges that
he had improperly supplemented his salary with gifts from wealthy supporters.
This speech, the Checkers speech, drew its name from Mr. Nixon's mentioning a
cocker spaniel that had been given to his daughters, Tricia and Julie.
''Regardless of what they say about it, we are going to keep it,'' he told
viewers.

The Watergate exhibit will include three crucial White House tapes: the
''smoking gun'' tape of June 23, 1972, in which Mr. Nixon agreed to ask the
Central Intelligence Agency to block an investigation of Watergate by the
Federal Bureau of Investigation; the tape of March 21, 1973, in which the White
House counsel, John W. Dean 3d, said, ''We have a cancer within, close to the
Presidency, that is growing;'' and the tape of March 22, 1973, in which the
President told Attorney General John N. Mitchell that he wanted his aides to
''stonewall it, plead the Fifth Amendment, cover up or anything else if it'll
save it, save the plan.''

But the museum designers chose not to have a video or audio presentation of the
''last press conference,'' after Mr. Nixon's defeat in the race for California
governor in 1962, when he told reporters, ''You won't have Dick Nixon to kick
around anymore.''

Theme of Resiliency

A theme of the museum is Mr. Nixon's ability to rise from such defeats. A film
to be shown in a central auditorium is titled: ''Never Give Up -R.N. in the
Arena.''

Mr. Hewitt said he thought many visitors would find nostalgic pleasure in the
exhibits. For some, it appears that nostaligia includes the chance to kick
around Mr. Nixon once again.

''I definitely want my picture taken in this setting,'' said an early visitor
outside the still-unopened museum, Jim LeMonds of Castle Rock, Wash., as he
posed with his arms raised in Mr. Nixon's double victory gesture.

''We used to go through the Nixon routines, the mimicking and so on,'' Mr.
LeMonds said. ''They need a little statue of him out here with all the Watergate
figures lined up behind him, so you could get in there and have your picture
taken with them. Now, that would be a bold stroke by the Nixon people.''

On the other extreme was a veteran of the Battle of the Bulge, who was lobbying
to take part in the museum's inauguration.

''He's not calling and excited about coming here because he wants to see the
Watergate exhibit,'' Mr. Hewitt said of the veteran, ''but because Nixon brought
his son home from Vietnam and he believes he is a great man.''

Inside the museum, one exhibit allows visitors to mingle with the life-size
statues of 10 Nixon-era world leaders, arranged as if they were attending a
cocktail party. Press a button and the statues of statesmen like Konrad
Adenauer, Mao Zedong and Nikita S. Khrushchev will share their thoughts, in
English, about Mr. Nixon. Recorded texts also describe these leaders and Mr.
Nixon's views of them.

Charles de Gaulle, speaking of a meeting with Mr. Nixon in the 1950's, is quoted
as saying, ''He struck me as one of those frank and steady personalities on whom
one feels one could rely in the greatest affairs of state, if ever they were to
reach the highest office.''

Debates and Time Covers

Other exhibits include the 1960 Presidential debates with John F. Kennedy,
various political campaigns, the 1959 ''kitchen debate'' in Moscow with Mr.
Khrushchev and the case of Alger Hiss, convicted of being a Communist spy, along
with such artifacts of the case as a hollowed-out pumpkin similar to the one in
which microfilm was said to have been hidden.

Along one wall are displayed 30 of the 67 Time magazine covers on which Mr.
Hewitt said Mr. Nixon appeared either alone or as part of a group.

The exhibits, and the broad span of Mr. Nixon's career, are put in dramatic
context by the presence a few yards from the library of a tiny, white clapboard
house where Mr. Nixon was born on Jan. 9, 1913, and where he lived until he was
9 year old.

Restored in pristine detail, the house includes the bed in which the future
President was born and other original furnishings like a dresser, high chair,
china and books as well as the piano on which he learned to play.

'A Very Happy Time'

From the window of the upstairs bedroom that Mr. Nixon shared with three
brothers visitors can see the sprawling one-story library on land once covered
by orange and lemon trees at the edge of the Southern California desert.

Still a lover of audio tapes, as he was in the White House, Mr. Nixon has
recorded a reminiscence for visitors to his birthplace, complete with a distant
train whistle and thoughts on angel food cake and National Geographic magazines.
''It was a very happy time,'' Mr. Nixon says.

Speaking of his love of music, Mr. Nixon suddenly offers an unexpected aside.

''I have often thought,'' he says, ''that if there had been a good rap group
around in those days I might have chosen a career in music instead of
politics.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: July 19, 1990, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

CORRECTION:

Because of an editing error, an article on Monday about the Richard Nixon
Library and Birthplace referred incorrectly in some editions to the outcome of
the Alger Hiss case.

Mr. Hiss's conviction was on a perjury charge, for his denial of having received
military secrets from a confessed former Communist spy, Whittaker Chambers. Mr.
Hiss was not convicted of being a Communist spy.

GRAPHIC: Photo: The Richard Nixon Library, which, together with the former
President's birthplace, is being dedicated this week in Yorba Linda, Calif.
(Bart Bartholomew for The New York Times); Map: Yorba Linda, Calif. (pg. A10)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              55 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 16, 1990, Monday, Late Edition - Final

125,000 Attend Base's Air Show, Billed as Panama Re-enactment

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 13, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 402 words

DATELINE: McCHORD AIR FORCE BASE, Wash., July 15


About 125,000 people attended an air show on Saturday that was billed as a
re-enactment of the invasion of Panama, but the military, reacting to criticism
of insensitivity to those who were killed, played down the event.

A press release for the base's 50th anniversary celebration promised a
''re-enactment of the invasion of Panama, with the actual aircraft, air crews
and soldiers who were there participating!''

But Capt. John Litton denied that the event was a re-enactment. ''That was just
something that got overemphasized in a news release,'' he said.

Drawn by Sound and Fury

Still, many of those who attended the air show at the base just south of Tacoma
said they were drawn by word they would get some of the sound and fury of the
invasion on Dec. 20.

''I think it's appropriate for them to re-create the Panama invasion,'' said
Jean Smith of Tacoma, who was joined by three of her 18 grandchildren. ''This
way you get a chance to find out exactly what goes on, to see it for yourself.''

''War is war, and that's a fact of life,'' said Henry Stahl, who brought his
son, a member of the Air Force R.O.T.C., to the show. ''If the military does a
good job, I think they should let the people see.''

Fighters roared overhead at 600 miles an hour, and bombers and helicopters
swooped low on mock strafing runs. Paratroopers jumped from a C-141.

The show did include some troops who participated in the Panama invasion, said
Bob Rosenburgh, a civilian spokesman for Fort Lewis.

Officials said they received some criticism and accusations of an insensitivity
to the loss of life in the invasion.

''Somebody on base overhyped the event,'' said Col. Mike McCarthy, the commander
of the air base. ''As soon as I heard about it, I said, 'It's a mistake. We're
not doing Panama II.' ''

''We got a lot of flak about it,'' said Sgt. Randy Mitchell. ''It doesn't make
sense to me. The public was overwhelmingly behind the Panama operation, but now
it's a sensitive subject, like Vietnam.''

About 24,000 American troops raided Panama in December, arresting Gen. Manuel
Antonio Noriega and installing as president Guillermo Endara, who lost elections
in May that were widely described as fraudulent and were annulled by the
government supported by General Noriega.

The invasion cost the lives of 220 civilians and at least 300 soldiers, 23 of
whom were American, the United States Army has said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              56 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 16, 1990, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Gen. George L. Mabry Jr., 72; Was Awarded Medal of Honor

BYLINE: By JAMES BARRON

SECTION: Section B; Page 10, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 295 words


Gen. George L. Mabry Jr., who won the Medal of Honor in World War II and later
commanded American forces in the Panama Canal Zone, died Friday at Richland
Memorial Hospital in Columbia, S.C. He was 72 years old and lived in Columbia.

General Mabry died of prostate cancer that spread to the lining of his heart,
said a son, Lieut. Col. George L. Mabry 3d.

General Mabry, who joined the Army after graduating from Presbyterian College in
Clinton, S.C., in 1940, landed with the Fourth Infantry Division on Utah Beach
in Normandy on D-Day, June 6, 1944.

He was awarded the Medal of Honor for his actions during an attack on Nov. 20,
1944, in the Huertgen Forest near Schevenhutte, Germany. He was cited for
clearing a path through a German minefield, capturing three German bunkers,
killing three German soldiers and injuring another with his rifle butt. He
captured nine other Germans. He served as a regimental commander of the 31st
Infantry Regiment in Korea from 1954 to 1956, and later spent 10 years in the
Panama Canal Zone, including four as commanding general.

As the commander of American support troops in Vietnam in 1969, General Mabry
ordered an investigation of eight Special Forces soldiers accused of murdering
Thai Khac Chuyen, an American espionage agent suspected of also working for the
Vietcong. The Army later dropped the charges against the Green Berets, saying
that the Central Intelligence Agency had refused to let its personnel testify at
their courts-martial.

In addition to Lieutenant Colonel Mabry, who is stationed in Stuttgart, West
Germany, General Mabry is survived by his wife, Eulena; a daughter, Abigail M.
Ferrick of Columbia; a son, Benjamin, also of Columbia; a brother, Buford, of
Sumter, S.C., and five grandchildren.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              57 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 17, 1990, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Aggression in Men: Hormone Levels Are a Key

BYLINE: By DANIEL GOLEMAN

SECTION: Section C; Page 1, Column 2; Science Desk

LENGTH: 1703 words


WHEN men are domineering and intensely competitive, it may be just another case
of raging hormones, specifically the male sex hormone testosterone, researchers
say.

Scientists have long linked abnormally high levels of testosterone to an
unusually early involvement with sex and drug use and to certain violent crimes,
like particularly vicious rapes. But now a series of new findings show that high
testosterone levels play a role in the normal urge for the upper hand.

Those men who are most likely to try to dominate in a social situation, be it in
a prison yard or a board room, are likely to have higher testosterone levels
than their peers, new data show.

Scientists caution against placing too much stock in the importance of hormones
like testosterone in human affairs, since so many other factors, from childhood
experiences to social status, shape the expression of a given behavior like
dominance or competitiveness.

''This doesn't mean that people can't be dominant or aggressive without high
testosterone,'' said Dr. Robert Rose, a psychiatrist at the University of
Minnesota medical school. ''A woman, of course, can be as competitive as a man,
even though her testosterone levels are much lower.''

Scientists emphasize that the effects of hormones on human behavior are small
relative to social and psychological factors, showing up most clearly in studies
of large numbers of people. And Dr. Rose is among a group of scientists who are
skeptical that the hormone is a strong and direct cause of specific human
behavior. He cites a series of studies, most involving small numbers of people,
that have posted contradictory findings.

''In animals behavior like mating, nesting and aggression is much more tightly
linked to hormones than is true in humans,'' Dr. Rose said. ''In humans hormones
only set the stage, while social factors determine if and how they are
expressed.''

Still, a growing body of new evidence portrays a distinct role for testosterone
among men jockeying for power.

High testosterone levels have long been known to typify the dominant males in
groups of primates like baboons, and in unusual groups of men like prison
inmates and hospitalized psychiatric patients. But the recent research has found
the same differences in men who seek social dominance in normal realms of life.

''Hormonal secretions create a propensity for certain behaviors,'' Dr. Rose
said. ''Testosterone seems most strongly linked to competitiveness and
dominance.''

The findings apply only to men. After puberty, testosterone levels in men are
about 10 times higher than in women.

''The highest testosterone level in women tends to fall within the low range for
men, so that the hormone is a far greater factor for men than women,'' said Dr.
Richard Udry, head of a center for population study at the University of North
Carolina, who is studying the effects of testosterone on sexuality. But
researchers agree with Dr. Rose that other factors can make women just as
competitive as men.

The newest and strongest evidence about the effect of testosterone comes from a
study of 1,706 men in the Boston area, aged 39 to 70. The men were selected at
random as part of a larger study on aging. Those who agreed to participate were
interviewed in their homes and given psychological tests, and blood samples were
taken.

Those who had higher levels of testosterone and related hormones had a
personality profile that researchers described as ''dominant with some
aggressive behavior.''

''The picture we get is of a man who attempts to influence and control other
people, who expresses his opinions forcefully and his anger freely, and who
dominates social interactions,'' said John B. McKinlay, a psychologist at the
New England Research Institute in Watertown, Mass., who was on the research
team.

The study, which will be published in Psychosomatic Medicine, is considered
significant because it is the first to examine so many randomly chosen men. Most
studies of testosterone in humans have been on small numbers in select
populations, like prison inmates.

Other studies, Dr. McKinlay noted, have found that men high in the trait of
social dominance tend to rise to positions of leadership in business and other
organizations. But for many others, some traits associated with testosterone
present an obstacle to success.

Exactly how a man's high testosterone level is expressed depends in part on his
social class, another new study has found. For men of lower social and economic
status, it is likely to show up as a readiness for fights, a history of minor
crimes, and chronic trouble with parents, teachers and peers in childhood. But
that is not true at higher social and economic rungs, where the display of
dominance is more subdued, researchers say.

Study of Vietnam Veterans

The findings are from data collected by the Federal Centers for Disease Control
from 4,462 Vietnam veterans who were studied starting in 1985 to assess
long-term effects of military service. The men's social and economic standing
was rated as high if they fell into the top half of the United States population
in both income and education level, and low if they fell into the bottom half.

An analysis of data on their testosterone levels was reported in the current
issue of Psychological Science by James Dabbs Jr., a psychologist at Georgia
State University.

''The overall picture among the high-testosterone men is one of delinquency,
substance abuse and a tendency toward excess,'' Dr. Dabbs said. ''They have more
trouble with people like teachers while they are growing up, have more sexual
partners, are more likely to have gone AWOL in the service and to have used hard
drugs. But that was so mainly for men who had low income and little education.''

There is disagreement over the social effect of testosterone on high status men.
Dr. McKinlay sees these results from the study of veterans as dovetailing with
his own on testosterone and social dominance, with high status men having
different outlets for their impulse to dominate.

''How hormone levels are expressed depends on social factors,'' he said. ''You
can drive a fast car instead of stealing them, for instance. Social dominance
could be channeled into organizational leadership if you have the
opportunities.''

An Obstacle for Some

On the other hand, Dr. Dabbs believes that many men with high testosterone
levels are too impatient and aggressive to find their ways to positions of
responsible leadership. Men with the highest testosterone levels were two and a
half times more likely to be low-status as high.

The traits of some men with high testosterone may not suit them to rising in
organizations where cooperation and consensus are valued, Dr. Dabbs noted. He
cited other studies showing that among rapists, high levels are found in those
who committed the most vicious attacks, and that among young men, schoolyard
bullies have high levels of the hormone.

''Those successful in the business world use the machinery of social power, and
many men with high testosterone may not be patient or docile enough to learn
that mastery,'' he Dabbs said. ''They'd rather be out doing something physical.
They're showoffs and swaggerers, anti-social and selfish.''

In a comparison of men in occupations ranging from the ministry, medicine and
college professors to actors, football players and firemen, Dr. Dabbs found that
testosterone levels correlated with certain vocations. Ministers were low in the
hormone, while actors and football players had the highest levels. That study
will be published in The Journal of Personality and Social Psychology.

''I was surprised that actors had such high levels,'' Dr. Dabbs said. ''But I
found that among the Vietnam veterans, those who described themselves as
entertainers also had high testosterone. There is a certain renegade quality to
acting as a career.''

Dr. Dabbs is now studying lawyers to see if those specializing in litigation
have higher testosterone levels than lawyers who do not fight it out in court.

In a series of other recent findings, fluctuations in testosterone levels in the
20 to 30 percent range have been found to reflect competitive triumphs and
defeats. While most studies have focused on testosterone's influence in causing
traits, these studies suggest that the hormone may be sensitive to the ups and
downs of competition.

For instance, in one study the testosterone levels of the six members of the
University of Nebraska varsity tennis team were monitored before and after six
meets.

Players with the highest testosterone levels before each match were the most
''psyched,'' feeling optimistic about the match. Afterward, testosterone levels
rose in those who won.  How well the players felt they performed was also
strongly related to the hormone levels: the better the player evaluated his own
performance, the higher the level.

''There is a link between triumph and testosterone levels, which possibly could
account for the momentum of a losing or winning streak,'' said Alan Mazur, a
sociologist at Syracuse University who was an author of the study. The results
were published in Hormone and Behavior in 1989.

Triumph and Humiliation

In the same vein, an earlier study by Dr. Mazur showed rises in the testosterone
levels of men in the hours after being awarded their M.D. degrees. And,
conversely, research by Dr. Rose found that testosterone levels fell in men
going through harassment during the first few weeks of officers' candidate
school.

Dr. Mazur sees testosterone at play in the small contests that establish pecking
orders among men in social life. ''The sporting contest is an analog for any
social competition,'' he said. ''It needn't be physical. We've found the same
hormone changes in chess matches.''

''Finding your place in the hierarchy is a basic part of primate life, and
testosterone is tightly linked to the outcome of battles for dominance in other
species,'' he added. ''In humans, of course, face-to-face dominance is highly
symbolic. I'd guess that any meaningful elevation of status would raise
testosterone levels, and a blow to your status would lower them, though it
hasn't been measured yet.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing (pg. C1); photo: Dr. James Dabbs Jr., a psychologist at Georgia
State University, has assessed data on reactions of men with various levels of
testosterone. (Alan Weiner for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              58 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 18, 1990, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Number of Killings Soars In Big Cities Across U.S.

BYLINE: By MICHAEL deCOURCY HINDS, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1757 words

DATELINE: PHILADELPHIA, July 17


After an alarming increase last year, homicide rates have continued to soar this
year, and experts attribute the rise to an increase in drug disputes, deadlier
weapons and a tendency among more young people to start careers in crime with a
gun.

Although the Federal Government has not compiled nationwide statistics on
killings in the first half of 1990, police departments in more than a dozen
major cities report increases ranging from 10 percent to more than 50 percent
over the first six months of 1989.

New York City, for instance, which set a record in 1989 with 1,905 killings,
reported a 22 percent increase in the homicide rate in the first three months of
1990, or 45 percent when the 87 arson deaths at the Happy Land Social Club are
included.

'Going Through the Roof'

In Boston the rate has increased 56 percent, on top of a 5 percent increase for
all of 1989. Here in Philadelphia killings are up 19 percent this year, after a
21 percent increase in 1989. And in Milwaukee, killings are up 25 percent after
a 35 percent increase for all of last year.

The statistics have alarmed the police and prosecutors across the country, some
of whom describe the situation in dark and hyperbolic terms. ''Our homicide rate
is going through the roof,'' said Ronald D. Castille, the Philadelphia District
Attorney. ''It's just raining a hail of bullets out there on the streets. Three
weekends ago, 11 people were killed in a 48-hour period.''

''What's causing most of the increase,'' he said, ''is the ready availability of
powerful handguns and the effects of drugs on human beings.''

Crime specialists and gun-control advocates say the ban on assault rifles that
was included in the crime bill that the Senate passed last week would have no
immediate effect on the murder rate even if it was immediately enacted. They say
too many people already have the weapons.

In a New York Times survey of 22 major cities around the country, all but five
reported increases in homicides in the first half of 1990 over the same period
in 1989. Their reports suggest that the nation's murder rate, after dipping in
the mid-80's, is continuing a strong upsurge and the number of victims may even
surpass the record year of 1980, when 23,040 people were slain.

Chicago recorded a 14 percent increase so far this year after a 12 percent
increase in 1989; in June alone, the city had a record 83 killings. Seattle
reported a 75 percent increase this year after the murder rate fell 32 percent
in 1989. But in Washington, which for the past two years has led the nation in
homicides, the rate increased only 1 percent, after an 18 percent rise in 1989.

Five Cities Stand Apart

The increases across the country reflects a generally worsening crime situation,
statistics from the Federal Bureau of Investigation show. Last year, the bureau
reported that violent crimes increased nationwide by 5 percent and homicides by
4 percent, while in cities with populations over one million violent crime
increased by 6 percent and homicides rose by 7 percent, the steepest increases
for those cities since 1985.

In five cities surveyed, murder rates are lower now than in 1989: Atlanta,
Cleveland, Miami, Portland, Ore., and Tucson, Ariz. Of those, only Miami also
had a decline last year.

Willie L. Williams, Commissioner of Police in Philadelphia, said rigorous gun
control would help curb the number of killings in his city, which reached 489
last year. And while he strongly supports the Senate move to ban semiautomatic
assault weapons, he said he thought it would have no immediate effect on the
homicide rate. ''There are so many of these weapons around,'' he said, adding
that Philadelphia police confiscate assault weapons in about half of their drug
raids.

Others are even less optimistic about the effect of the Senate's approval of a
ban, which the House has yet to vote on. ''Expecting a ban on assault rifles to
bring down the homicide rate is a bit like banning high-powered sports cars from
highways as a way to bring down the highway fatality rate,'' said James Q.
Wilson, professor of public policy at the University of California at Los
Angeles. Most homicides are committed with ordinary handguns, he said.

Across the country murder rates have increased steadily over the past several
years. After reaching a peak of 10.2 killings per 100,000 population in 1980,
the rate fell to 7.9 per 100,000 in 1984 and 1985, a decline that officials
attribute to the drop in numbers of people in their teens and 20's. The rate has
since rebounded, reaching 8.4 in 1988, the last year for which the F.B.I. has
figures broken down in that way.

Criminologists say the steep increase in homicides appears to be statistically
significant. ''Most year-to-year fluctuations tend to be random, but the bigger
the increase the more important it is and the more it sounds like a real
trend,'' said Lawrence W. Sherman, professor of criminology at the University of
Maryland who is president of the Crime Control Institute, a nonprofit research
organization.

Inner Cities Hit Hardest

Murder rates are primarily escalating in impoverished inner cities with large
minority populations and heavy drug use, said M. Dwayne Smith, an associate
professor of sociology at Tulane University. Most of those slain continue to be
young and black, as are the killers. In 1987, for example, there were 26.9 black
victims and 4.6 white victims for each 100,000 people.

Police officials say they can only guess why the number of homicides is rising
in most cities and dropping in others.

In Seattle, which usually has 50 to 60 killings a year, no one knows why the
number dropped to 38 last year or why it snapped back in the first six months of
this year, said Mark D. Amundson, a spokesman for the Police Department.

In Boston, Joseph V. Saia, chief of detectives for the Police Department, said
domestic disputes and turf battles over drugs were primarily responsible for the
78 killings in the first half of 1990, a large increase from the 50 killings in
the same period last year. Mr. Saia said it was handguns that were turning more
arguments into killings.

In Los Angeles 452 people were slain in the first half of this year as against
418 in the same period last year. Lieut. Fred Nixon of the Los Angeles Police
Department estimated that more than half of the killings were drug-related and
said gang killings accounted for 158 deaths so far this year, up from 150 in the
same period last year.

''We have had a few more multiple homicides, where three or four people were
killed at once,'' he said. ''Sometimes these are drive-bys, sometimes just
execution-style murders, which, of course, suggests drug-trafficking.''

Drugs, Alcohol and Relatives

Police often report an increase in drug-related killings, but criminologists
like Leonard D. Savitz say there is little research to support it. ''It's
fashionable for the police and the media to talk about drug murders,'' said Dr.
Savitz, a professor of sociology at Temple University, ''but I suspect that
drug-related murders were fairly prevalent in the past as well.''

In Dallas, the police do not break out the numbers of drug-related homicides,
but they say 30 percent of the homicide victims this year had drugs or alcohol
or both in their blood, as did 14 percent of the suspected killers. There have
been 189 killings in the city this year, as against 157 in the first six months
of last year. About 10 percent of this year's victims were related to their
killers, and 32 percent were acquainted with the killer. Sixty percent of the
homicides were committed with handguns; other firearms were responsible for an
additional 17 percent.

Police in Chicago and Atlanta said murder weapons have become more powerful and
killers, more youthful. ''We're getting many more younger people, and we're
seeing a lot more semiautomatic weapons,'' said Capt. Calvin A. Wardlaw,
commander of Atlanta Police Department's homicide squad.

John J. Townsend, chief of detectives for the Chicago Police Department, said:
''People used to use Saturday night specials, which were cheap and small and
didn't do as much damage as these big guns are doing. More people are dying from
their wounds because a semiautomatic or a 357 magnum really tears up the body.''


Impact of Vietnam War

In 1988 there were 660 killings in Chicago. Last year, there were 742, including
29 child-abuse homicides, seven accidents and two mercy killings. The police
attributed about 22 percent of the killings to domestic disputes and 24 percent
to drugs, though they did not break down which drugs were involved.

Professor Sherman said there is a very strong relationship between the
availability of weapons, as measured by indicators like sales and confiscations
by the police, and annual fluctuations in the homicide rate. ''The number of
assaults don't vary much, but the means of destruction do,'' he said.

Improved medical techniques, learned on the battlefields of Vietnam may have
contributed to decline in homicides in the mid-1980's, Professor Sherman said,
but the homicide toll is rising again because emergency medicine is no match for
the firepower of a semiautomatic gun.

''The number of bullets these guns fire, the speed they travel and the damage
they do is driving the homicide rate up,'' he said, citing reports from hospital
emergency rooms in Washington and Oakland, Calif., that the number of gunshot
wounds per victim has increased dramatically since 1985.

Impact of Handguns

Handguns are used in nearly half of all homicides; about one quarter of American
households have handguns, and in those homes there are 3.2 handguns on average.
Some cities, like Chicago, New York and Washington, have stringent regulations
on handguns, but they have been undermined by the lack of restrictions
elsewhere.

The National Rifle Association says such regulations are counterproductive.
''Washington has had a 160 percent increase in homicides since banning the
handgun in 1977,'' said Dr. Paul H. Blackman, research coordinator for the
association. ''The ban has been totally ineffective except in protecting
criminals from law-abiding citizens who might have been able to shoot back.''

But Carl T. Bogus, a Philadelphia lawyer and a director of the Center to Prevent
Handgun Violence, an advocacy group based in Washington, said law-abiding
citizens rarely use handguns to protect themselves. No more than about 2 percent
of killings nationally are considered justifiable, he said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Graphs: Percent change in number of homicides for each American City
from '89 to '90 (Source: Police departments) (pgs. A1 & D20)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              59 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 18, 1990, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Apply Lessons of Vietnam and El Salvador to Peru

SECTION: Section A; Page 20, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 358 words


To the Editor:

''Peru: No Vietnam in the Andes'' (editorial, July 7) assures us that the Bush
Administration's antidrug policy in Peru will not lead to another Vietnam War in
the Andes and that United States military involvement there is not serious cause
for concern. Indeed there are many important differences between the situation
in Peru and the Vietnam of the 1960's. The conflicts themselves are different.
So are the stated goals of the United States.

But there are also similarities. Just as in Vietnam, the United States military
presence in Peru is escalating slowly and quietly; the President is repeatedly
assuring the American people that he is only sending ''advisers'' and
''trainers,'' and the Administration is insisting that the exact number of
United States military personnel must remain secret, ''for security reasons.''

The parallel with Vietnam, however, is not the only problem. There is an equally
disturbing comparison with our policy in El Salvador, where the United States is
still mired in a 10-year-old guerrilla war. Military aid to El Salvador has
implicated the United States in atrocious human rights abuses and made the
Salvadoran Army the country's strongest institution. President Bush now plans to
lead us down the same path in Peru, where the civilian government is in a
precarious period of political transition and where the military is one of the
world's worst human rights abusers.

Of course, stopping the flow of drugs from the Andean countries is an important
goal. But the protection of human rights and the promotion of democratic
institutions should not be sacrificed along the way.

I hope you are correct that the United States learned a lesson in Vietnam - and
El Salvador - and that the Bush Administration will not repeat the mistakes of
the past. If there is anything the United States should have learned from
Vietnam and El Salvador, it is that protracted conflicts in distant countries
are easier to get into than out of. That lesson alone justifies concerns about
Administration policy in Peru.

TED WEISS
Member of Congress, 17th Dist., N.Y.
  Washington, July 12, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              60 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 18, 1990, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Apply Lessons of Vietnam and El Salvador to Peru;
Yanqui Intruders

SECTION: Section A; Page 20, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 340 words


To the Editor:

I was distressed to read, on the day I returned from my 18th visit to Peru in 24
years, your July 7 editorial approval of the United States military presence in
Peru.

The people of Peru view this presence with apprehension and fear.

It is by no means certain that Sendero Luminoso (Shining Path) is, as you state,
a terrorist group. Most Peruvians believe that the so-called atrocities in
remote mountain regions and the occasional power cuts and derailment of freight
trains are the work of the Peruvian army, to embarrass the Government and
prepare the way for a military coup for which the United States will have
provided equipment and training.

The coca plant is legally grown in Peru and has for many centuries been a
beneficial staple of the Andean population. It provides energy at high altitudes
and has the additional boon, for people who rarely have enough food to eat, of
depressing the appetite. Each year, I visit Signora de M., who has a few small
fields of coca bushes shaded by fruit trees in the Huyro valley. The three
annual crops provide her and her family with an extremely modest living; her
ancestors have owned this coca plantation for generations; and if the United
States military destroys it, she and her family would have no alternative but to
make their way to Lima and exist in a cardboard or corrugated iron shack in one
of the vast slums, and try to sell ballpoint pens outside the luxury hotels and
the clubs of the Peruvian grandees.

Signora de M. is a farmer, not a drug trafficker. What the rich, the famous and
the powerful in the United States do with a substance manufactured outside Peru
from her God-given plants does not concern her. Peruvians view the United States
military involvement in their affairs with the outrage that the people of North
Carolina would feel if foreign troops were to descend upon them in helicopters
and destroy their tobacco crops.

HANNS EBENSTEN
  Key West, Fla., July 9, 1990

The writer heads a travel company and conducts tours.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              61 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 18, 1990, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Apply Lessons of Vietnam and El Salvador to Peru;
Human Rights Abuses

SECTION: Section A; Page 20, Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 290 words


To the Editor:

''Peru: No Vietnam in the Andes'' (editorial, July 7), endorsing the Bush
Administration's plan to provide $35 million in military aid to Peru, neglects
even to mention why human rights groups oppose this aid or want to subject it to
conditions.

As you point out, the Shining Path guerrillas in Peru, despite their vicious
practices, have been gaining ground and are heavily involved in the coca-growing
region. Accordingly, aid to the Peruvian military to fight the drug trade would
amount to support for the military's counterinsurgency program.

Unfortunately, the Peruvian armed forces have been as vicious as the Shining
Path guerrillas in their conduct of the war. They have killed thousands of
civilians; massacred whole villages; murdered witnesses to their killings, and,
each year, hundreds of people taken into custody have ''disappeared.'' Last year
was one of the worst, with 306 ''disappearances'' recorded by Peruvian human
rights groups. Of these, 268 were carried out by the army and most of the rest
by other armed forces branches.

Evidence suggests that the Shining Path has gained ground because of the
disaffection stirred by the Peruvian armed forces. Financing their fight against
the Shining Path could thus turn out counterproductive. The United States should
withhold support from any force that has been as brutal as the Peruvian
military. At the least, aid should be conditioned on clearly defined and
measurable reforms.

The Bush Administration has failed to insist on human rights conditions for
military aid. Regrettably, in endorsing the program, you have also failed to be
concerned with human rights.

ARYEH NEIER
Exec. Director, Human Rights Watch
  New York, July 9, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              62 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 18, 1990, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Supermarkets Reach Out To Hispanic Customers

BYLINE: By MARIAN BURROS

SECTION: Section C; Page 1, Column 1; Living Desk

LENGTH: 1361 words

DATELINE: EL MONTE, Calif.


FROM the tortilleria of the Tianguis supermarket here comes the slap, slap, slap
of women making tortillas by hand. On a Saturday afternoon, the market is in
perpetual motion: women mix, shape and bake tortillas almost nonstop. The result
is corn tortillas, flour tortillas (with or without lard), corn chips and
tostados.

The produce section of the store in this Los Angeles suburb has some 600 items,
including a grand assortment of chili peppers, from the brings-tears-to-your
eyes chipotle to the gentler poblano. There are mounds of grassy green cilantro,
tomatillos rustling in their papery brown covers and a rainbow of dried beans,
frijoles in 100-pound bags, the herb epazote and piloncillo, the tan cone of
Mexican sugar. There is lemon grass to use in tea, and star anise for syrups.
Customers can also choose from 18 flavors of chorizo, seven varieties of salsa
and 20 types of Mexican cheese.

What there is not much of is frozen food: frozen items account for only 2
percent of sales and half of that is ice cream. There are more canned products,
but few cake mixes. The people who shop at Tianguis cook from scratch. The
labels, like the signs and the workers in the store, are bilingual. So are the
announcements on the public address system.

Throw in a mariachi band and it is clear why this Tianguis (pronounced
tee-AN-geese), one of eight in Los Angeles County, has a loyal following among
Hispanic residents, who make up 95 percent of the stores' shoppers. Even the
name hints at why this is so: Tianguis is a shortened adaptation of tianquiztli,
the Aztec word for marketplace, and in Mexican culture, the marketplace is not
just for shopping, but for meeting friends. But the stores also draw
non-Hispanic shoppers who are attracted by the assortment of fresh produce, or
by the chance to try new foods.

Vons, a chain of more than 200 supermarkets in Southern California, built its
first Tianguis in 1987 in Montebello, branching out into a venture others now
see as the wave of the future: supermarkets tailored to the needs of large
ethnic neighborhoods.

In 1987 the first Tianguis store had sales of $23 million; the 1990 projected
sales figure for the eight stores is $140 million.

Another Tianguis will open in the early 1992, and the company is looking at five
more locations in Southern California, said Chris Linskey, vice president of
Tianguis. In those areas, he explained, the population is ''65 percent Hispanic
in a three-mile radius.'' The company is waiting for the results of the 1990
census to consider other sites, he said.

Elsewhere, other companies are also tapping into the ethnic market. In Southern
Florida, Extra, a division of Pueblo International of Puerto Rico, a supermarket
chain, caters to a Cuban-American population, and in Houston Fiesta Marts,
designed for the Hispanic population, stocks shelves also for customers of other
ethnic groups, especially Asians.

Like Vons, Fiesta, which opened its first store in 1972, emphasizes fresh
produce, Mexican bakery items and Mexican cuts of meat. It also has aisles of
items from China, Vietnam, India, Indonesia and Jamaica.

By the year 2000, the Hispanic population in the United States is expected to
exceed 28 million, and the Asian population 12 million, said Ana Maria Fernandez
Haar, president of IAC Advertising Inc. in Miami.

''With that many Hispanics and with that many Asians, they become a critical
mass,'' she said. So supermarket chains must take steps if they want to turn
these people into loyal customers.

''The age of mass marketing is clearly over,'' Ms. Haar added. ''Today, in all
marketing efforts it's either target or perish.'' Earlier ethnic groups
homogenized within a generation, but that is no longer necessarily true, said
Tim Hammonds, senior vice president for education and research of the Food
Marketing Institute, a trade group in Washington.

''America is not a melting pot in the sense that we once were,'' he said.
''Today, we are a mosaic of ethnic neighborhoods and ethnic styles. And now
ethnic groups are aggressively keeping two elements of their culture: language
and food. Successful marketers are those who can speak to each of those groups.

''It is very different from 20 years ago. The niches are smaller and smaller.''

But niche marketing is not static. Customers are constantly changing. ''Five or
10 years from now, those same shoppers will be cooking and eating different
things,'' Mr. Hammonds said.

It is the two million Hispanic people living in Los Angeles County whom Vons is
courting in its Tianguis markets. To do that, the company has built a bright,
impeccably clean version of a Mexican outdoor market.

Actually, the Tianguis markets are a glamorized version of the Grand Central
Market in downtown Los Angeles. What they lack in old-fashioned, down-at the
heels, crowded, historical charm they make up for in quality of products,
spaciousness and cheerful decor.

The extra-wide aisles in the 92,000-square-foot store in El Monte provide plenty
of room for pushing oversized carts up and down while visiting with friends. To
make the stores even more hospitable, each has a Taqueria, or fast-food
restaurant, where well-made Mexican food is served to those who want to linger
over tripas de leche (milk tripe) with horchata, a liquid version of rice
pudding, and atole, or corn porridge, a rich mixture of corn, chocolate, milk,
water and sugar.

One of the most inviting counters in the store is the cut fruit and juice bar.
Piles of fresh tropical fruits cascade beside eye-catching Mexican papayas,
peeled coconuts with a straw inserted to sip the milk and pieces of coconut
topped with hot chili powder.

Nearby is the seemingly endless counter of prepared foods, from pickled pig
skin, usually served on top of a tostada; capirotada, a sweet, incredibly rich
toasted bread pudding, and rajas, which are roasted poblano chilies fried in
olive oil with onions, garlic and fresh corn.

Everything is available for tasting, and an irresistible need to taste
everything comes over even the most casual shopper.

When the stores were started, there was ''a lot of pressure to do authentic
Mexican food representative of all the regions,'' said Regina Cordova, the food
development consultant for the Tianguis stores. She chose to do what is typical
of northern Mexico because the majority of the Mexican-Americans in Southern
California came from there.

''These are the things people had in our country as children,'' said a customer,
Heidi Osgood, as she surveyed the store. Mrs. Osgood, who was brought up in
Mexico, had brought her grown daughter, Heidi Logiudice, to shop. ''I found out
about this place by acccident,'' Mrs. Osgood said. ''I want my daughter to see
this. I don't want her to lose her heritage.''

Still, she said she cooks Mexican food only once in a while, ''when I get
homesick, because good Mexican food goes right to your hips and stays there.''

Like every up-to-date supermarket, Tianguis has seasoned ready-to-cook meats
like chicken and beef fajitas, but it is the hanging beef carcasses, lamb heads
and beef lips that catch the eye of the uninitiated.

So do the number of men shopping at the meat counter on Saturday afternoons. Not
unusual, Ms. Cordova said. ''Men come from Mexico to work up here and a number
of them take an apartment together,'' she said. ''They do their own shopping and
they cook for themselves.''

Grocery shopping here also appears to be a family outing. Couples share in
selecting foods and children follow along.

''I do all my shopping here because of the prices and the quality,'' said
Hidalgo Campachuca, a native of Mexico. ''It takes me 20 minutes to come here
but I come every week.''

Many people who are not Hispanic also come to shop, drawn by the quality of
goods and the variety of Mexican specialties. Shirlee and Richard Opp, who
stopped by Tianguis in El Monte on the day they were celebrating their 38th
wedding anniversary, said they shop there because of the assortment of Mexican
desserts.

''I'm German and he's French,'' Mrs. Opp said, ''but where can you go and get a
mariachi band when you are shopping?''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Customers inspecting stoneware at the Tianguis market in El
Monte, a Los Angeles suburb.; Pinatas are regularly stocked by the store.; Fresh
produce is a Tianguis specialty.; Esther Hernandez making tortillas.
(Photographs by Michael Tweed for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              63 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 19, 1990, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

U.S. SHIFTS CAMBODIA POLICY; ENDS RECOGNITION OF REBELS; AGREES TO TALKS WITH
HANOI

BYLINE: By THOMAS L. FRIEDMAN, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1559 words

DATELINE: PARIS, July 18


In a major policy reversal, Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d announced today
that the Bush Administration was withdrawing its diplomatic recognition of the
Cambodian guerrilla coalition, which includes the Communist Khmer Rouge, and
opening negotiations with Vietnam on settling the Cambodian conflict.

Mr. Baker, speaking to reporters after a two-hour meeting with the Soviet
Foreign Minister, Eduard A. Shevardnadze, said the move was necessary because
existing American policy appeared increasingly likely to promote a return to
power of the Khmer Rouge, under whose rule in the 1970's more than a million
Cambodians were killed or died of starvation.

Pressure From Rights Groups

The Administration had been under pressure from Congress and human rights groups
to change its Cambodia policy, especially in light of a recent series of major
military gains by the Khmer Rouge.

The policy that was abandoned today dates to the Carter Administration, which,
seeking to improve relations with China and in deference to Southeast Asian
nations wishing to contain Vietnam, stifled some of its human rights concerns
and condoned Beijing's support of the Khmer Rouge. The policy continued under
the Reagan Administration.

Mr. Shevardnadze, whose Government supports Vietnam, said after meeting with Mr.
Baker that the American and Soviet approaches on Cambodia have ''come much
closer.''

Seeking to Isolate Hanoi

The Administration also signaled that the talks with Vietnam could eventually
lead to normal relations with Hanoi, although Mr. Baker said that such a step
was not at hand. After the Vietnam War ended in 1975, the United States sought
to isolate Vietnam diplomatically and economically and did not establish
relations.

Since Vietnam invaded Cambodia in December 1978, ousted the Khmer Rouge and
installed a pro-Vietnamese Government, Washington came to support a
three-faction Cambodian coalition trying to topple the Government in Phnom Penh,
led by Prime Minister Hun Sen. The United States argued that Mr. Hun Sen was an
illegitimate puppet of an ''expansionist'' Soviet-backed Vietnamese Government.

The rebel coalition consists of two non-Communist groups led by Prince Norodom
Sihanouk, the former Cambodian leader, and a former Cambodian Prime Minister,
Son Sann, both of which have received American aid. The most powerful military
force in the coalition, however, was the third partner, the Khmer Rouge.
Washington, in its eagerness to oust the Vietnamese-installed regime, was seen
as indirectly supporting the Khmer Rouge's aim of returning to power.

Explaining the Administration's move today, long advocated by human rights
organizations, Mr. Baker said Washington had realized one of its goals on
Cambodia last year with a Vietnamese troop withdrawal.

But he added: ''Another policy goal was to prevent the return of the Khmer
Rouge. We've not been able to achieve that goal and, in fact, it would appear
that the risks are greater as we move forward that that might occur. So we want
to do everything we can to prevent a return of the Khmer Rouge to power. That
has been one of our policy goals all along that we've not been able to
achieve.''

U.S. to Continue Aid

Mr. Baker said that in keeping with this objective, the United States would now
''open a dialogue with Vietnam about Cambodia.'' He said Washington would also
''be prepared to enhance our humanitarian assistance to Cambodia'' and to
withdraw support for the rebel coalition's claim to Cambodia's United Nations
seat, which it has long held. Washington is expected to support leaving the seat
open pending elections in Cambodia.

The Secretary indicated that Washington would continue to provide aid to the two
non-Communist guerrilla factions led by Prince Sihanouk and Mr. Son Sann, to
keep them politically alive until internationally supervised elections can be
held in Cambodia. Whether such a policy will be sustained by Congress, however,
is uncertain.

Mr. Baker said he and Mr. Shevardnadze would have discussions of such regional
problems when they meet in Irkutsk, in Siberia, on Aug. 1.

U.S. Holds Talks With China

Mr. Baker also said that Washington has held ''consultations'' with China and
Southeast Asian nations regarding the policy switch, but he declined to
elaborate. Persuading China to withdraw its backing for the Khmer Rouge would be
an essential ingredient in defusing the conflict.

The Administration's decision to ''change policy does not constitute a decision
to normalize relations with Vietnam,'' Mr. Baker said. ''It is a decision simply
to begin a dialogue with Vietnam about Cambodia.''

Mr. Baker said whether the talks would lead to a normalization of relations
would depend in large part on Vietnam's responsiveness to American inquiries
about prisoners of war and soldiers missing in action.

American officials said the talks with Vietnam would be held in New York, where
Vietnam has a United Nations mission; a date was not disclosed. The American
delegation will be led by the Assistant Secretary of State for Asian Affairs,
Richard H. Solomon.

Mr. Solomon has been in Paris representing the United States at a meeting with
China, France, Britain and the Soviet Union designed to push an Australian plan
to put Cambodia under United Nations administration until elections can be
organized.

That conference adjourned with diplomats from the five countries citing progress
toward agreement among themselves, but voicing frustration with the lack of
progress toward agreement among the Cambodian factions.

The American policy reversal today appeared to be a way to put pressure on the
Cambodian factions to reach a settlement under the plan being developed by the
five nations, the five permanent members of the United Nations Security Council.
Their next meeting on Cambodia is scheduled for late August in New York.

Factors Behind U.S. Switch

The Administration's policy switch appears to have been motivated by two
factors: The war on the ground, where the Khmer Rouge appear suddenly to be
making major headway, and mounting Congressional opposition.

The Khmer Rouge's senior diplomatic representative in Paris, Khieu Samphan, was
quoted by French newspapers as saying that the rebels have recently taken up
positions near Phnom Penh.

In Congress, a series of recent votes has made it clear to the Administration
that its policy of supporting a coalition that could return the Khmer Rouge to
power is rapidly losing support. The end of the cold war has made the
Soviet-backed Hun Sen Government less distasteful to Washington, and the
withdrawal of Vietnamese troops from Cambodia last year has undercut the
impression that Mr. Hun Sen was a puppet of Hanoi.

Mr. Baker acknowledged this change in perception of the Hun Sen Government when
he said: ''It certainly was a puppet government while Vietnam troops were in the
country supporting it. Those Vietnam troops have now gone and that's one of our
policy goals that we've been able to achieve.''

While today's move came about in part from consultations with Congress, it is
not the result of any negotiated bipartisan agreement, Mr. Baker said.

Fears of a New 'Killing Field'

WASHINGTON, July 18 (Reuters) -The Bush Administration's decision to open talks
with Vietnam is not enough to prevent the Khmer Rouge from again turning
Cambodia into a ''vast killing field,'' Senator George J. Mitchell, the majority
leader, said today.

''I welcome Secretary Baker's announcement of changes in American policy toward
Cambodia, although I do not believe they go far enough in clearly and
effectively preventing future Khmer Rouge domination of Cambodia,'' Senator
Mitchell said.

The Maine Democrat called for a comprehensive rethinking of American policy.

Representative Stephen J. Solarz, Democrat of Brooklyn, chairman of the House
Asian and Pacific Affairs subcommittee, said the policy shift was a recognition
of changed circumstances in Southeast Asia.

''I consider it a welcome adjustment in our policy in Cambodia,'' Mr. Solarz
told reporters.

Non-Communists Oppose Policy

BANGKOK, Thailand, July 18 (AP) - Non-Communist Cambodian guerrilla leaders said
today that the American decision would force them closer to China and strengthen
the Khmer Rouge.

Vietnam's Ambassador to the United Nations, Trinh Xuan Lang, hailed the decision
as a ''positive'' step that could eventually lead to the normalization of
relations with the United States.

''In the future, to survive, to go on fighting, we will have to accept more aid
from China,'' said Prince Norodom Ranariddh, son of Prince Sihanouk. Prince
Ranariddh is commander of his father's army.

No Reaction Reported in China

BEIJING, Thursday, July 19 (Special to The New York Times) -The Chinese
Government appeared to be weighing its response to the Baker announcement on
Cambodia today as the Foreign Ministry announced it would hold a press
conference later in the day.

China's leading newspapers carried no reaction. But in in comments quoted by the
New China News Agency, Xu Dunxin, the Assistant Foreign Minister, expressed
satisfaction with the progress being made in the talks in Paris among the five
permanent members of the United Nations Security Council. His comments appeared
to have been made before the Baker announcement.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d announced yesterday in
Paris that the United States was withdrawing recognition of the Cambodian
guerrilla coalition and opening talks with Vietnam on the Cambodian conflict.
(Associated Press); map showing location of Cambodia (pg. A1); photo: Secretary
of State James A. Baker 3d, left, leaving a meeting with Foreign Minister Eduard
A. Shevardnadze of the Soviet Union yesterday in Paris. Mr. Baker made his
policy announcement on Cambodia shortly after the end of the session. Mr.
Shevardnadze, whose Government supports Vietnam, said that the American and
Soviet approaches on Cambodia have ''come much closer.'' (Jose R. Lopez/The New
York Times) (pg. A10)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              64 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 19, 1990, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1340 words



International    A3-14

A major reversal on Cambodia was announced by Secretary of State Baker. The
Administration is withdrawing its recognition of the Cambodian guerrilla
coalition and opening negotiations with Vietnam on settling the Cambodian
conflict.    Page A1



Behind U.S. reversal: Gains by the Khmer Rouge    A10



Abortion is dividing the Germanys. East German women are fighting to preserve
abortion on demand, which has been their right for almost two decades. West
German law is more restrictive.    A1



The toppled Bulgarian dictator, Todor Zhivkov, has agreed to appear before the
National Assembly to address allegations that have been leveled against him.
A6



Premier of Czechs seeks U.S. capital    A7



U.S. gives Soviets menu of American expertise    A8



To thwart Moscow's draft, Lithuania prepares its own    A8



Communist functionaries prosper in the new Poland    A6



Two Soviet astronauts were trapped outside the Mir space station during a space
walk on Tuesday when an airlock door failed to close, forcing them to use an
emergency re-entry procedure as their air supplies ran dangerously low.    A14



NASA was curbed in checking mirror    A15



Finnish scientists to study gravity in eclipse    A19



Is Italy too rich for its own good? Its self-image tends to be that of a warm
country with caring people, especially where children are concerned. But an
incident last weekend is challenging that perception.    A1



Shiite fighting rages in South Lebanon    A3



Mandela is home from trip, happy as ''a boy of 36''    A5



The death toll in the earthquake in the Philippines rose to at least 311, with
682 injured. Doctors said that any people trapped alive who could not be reached
in the next day would almost surely die from shock, wounds and dehydration.
A3



Saudis criticized over Mecca tunnel disaster    A13



Tokyo said to tell China it will go ahead on loan    A12



Taipei journal: Castaway from China finds trouble in Taiwan    A4



National    A15-20, B6



The Senate Ethics Committee recommended that Senator Dave Durenberger be
publicly denounced by the full Senate, ordered to pay restitution and possibly
be sanctioned by the Republican Party for intentionally breaking Senate rules.
    A1



Senate passes civil rights bill

    A20



House Republicans vote opposition to tax rise    A20



Washington at Work: Newt Gingrich has a mission    A18



What makes a male masculine? Scientists say they have found a key gene on the Y
chromosome that seems to act as a master switch for maleness, transforming a
growing human fetus that otherwise would become a girl into a baby boy.    A1



The rate of new housing construction has dropped for five consecutive months,
providing further proof, home builders say, that the economic and regulatory
fallout from the savings and loan crisis has pulled the industry into a
recession.    A1



Neil Bush should make a deal with Federal regulators, top Republican strategists
have concluded. The President's 35-year-old son is dead set against the idea. So
is his father.

    A20



Savings bailout to use up cash in three months    D1



Major changes in immigration rules were announced by the Administration. The
changes are to protect the rights of aliens who seek asylum in the U.S. and fear
persecution abroad.    A16



Two new shelters in San Francisco are the linchpin of a plan to restore the
city's 6,000 homeless men and women to self-sufficiency. Advocates for the
homeless say the plan could be a model for the nation.    A16



No hope, doctor ends family's lives    A16



Texas executes 37th inmate, a man who killed another    A20



The prosecution in the Barry trial rested after calling a final witness to
support its contention that Mayor Barry regularly used drugs over the past six
years and lied to investigators about that use.    A17



Omen for Young: Low black turnout    B6



Lutherans punish two churches for gay ordinations    B6



Two Southern Baptist news chiefs are dismissed    B6



Regional    B1-4, B20



Eighty schools in New York City have been chosen to begin Schools Chancellor
Joseph A. Fernandez's trademark experiment in power sharing among teachers,
parents and principals, but scores of other schools have stayed out of the
process.    A1



The residents of Munnsville, N.Y., a tiny dairy-farming town, do not routinely
challenge authority. But they cannot understand how the police could arrest a
man they had always known as a gentle, simple soul.    A1



A steep rise in crime in New York prompted the Dinkins administration to
announce that it would pay 200 police officers overtime wages each day to work
extra shifts walking beats in seven of the most troubled precincts.

    B1



A man was shot to death by the police in the Park Slope neighborhood of
Brooklyn. The man, apparently deranged, was waiving a sawed-off shotgun as he
was trailed by a group of police officers.    B1

Taped confession played at jogger trial    B3



Prosecutor to retry Connecticut youth in mother's slaying

    B20



Garbage left on the curb is private and the state cannot search through it
without a warrant, the New Jersey Supreme Court has ruled. The decision
contradicts a ruling by the U.S. Supreme Court.    B1



New Jersey officials defend policy of exporting trash    B2



Administrator at Tulane named to head Rutgers    B2



A developer's embattled effort to build a luxury apartment tower on the site of
a landmark tenement complex in Manhattan took a twist that combined a debate, a
delay and a hand from one of Mayor Dinkins's closest associates.    B1



Primary for surrogate attracts big spenders    B4



Barges collide, spilling oil into the Arthur Kill    B3



A subway fire delays service for four hours    B2



Business Digest    D1



The Home Section



Star-spangled style defines a look and a way of life, too    C1



Decorators feel the pinch as jobs wane    C1



Electronics Notebook    C1



Close to Home    C2



Currents    C3



Parent & Child    C8



City Gardening    C10



Arts/Entertainment



At street theater melange, audience chooses what to watch    C17



Louisiana's battle on song lyrics    C17



Garbo's art to be sold    C19



Dance: ''Ivan the Terrible''    C17



Word and Image: Untangling Wedtech scandal    C20



The Spectator and the minister

    C22



Rick Dees's late-night show

    C22



Obituaries



Peggy Mann Houlton, author    D18



Karl A. Menninger, leading figure in American psychiatry

    D19



Richard M. Overholt, surgeon    D19



Sports



Baseball: Arbitrator finds third case of collusion    B9



Steinbrenner's varying explanations are at issue    B9



Scott beats Mets, 1-0    B11



Column: Vecsey on Steinbrenner    B9



Racing: Easy Goer is retired    B9



Health Page    B8



Personal Health

For some, ''no beards'' is a painful job rule

Editorials/Letters/Op-Ed



Editorials    A22



In Cambodia: not too soon

Sell cars, not racism

Topics: Saratoga's secret

Letters    A22



A. M. Rosenthal: Our German future    A23



Tom Wicker: Beyond Murphy's law    A23



Terrence McNally: Art, and my first dirty word    A23



Avner Yaniv and Robert J. Lieber: Baker's Middle East phone    A23


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              65 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 19, 1990, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

The Cambodian Ordeal: A Country Bleeds for 15 Years

SECTION: Section A; Page 10, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 531 words



Aril 1975 Communist guerrillas of the Khmer Rouge seize the capital, Phnom Penh,
defeating the non-Communist Government of Marshal Lon Nol. Under the leadership
of Pol Pot, the Khmer Rouge impose a brutal reorganization of society in which
more than a million people die. Prince Norodom Sihanouk, their virtual prisoner,
is named head of state.

April 1976 Prince Sihanouk resigns and Pol Pot becomes Prime Minister.

December 1978 Vietnamese troops invade Cambodia, quickly occupying Phnom Penh
and driving the Khmer Rouge to the Thai border.

January 1979 The Vietnamese install a new Government led by Heng Samrin.

October 1979 The Khmer Rouge, the largest of three guerrilla groups fighting the
Vietnamese-installed Government, is recognized by the United Nations as the
legitimate government of Cambodia.

June 1982 Under pressure from China, the United States and other backers, the
three Cambodian guerrilla factions form a coalition government in exile with
Prince Sihanouk as president, Khieu Samphan of the Khmer Rouge as vice president
and Son Sann of the Khmer People's National Liberation Front as prime minister.
Despite its opposition to the Khmer Rouge, the United States recognizes the
rebel coalition.

September 1985 The Khmer Rouge announces the retirement of Pol Pot as military
leader, but Western governments say he is still the real leader.

May 1987 Prince Sihanouk steps down for a year as head of the coalition after
attacks on his men by Khmer Rouge and pursues his own peace initiative.

December 1987 Hun Sen, Prime Minister in Phnom Penh, and Prince Sihanouk hold
talks in France. In the 18 months, they hold five inconclusive meetings.

February 1988 Under Chinese pressure, Prince Sihanouk returns to lead the
coalition.

May 1988 Vietnam says it will withdraw 50,000 troops, about half its force, by
the end of the year.

July 1988 The Phnom Penh Government and the rebel coalition meet for the first
time at inconclusive talks in Indonesia.

April 1989 Hanoi and Phnom Penh announce that all Vietnamese troops will leave
Cambodia by the end of September, even if no settlement is found.

August 1989 Peace talks in Paris involving 19 nations and the four warring
Cambodian factions collapse.

September 1989 Vietnam announces the completion of its withdrawal from Cambodia,
although guerrilla groups charge, and Vietnamese officials later confirm, that
some Vietnamese troops remain.

January 1990 The five permanent members of the United Nations Security Council
draft a peace plan calling for a neutral United Nations-supervised
administration to run the country while elections are organized.

June 1990 The Senate majority leader, George J. Mitchell of Maine, suggests that
the United States open talks with the Hun Sen Government and ease restrictions
on development and humanitarian aid to Cambodia.

July 1990 Under pressure from Congress and in light of battlefield gains by the
Khmer Rouge, the Bush Administration withdraws its recognition of the rebel
coalition. A State Department official says the Administration might encourage
the Sihanouk forces to join with the Phnom Penh Government against the Khmer
Rouge.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Chronology

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              66 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 19, 1990, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Behind U.S. Reversal: Gains by the Khmer Rouge

BYLINE: By CLIFFORD KRAUSS, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 10, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 697 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 18


Defense and intelligence officials say they are increasingly concerned that the
Communist Khmer Rouge guerrillas are winning their war to oust the
Vietnamese-backed Cambodian Government. The Bush Administration's announcement
today that it is withdrawing recognition of the Cambodian rebel coalition and
opening talks with Vietnam underlines that concern.

State Department, Defense Department and Congressional analysts said that
despite recent Khmer Rouge advances they do not believe the Cambodian Government
will fall this year.

They said that two non-Communist guerrilla groups loosely allied with the Khmer
Rouge had failed to make similar advances. The two groups receive more than $15
million in yearly overt and covert American assistance.

''A primary concern of our policy is to keep the Khmer Rouge from taking
power,'' said a senior State Department official. ''Khmer Rouge military
advances have caused concern.''

A Rainy Season Offensive

''We want to do everything we can to prevent a return of the Khmer Rouge to
power,'' Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d told reporters in Paris.

Human-rights monitors have documented that more than a million Cambodians were
killed under Khmer Rouge rule in the 1970's during a radical restructuring of
society that included the forced mass migration of urban people into the
countryside.

Administration officials said that the Khmer Rouge rebels are following
rural-based strategy similar to the one used in encircling Phnom Penh in 1975,
when the Khmer Rouge came to power.

American officials said that in their current rainy-season offensive, the rebels
are taking advantage of the Government's decreased mobility. The rebels are
spreading their forces across the countryside - from northwestern Siem Reap
province and Bantheay Meanchey province to southern Kampot province - while they
cut off major highways and communications lines to choke the cities.

In the face of this offensive on northern, southern and central villages within
40 miles of the Cambodian capital, Phnom Penh, Government forces are retreating
and in some cases dropping their weapons, the officials said.

A Defense Department official said the Khmer Rouge strategy was directed at
''undermining the people's confidence in the Government and the Government's
confidence in itself.'' The official continued: ''The Government forces are hard
pressed and extended in contending with the Khmer Rouge offensive. Morale
problems and corruption are clearly evident.''

The Vietnamese-backed Government of Prime Minister Hun Sen is struggling to
manage a series of problems. The Government cannot pay all of its civil servants
and soldiers, a situation made all the more severe by rising inflation and a
decline in Vietnamese and Soviet economic aid.

Regular Vietnamese Army forces, which once numbered up to 200,000, left the
country last year. American officials report that a few thousand Vietnamese
military advisers have returned to help beat back the offensive.

Support for Khmer Rouge

In briefings to other Government officials earlier this week, Central
Intelligence Agency analysts estimated that the Khmer Rouge faction consists of
30,000 to 40,000 fighters, slightly larger than the size of the two
non-Communist rebel groups combined.

They fight a Government army of from 60,000 to 100,000 men. The C.I.A. estimated
that the value of Chinese assistance to the Khmer Rouge approaches $100 million
a year, while the non-Communist groups receive much less from several countries,
including Singapore, which sends them $10 million a year in military hardware
and other supplies.

The C.I.A. estimates that the Khmer Rouge is backed in one form or another by 30
percent of the population, with larger proportions of support in areas they
control, where they can exercise intimidation.

C.I.A. analysts also said the non-Communist groups and Khmer Rouge share supply
lines, raising questions of how the Bush Administration can continue to supply
the non-Communists without inadvertently helping the Khmer Rouge. The deeper the
American-supported groups operate inside Cambodia, the more dependent they are
on the Khmer Rouge.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              67 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 19, 1990, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

In Cambodia: Not a Moment Too Soon

SECTION: Section A; Page 22, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 482 words


''We want to do everything we can to prevent a return of the Khmer Rouge to
power.'' With those words, Secretary of State Baker has restored a measure of
decency, and realism, to America's policy toward the tormented land of Cambodia.

At long last, he's ending U.S. support for a Cambodian resistance that includes
the genocidal Communists called the Khmer Rouge. And he's opening a dialogue
with Vietnam and its allies in the Phnom Penh Government that could point the
way to a settlement in Cambodia.

Given the important progress reported in the recent five-power peace talks in
Paris, Mr. Baker can use this dialogue to encourage movement to a political
settlement broad enough to draw in all but the hard-core Khmer Rouge.

There's a developing diplomatic consensus about the desired outcome in Cambodia:
Any alternative is better than the return to power of the Khmer Rouge, under
which millions were murdered, tortured and displaced. A consensus, that is,
except for the Bush Administration and China, the Khmer Rouge's patron.

The Administration was about to be strangled by its own stubbornness; Congress,
impatient, seems ready to challenge the past policy. Thus, at the last moment,
Mr. Baker has shrewdly turned a potential domestic political embarrassment into
a chance to save Cambodia from new disaster.

It's still only a chance. Sadly, the resurgent Khmer Rouge is now stronger
militarily than at any other time in the past 11 years, having gained
considerable ground in battle with opposing forces. Its presence, aided by
America's shameful indirect association, is felt in every province.

In any case, Khmer Rouge military strength does not now depend on the U.S. or
China. Its forces have a two-year supply of military equipment and the
wherewithal to buy more. Still, it would measurably boost morale in opposing
military camps if President Bush, with help from Prime Minister Kaifu of Japan,
could prevail on Beijing to cut off aid to its Khmer Rouge allies.

The best hope for containing Khmer Rouge influence is for all the other parties
to agree to internationally sponsored elections, open to the widest possible
range of Cambodian political forces.

That will take some concessions from the Vietnamese-installed Hun Sen Government
in Phnom Penh, which has been insisting on a dominant role for itself in the
election process. Progress at the Paris talks suggests that Foreign Minister
Shevardnadze of the Soviet Union is prepared to use his influence with Vietnam
to that end.

A government elected with broad-based participation will have a better chance of
resisting Khmer Rouge advances than the Phnom Penh regime now has. The door to
compromise and peace is now open as it has not been for a decade. The U.S. gives
itself an opportunity, at long last, to play a constructive role in Indochina
and to escape, at long last, the stench of the killing fields.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              68 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 19, 1990, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

HEALTH;
For Some, 'No Beards' Is Painful Job Rule

BYLINE: By LAWRENCE K. ALTMAN

SECTION: Section B; Page 8, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1095 words


For millions of men with coarse, curly hair there is no such thing as a smooth
clean shave. For these men, shaving is painful because they develop razor bumps
on the face and neck from the closely cut ends of hairs that imbed themselves to
irritate and scar the skin.

Although they occur among men of other races, the bumps are particularly common
among black men. And they are a particular problem for them too, because the
skin of blacks tends to form large scars known as keloids more easily than that
of whites.

The easiest and most effective treatment is simple: grow a beard or use clippers
to leave a stubble and a permanent 5 o'clock shadow.

Yet the prescription is often difficult, if not impossible, to fill because of
social pressures to be cleanshaven. Some organizations, like police departments
or airlines, demand that men be cleanshaven. Many other employers informally
make it clear that the corporate image requires a smooth shave. Some have been
criticized as harassing bearded workers.

Ruling Finds Discrimination

The condition, pseudofolliculitis barbae, ''is a disorder that is really
generated by societal pressures to force individuals with coarse, curly hair to
shave,'' said Dr. Stanford I. Lamberg, a dermatologist at Johns Hopkins Medical
School in Baltimore.

Dr. Lamberg testified in a recent civil rights case in Maryland that has cast
doubt on the legality of on-the-job grooming rules that require men with the
condition to shave. A Maryland hearing examiner ruled that a ban on beards that
allowed no exceptions for medical reasons was discriminatory under Maryland's
civil rights laws.

But the issue remains unclear. Courts in other states have held that there is no
constitutional right to grow a beard and that companies can require employees to
be cleanshaven.

Because accurate surveys have not been conducted, it is not known how many men
with the problem have been forced to shave to get or keep a job.

Dermatologists interviewed said that the overwhelming majority of blacks suffer
at least a few razor bumps at some time and that about 25 percent of black men
suffer continuing irritation unless they stop shaving.

The issue often arises among uniformed personnel who deal with the public,
including police officers, waiters, fast-food handlers, airline flight
attendants and bus drivers. Fire departments that ban beards say they interfere
with the use of breathing devices. Critics say organizations like these often
shunt bearded men behind a desk or to an office out of the sight of clients.

Yet others with highly visible jobs believe it is more important to shave, even
if an employer does not explicitly require a clean shave.

Dr. Bernard S. Goffe, a dermatologist in Seattle, said he had cared for workers
with shaving bumps at large multinational organizations who felt compelled to
shave because of the corporate culture. Other dermatologists said they had found
the same attitude expressed by investment bankers and executives.

The Marine Corps requires close shaves and will discharge men who cannot find an
effective way to cope with the condition after eight weeks.

Chief Warrant Officer Randy Gaddo, a Marine Corps spokesman, said, ''Marines do
not wear beards, period.''

But the Army, Navy and Air Force have eased their policies to permit beards not
exceeding one-quarter of an inch, largely in response to complaints during the
Vietnam War. But critics say many susceptible servicemen shave anyway because of
pressure from superior officers and other servicemen or because those who grow
beards are often denied promotion.

Dr. Richard B. Odom, chief dermatologist at the University of California at San
Francisco, said that as a white physician who was part of an Army committee that
developed new guidelines concerning the condition, he often felt that blacks
were discriminated against because they were not allowed to grow beards when
medically warranted.

A Lack of Understanding

Many blacks have complained that most whites know little about the condition and
that shaving requirements are set by people who have no idea how uncomfortable
the ingrown hairs can be.

''If you are part of a decision-making group and you don't have the problem, you
don't understand how it makes you uncomfortable,'' said Dr. Lucius C. Earles 3d,
a black dermatologist in Chicago who wore a beard for many years until the
condition wore off as it sometimes does.

Dr. A. Melvin Alexander Jr., a black dermatologist in Columbia, Md., said that
in testifying in razor-bump cases he had not met judges who knew about the
condition and its prevalence among blacks. ''Many take the attitude that if they
haven't heard of the problem, or don't have it themselves, how can it really
exist,'' Dr. Alexander said. Dermatologists say that razor bumps are found only
in those who shave, the condition gets worse for those who continue to shave and
remission invariably occurs after people affected by the condition stop shaving
for about a month.

The condition comes about because shaving puts the skin under tension and cuts
hair at an angle, leaving a sharp tip. When the tension is relaxed, some hairs
retract beneath the surface, provoking the type of inflammatory response that
follows injection of a foreign substance. Sometimes large cysts form and fluid
can drain from the skin.

Next to growing a beard, dermatologists say, the best treatment is to
meticulously uncurl the hairs by first wetting the face to soften the skin.
Periodic application of hair-removing products can help but may leave an
unpleasant odor and may be irritating.

Many bumps on the face represent ingrown hairs that will remain buried until the
caught hairs are freed. Dermatologists therefore say that freeing up the tips of
caught hairs is more helpful than letting the hairs work themselves free. But
dermatologists advise against plucking a hair because it could possibly cause a
severe, deep reaction when it regrows.

Shaving with a two-track razor, against the grain or with a dull blade
aggravates the condition. Electric razors are of little help because they are
designed for shaving straight hair.

In a new development, women who use a mechanical hair-removing device to shave
their legs have developed razor bumps, said Dr. Charles J. McDonald, the chief
of dermatology at Brown University Medical School in Providence, R.I. ''Over the
last several months we have seen a number of young white women with ingrown
hairs and pustules on their legs that looks exactly like pseudofolliculitis
barbae,'' he said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              69 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 20, 1990, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Hanoi's Partial Victory;
U.S. Shift on Cambodia Is Latest Example Of Pact With Moscow on Regional
Disputes

BYLINE: By STEVEN ERLANGER, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1057 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, July 19


The decision by the United States to alter its Cambodia policy and talk directly
to Vietnam is another indication of the growing Soviet-American accord on
regional conflicts, this time at the expense of Beijing, the main ally of the
Khmer Rouge guerrillas.

Washington's decision to withdraw diplomatic recognition from the Cambodian
coalition dominated by the Khmer Rouge was announced, tellingly, by Secretary of
State James A. Baker 3d after a meeting with his Soviet counterpart, Eduard A.
Shevardnadze, in Paris on Wednesday. But the agreement is not only a signal of
Soviet-American comity; it is also an important, if partial, victory for
Vietnam.

Hanoi has wagered that the American abhorrence of the Khmer Rouge and the
disenchantment with China would drive the United States closer to Vietnam and
its allied Government in Phnom Penh, giving it more international legitimacy and
stability.

Pressure for a U.N. Accord

Some Southeast Asian diplomats worried today that Mr. Baker, concerned about
criticism from members of Congress who saw the issue in simple, moral terms, had
gotten no clear concession from Vietnam in return.

But others, especially Thai officials, said that the Americans, with Soviet
support, will now be able to put more pressure on Vietnam and Phnom Penh to
accept the outlines of a United Nations settlement. While Mr. Baker and Mr.
Shevardnadze met, the terms of such a settlement were being refined at separate
talks in Paris.

The meeting of the five permanent members of the United Nations Security Council
included all the proxy powers to the complex Cambodian conflict: the Soviets,
who support Vietnam and its ally, Phnom Penh; the United States, which supports
the weaker, non-Communist allies of the Khmer Rouge, and the Chinese, who
support the Khmer Rouge, under whose rule in the 1970's more than a million
Cambodians were killed or died of starvation.

The Soviet Union and the United States, with Chinese agreement, want United
Nations-run elections in Cambodia as an integral part of a settlement. But
Vietnam and Phnom Penh have been resisting a major United Nations role before
new elections, one of China's key demands.

That resistance largely stems from three factors: a reluctance to further weaken
the administrative structure of the Phnom Penh Government; a desire to minimize
the role the opposition coalition, including the Khmer Rouge, will play in the
period before elections; and perhaps most important, the fear that the
non-Communists, in particular the faction of Prince Norodom Sihanouk, might win
those elections despite military weakness.

Contradictions in U.S. Policy

But by agreeing now to discuss Cambodia directly with Vietnam, the United States
can with Soviet support expect some concessions in return from Hanoi and Phnom
Penh.

Vietnam and Cambodia will also regard the United States as more of an honest
broker on Cambodia because of Washington's decision to stop supporting the Khmer
Rouge-dominated coalition for Cambodia's seat at the United Nations.

The contradictions in American policy have become acutely visible since Vietnam
withdrew the bulk of its troops from Cambodia in September and left the
Government of Prime Minister Hun Sen to fend for itself, with reduced Soviet
aid, against the guerrillas.

While opposing a return to power by the Communist Khmer Rouge, the United States
has been supporting a guerrilla coalition dominated by the Khmer Rouge, whose
non-Communist partners have never had real autonomy, diplomatically or
militarily.

Getting Baker's Attention

And while opposing the Government in Phnom Penh because it was installed by
Hanoi in 1979, Washington has been undermining the only obstacle remaining to a
return to power by the Khmer Rouge.

''It came to the point that any move Hun Sen made, no matter how positive, was
immediately discounted in Washington as a trick of the Vietnamese,'' a senior
Asian diplomat said today. ''It has been obsessive and counterproductive.''

In its tilt toward China and away from Vietnam, the policy has also been one
dominated by the National Security Council, American officials said, while Mr.
Baker and the State Department concentrated on more pressing issues like Soviet
change, German unification and the Middle East.

If it took a Congressional revolt to get Mr. Baker's attention, the Asian
diplomat said, ''perhaps there could be more of them.''

Khmer Rouge's Military Gains

But he agreed with Mr. Baker that Washington would be foolish to end its support
to the non-Communists when they might win an election in Cambodia, or at least
form a coalition with Mr. Hun Sen.

''The United States must continue to support these factions to remain a credible
actor on Cambodia,'' he said. In any event, he said, no knowledgable analyst
believes the Khmer Rouge are aided militarily in any significant fashion by the
non-Communists, who get most of their support from Beijing anyway.

The Khmer Rouge have been making military gains in this rainy season, the first
one since most Vietnamese troops left Cambodia.

Thai officials and Asian and Western diplomats say that the Khmer Rouge gains
have been cumulative and do not in fact represent a sudden shift of strength on
the ground.

Phnom Penh's Weaknesses

But they come when Mr. Hun Sen's Government has been unstable and as some less
doctrinaire officials have been put under arrest. The weaknesses of Mr. Hun Sen
have also been cumulative, the diplomats say, and include official corruption at
all levels, a harsh military draft and an ill-trained army that often runs away.

Paradoxically, the diplomats said, the recent surge in Khmer Rouge fighting
stems directly from American efforts to isolate them diplomatically.

For their part, the Khmer Rouge set about demonstrating on the battlefield that
it could not be ignored at the negotiating table.

They can only be contained, and that would ideally be done through a
comprehensive settlement that cuts off external arms supplies, provides for
monitoring of a cease-fire, organizes free elections and provides major Western
aid to the new Government in Cambodia.

The American policy shift may finally push Hanoi and Phnom Penh to come to the
same conclusion and make the needed concessions for a settlement, before it
really does become too late.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: News Analysis

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              70 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 20, 1990, Friday, Late Edition - Final

China Faults U.S. Shift on Cambodia

BYLINE: By JAMES STERNGOLD, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 935 words

DATELINE: BEIJING, July 19


China issued a stern and disappointed response today to the American
announcement that Washington was withdrawing support for China's closest ally in
Cambodia and beginning direct talks with Vietnam, China's bitterest rival in
Asia.

Jin Guihua, a Foreign Ministry spokesman, said China would stand by its current
policy and continue to back its ally, the Communist Khmer Rouge. The Khmer Rouge
are one of the three groups in the guerrilla coalition fighting the Cambodian
Government of Hun Sen, which is backed by Vietnam.

''So long as Vietnam does not genuinely withdraw all its troops from Cambodia,
China will continue to support the Cambodian people in their resistance against
the foreign invaders and their just struggle for national independence,'' Mr.
Jin said at a briefing today.

On Wednesday in Paris, Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d announced that the
United States was withdrawing its support for the Cambodian guerrilla coalition
including the Khmer Rouge, who caused the deaths of more than a million
Cambodians during their rule in the 1970's.

Ties With Hanoi Possible

Mr. Baker said the change in policy was necessary to prevent the return to power
of the Khmer Rouge, and the Administration also signaled that the talks with
Vietnam could eventually lead to a restoration of American diplomatic relations
with Hanoi.

Today Mr. Jin made it clear that China considered it a grave mistake to favor
Vietnam over the guerrilla groups, since Vietnam's invasion and continued
presence in Cambodia are, in the Chinese view, the principal cause of the
draining conflict in the poverty-stricken country.

China was joined in its implicit criticism of the United States by other Asian
officials. Foreign Minister Ali Alatas of Indonesia, the current chairman of the
six-member Association of Southeast Asian Nations, which has been a sponsor of
peace talks, said, ''We sincerely doubt whether at this stage of negotiation
such a move would help toward reaching a comprehensive solution that is mutually
acceptable.'' [The official Vietnam News Agency quoted Vietnam's Foreign
Minister, Nguyen Co Thach, as approving of the American move, the Associated
Press reported. Mr. Thach was quoted as saying Hanoi wanted ''an early, fair and
equitable solution'' and ''is ready to negotiate with concerned countries on the
Cambodia issue.''] Prince Norodom Sihanouk, leader of one of the two
non-Communist groups in the guerrilla coalition, issued a statement from North
Korea, where he lives part of the year. He condemned the American move as a
''very serious injustice'' that would only stiffen the guerrillas' resolve to
carry on their military campaign.

China's Words Are Measured

While the Chinese response today was stern, it was also measured, and Mr. Jin
reiterated positive remarks about progress being made in United
Nations-sponsored talks on the Cambodian problem. Noting that ''differences of
view still exist,'' Mr. Jin said progress had been made at the most recent
session of the talks, held Tuesday in Paris.

This appeared to leave open the possibility that a more elaborate deal might be
under negotiation between the United States, China, Vietnam, the Soviet Union
and other parties.

There were no direct signs that such a deal might be in the works, but some
diplomats expressed surprise that such a harsh American blow to the Chinese
position had not brought stronger language or action from Beijing.

The Chinese Foreign Ministry spokesman did hint that China may fight the
American shift in the United Nations, where the guerrilla coalition holds the
seat for Cambodia.

Mr. Jin noted that the guerrilla coalition groups have had the support of more
than 100 other nations in their desire to keep the seat from being given to the
Hun Sen Government. He added that the seat ''should not be left vacant'' before
a political solution to the conflict is reached.

Asked about Mr. Baker's announcement that the United States would start talks
with Vietnam over Cambodia, Mr. Jin said, ''This is a matter between the United
States and Vietnam.'' $100 Million in Chinese Support American officials
estimate that China provides as much as $100 million a year in military and
other support to the Khmer Rouge, which has the largest and most powerful force
among the guerrillas.

Diplomats here said today that China's resistance to a direct Vietnamese role
has been bolstered by the fact that recent Chinese attempts to negotiate with
Hanoi had apparently failed to do anything but leave a trail of hurt feelings
and hardened positions. After a meeting in Hanoi and another in Beijing this
year between the enemies, Chinese officials came out of the meetings saying the
Vietnamese were intransigent and rude, the diplomats said.

Mr. Jin said today that the Hun Sen Government and Vietnam had taken a ''rigid
pose'' in the talks and had resisted ''reasonable formulas'' for achieving
peace.

U.S. Official Is Hopeful

WASHINGTON, July 19 - A senior Bush Administration official today expressed hope
that the Chinese criticism of United States policy would not influence what he
called China's increasingly helpful position in talks seeking free elections in
Cambodia.

''I would prefer to look at their actions around the negotiating tables rather
than at their public comments,'' he said. ''We have taken every opportunity to
tell the Chinese that they have an important role to play in bringing peace to
Cambodia. It is very crucial to get the Chinese to back the process since they
are only ones who can bring the pressure to bear on the Khmer Rouge.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Prince Norodom Sihanouk condemned the United States decision to
withdraw recognition of the Cambodian guerrilla coalition. (Associated Press)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              71 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 20, 1990, Friday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1328 words



INTERNATIONAL    A2-7

News analysis: The policy shift by the U.S. on Cambodia and the decision to talk
directly to Vietnam are indications of the growing Soviet-American accord on
regional conflicts, this time at the expense of Beijing, the main ally of the
Khmer Rouge guerrillas.    Page A1



Beijing expressed disappointment at the announcement that Washington was
withdrawing support for China's closest ally in Cambodia and beginning direct
talks with Vietnam, China's bitterest rival in Asia.    A2



South Korea will open its border with North Korea for five days next month for
travel by residents from both sides, the Government announced. It was the first
time South Korea had offered an unconditional invitation for visitation.    A3



The man of the hour of German unity may be Chancellor Kohl, but the man who
first saw it coming is certainly the West German Foreign Minister, Hans-Dietrich
Genscher.    A1



East Germany has stopped spying but the Soviet Union and most other countries of
Eastern Europe have not given it up yet, the West German Interior Ministry said.

    A6



U.S. says envoy suspected as spy tried to resign    A6


Embalmed body of Bulgarian Communist is cremated    A6



The Communist President of Poland, Gen. Wojciech Jaruzelski, expressed
willingness to give up his office to a freely elected successor, perhaps as soon
as this year.    A7



10,000 Romanians protest arrests    A7


Bonn and Prague leaders plan to meet Waldheim    A7



The leader of the Communist Party in South Africa went on a popular phone-in
radio show in Johannesburg to field questions about himself and his party, both
of which were outlawed until last February.    A3



White House blocks furnace export to Iraq    A3


Philippines count quake's high cost    A3



A Canadian Archbishop resigned after charges that the Roman Catholic Church's
hierarchy ignored or failed to deal effectively with three years of scandal
involving allegations of sexual abuse.    A4



Port-au-Prince journal: Hard-liners in Haiti have emerged from the shadows of
exile or extreme discretion in which they have spent most of the last four
years, since the fall of Jean-Claude Duvalier.    A4



NATIONAL    A8-13

A bill to prevent job discrimination may be rewritten by its supporters to avert
a veto by the President. But both sides said there was only limited room for
compromise.    A1



Representative Barney Frank may receive a formal reprimand from the House for
his relationship with a male prostitute, according to Congressional officials.
The House ethics committee voted to recommend a reprimand.    A1



G.O.P. whip reverses tax stance    A10



Former President Nixon was hailed as a statesman and a peacemaker as he presided
over the dedication of the $21 million Richard Nixon Library and Birthplace in
the small California town of Yorba Linda.    A1



Mayor Barry's bodyguards testified in his trial in Federal court that they had
never seen him use or possess drugs. The two men appeared as the first witnesses
for the defense.    A9



U.S. jury subpoenas records of South Carolina politicians    A13



Many corporations in Pennsylvania have chosen to exclude themselves from the
protection extended by the state's anti-takeover law, which is the toughest in
the nation.    A1



Gov. Dukakis signs increase in taxes    A13



Pollution problems add to cost of the savings and loan bailout    D1



The focus of a bombing investigation, Walter Leroy Moody Jr., is a reclusive
loner who has been obsessed with a blizzard of lawsuits and court cases for
nearly 20 years.    A8



A new ground-based telescope has been developed by European scientists, and it
promises to work as well as a space-based instrument at a very small fraction of
the cost of the Hubble telescope.    A12



Pregnant women who are prosecuted for using illegal drugs are most often poor
members of racial minorities, experts say, even though drug use in pregnancy is
equally prevalent in white middle-class women.    A13



Virginia executes killer of an elderly neighbor    A12


Los Ebanos journal: Time no longer stays still for ferry    A8



REGIONAL    B1-5

The taxi business is less rewarding for both drivers and owners in New York City
as a result of sweeping changes in the industry in the last 18 months.    A1



Friends of a dead college student in Connecticut say he created a mystique of
anger and violence. But since he was found shot to death, they now wonder: who
really was Nicholas B. Haddad?    B1



Prosecutors in the jogger trial failed again to link scientifically three
defendants to the rape and attempted murder of the Central Park jogger. They
offered what is believed to be their final forensic evidence.    B1



Penalties are increased for violence by inmates    B3


Man with shotgun who was killed by police had arrest record    B3


Slain woman ''loved her TV'' and baseball    B3


Two brothers admit fraud scheme    B4



Buffalo is brimming with confidence as a robust economy has made residents feel
they are no longer snowbound, but in a boom town. The city has benefited from
its location across the Niagra River from Canada.    B1



A community with 116 shareholders along the Hudson in New Jersey is divided by a
question other co-op owners can recognize. Is the town an investment or a home?
    B1



Wanted, land for dump sites; benefits offered    B3


When finding the gold can take a little brass    B5



BUSINESS DIGEST    D1

SPORTS

Pete Rose will go to jail. Baseball's career hit leader was sentenced to five
months in a Federal correctional institution for filing false income-tax
returns.    A1



Baseball: Text on Rose and Spiegel    B10


Serving time for off-field wrongs    B10


How Rose may fare in the Hall    B10


Yankee owner awaits ruling    B9


Steinbrenner's history    B9


Steinbrenner tells of '74 ban    B11


Yankees beat Twins    B11


Mets top Braves    B11


Ripken ties record    B10


Column: Anderson on Pete Rose    B9


Football: Jets sign Hector    B12


Games: Big turnout at Goodwill    B12


Golf: Two share lead at St. Andrews    B9


Racing: Notebook    B12


Sports People    B12



LAW PAGE    B7



At the Bar
Supreme Court dissenters: loners or pioneers?

OBITUARIES    B6


Hippocrates G. Apostle; translated nine works by Aristotle
  WEEKEND

Youngsters on Broadway    C1


Concerts in the open air    C1


''Tie Me Up!'' X rating upheld    C12


Theater: On Stage    C2


''Broadway Jukebox''    C3


Film: At the Movies    C8


''Navy Seals''    C9


''The Freshman''    C10


Music: 2 Live Crew    C3


Obscenity guidelines worry City Opera    C13


Dance: ''Ivan the Terrible''    C13


New techniques for a ballerina    C14


Art: Edward Weston's works    C22


Lorna Simpson on oppression    C26


Auctions    C24


Restaurants    C20


Word and Image: ''Boone,'' a biographical novel    C28



EDITORIALS/LETTERS/OP-ED

Editorials    A26



T for Texas, treasure, theft
Bosch case: violence to justice
Big plunge on school reform
Leon V. Sigal: East Europe

Letters    A26



Anthony Lewis: When reality dawns    A27


British seminar concludes, ''Be nice to the Germans''    A27


James Bovard: Farm subsidies - milking us dry    A27


Garry Trudeau: The 90 points of light    A27


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              72 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 20, 1990, Friday, Late Edition - Final

ABROAD AT HOME;
When Reality Dawns

BYLINE: By Anthony Lewis

SECTION: Section A; Page 27, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 755 words


Representative Stephen Solarz of New York has been a principal shaper and
supporter of American policy on Cambodia for years. The policy has been to
isolate the Hun Sen Government in Phnom Penh as a Vietnamese puppet, aid two
small non-Communist guerrilla forces, urge them into coalition with the Khmer
Rouge and give the coalition Cambodia's seat at the United Nations.

Because Mr. Solarz is a thoughtful politician, and sensitive on human rights,
friends wondered why he backed a policy that in effect seemed to help the
murderous Khmer Rouge. His answer was that the only way to contain the Khmer
Rouge was through a political settlement.

Three weeks ago, in a telephone conversation, I asked Mr. Solarz about reports
of Khmer Rouge military advances near Phnom Penh. What if the Hun Sen Government
falls to the Khmer Rouge? I asked.

''That would be a great tragedy and disaster,'' he replied. ''At that point
either Vietnam would have to send its forces back into Cambodia, or there would
have to be some kind of international force. I personally would be prepared to
support any kind of international police action, but as a practical matter it
would be very difficult to put together any kind of consortium of countries.''

What a paradoxical answer, I thought. The United States has been doing all it
can to weaken the Hun Sen Government - supporting two of its opponents, imposing
economic sanctions, even forbidding humanitarian groups to help the destitute in
Phnom Penh. Yet if that Government falls, and the Khmer Rouge inevitably takes
over, it would be a ''tragedy'' calling for military intervention.

Mr. Solarz's answer showed, in short, that American policy has been disconnected
from its own logical end. No doubt we were sincere in wanting a diplomatic
solution; certainly Mr. Solarz was. But the actual effect of the policy on the
ground was to improve chances for the return of Pol Pot and the other Khmer
Rouge leaders who presided over the death of one million Cambodians.

That reality was recognized by Secretary of State Baker when he announced a
change of policy on Cambodia. One sentence of his told the story: ''We want to
do everything we can to prevent a return of the Khmer Rouge to power.''

The United States will now seek to oust the coalition dominated by the Khmer
Rouge from the U.N. seat. It will apparently encourage humanitarian assistance
to Cambodia. An American delegation headed by Assistant Secretary of State
Richard H. Solomon will ''open a dialogue'' with Vietnam, as Mr. Baker put it,
in talks at the United Nations.

Comment on the change of policy attributed it to growing pressures on the Bush
Administration. Congress had become restive about Cambodia. Last month the
Senate Intelligence Committee voted to cut off covert aid to the non-Communist
resistance. The Senate majority leader, George Mitchell, has been a strong voice
for change. The reports of Khmer Rouge military gains were sobering.

But all that amounts to saying that the Bush Administration yielded to reality.
And surely that is a credit. Far better to understand the possible consequences
of a mistaken policy, and change, than to pursue it mindlessly for fear of
seeming to admit a mistake.

The Bush Administration deserves credit for realism in another respect. This
shift in policy directly reflects a recognition that the cold war is over.

American policy on Cambodia has been driven to a considerable extent by
resentment at the outcome of the Vietnam War. We regarded Phnom Penh as not only
a Vietnamese but a Soviet outpost. But this week Secretary Baker had a
productive talk about Cambodia with Soviet Foreign Minister Shevardnadze.

Exactly what the new American position will mean in practice remains to be seen,
and one should maintain a certain skepticism. Still less does it give any
assurance of peace to the Cambodians. That still depends on diplomacy.

The current diplomatic proposal is for the United Nations to take charge in
Cambodia while an election is organized. Neither Hun Sen nor the Khmer Rouge has
so far endorsed the idea. China, the crucial outside force, has said what sounds
like yes. Perhaps the Bush Administration will be able to persuade Vietnam on a
U.N. role. Perhaps it will put its friendship with China to good use, though
Beijing reacted critically to Secretary Baker's announcement.

There are big ifs, and the hour is late. But at least the United States seems to
be on the right side now, committed above all to keeping the Khmer Rouge out of
power.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              73 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 21, 1990, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

U.S. Says China Backs Halt In Weapons to Khmer Rouge

BYLINE: By CLIFFORD KRAUSS, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 2, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 743 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 20


A senior State Department official told Congress today that China had agreed to
stop arms shipments to the Khmer Rouge guerrillas and to support a disarming of
all military forces in Cambodia as part of an arrangement leading to elections
there.

Richard H. Solomon, the Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific
Affairs, told a committee of Congress that China's pledge, made at a meeting
sponsored by the United Nations in Paris last Tuesday, was an advance in
international negotiations to settle the Cambodian civil war.

The commitment he attributed to the Chinese came a day before Secretary of State
James A. Baker 3d announced in Paris that the United States was withdrawing its
support from the Chinese-backed Cambodian coalition that includes the Khmer
Rouge. That decision was in turn attacked in Beijing on Thursday.

Tough Questioning

Mr. Solomon conceded, ''I wouldn't say time is on the side of a political
solution.''

Mr. Solomon faced heavy criticism and tough questioning before the Senate
Foreign Relations Committee two days after the Administration announced a
revision of its Cambodia policy by dropping diplomatic recognition for the
Cambodia guerrilla coalition and opening talks with Vietnam.

Several senators asserted that despite the change, the continuation of United
States aid to two non-Communist groups fighting to overthrow the Government
still threatened to help the Khmer Rouge retake power.

The 11-year war pits the Vietnamese-backed Government of Prime Minister Hun Sen
against a loose guerrilla alliance including the Chinese-backed Khmer Rouge and
two non-Communist rebel groups. The United States gives more than $15 million in
covert and overt aid each year to the non-Communist guerrillas.

The Khmer Rouge ruled Cambodia between 1975 and 1978, when more than a million
people were systematically killed or starved. A Vietnamese invasion force
overran the Khmer Rouge in 1979.

'Very Positive Development'

Mr. Solomon said the Administration's policy change accompanied previously
unreported progress in the latest round of talks on Cambodia between the five
permanent members of the United Nations Security Council.

''One of the very positive developments'' that came out of the Paris session,
Mr. Solomon said, was the agreement to ''a framework that would involve
cantonment of the various forces after a cease-fire and a phased process by
which the armed units would stack arms, and arms would come under United Nations
control and supervision.''

He added: ''You've got to have the Chinese on board committed to cutting off
arms and encouraging their friends to join in the political process. And they
have told us they will do so. They have been constructive.''

The United States, Britain, France, the Soviet Union and China have held five
meetings on Cambodia since January. The talks, which will continue in New York
on Aug. 27 and 28, have agreed that the United Nations should provide
peacekeeping forces and foster an administration structure including all the
known warring factions.

'The Time Is Past Due'

Mr. Solomon's description of the diplomatic advance went beyond the short
communique released by the five countries on Tuesday that said ''the time is
past due for the Cambodian parties to turn from the battlefield to the
negotiating table.''

But neither the communique nor Mr. Solomon have indicated that the warring
Government and guerrilla factions have come any closer to a settlement of their
differences. The Khmer Rouge has insisted that guerrilla representatives
outnumber Government representatives in the pre-election Supreme National
Council, a proposal Mr. Hun Sen has dismissed as out of hand.

Critics, including several senators and witnesses who spoke today at the
hearing, assert that China and the Khmer Rouge are interested in the
negotiations merely to stall for time. The Communist guerrillas' real strategy,
they say, is to amass their guerrilla forces and political cadres for a final
offensive in the next year or two.

In testimony, former Secretary of State Edmund S. Muskie said, ''If Cambodia
should again fall to the Khmer Rouge, the United States Government will have the
blood of the Cambodian people on its hands.'' He recommended cutting off aid to
the Cambodian guerrillas, opening talks with the Hun Sen Government, terminating
the economic embargo on Cambodia, and pressing the Chinese to cut aid to the
Khmer Rouge.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Richard H. Solomon, the Assistant Secretary of State for East
Asian and Pacific Affairs, told a Congressional committee that China's pledge to
support disarmament in Cambodia should help settle the conflict there. (Jose R.
Lopez/The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              74 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 22, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Japanese in the New York Region Begin to Feel the Sting of Prejudice

BYLINE: By LISA W. FODERARO

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 1, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1583 words


Japanese who have settled in the New York suburbs, whether for a temporary
business assignment or for good, are starting to feel a backlash from their
growing presence and the rising economic tensions between Japan and the United
States.

In Rye, N.Y., a handful of American parents, unhappy that Japanese enrollment in
public schools has swelled so that in one elementary school a fourth of the
pupils are Japanese, have quietly pulled their children out of the prestigious
system, school officials say.

''You will find people who are totally offended by their being here, which, to
me, is a very basic form of bigotry,'' said Lynn Ferrari, a spokeswoman for the
district.

Japanese-Americans Affected

In Knollwood, N.J., Tak Furumoto, a 45-year-old real-estate broker born in the
United States, was dining in a restaurant not long after Mitsubishi bought a
majority stake in Rockefeller Center when, he said, ''A couple came up to us and
said, 'Why are you guys buying up America?' I told them, 'Hey, we're
Japanese-Americans, and I fought in Vietnam.' ''

''But that didn't help,'' he continued. ''Japanese-Americans are affected as
well. People don't make the distinction.''

Several factors have contributed to what some Japanese and experts in relations
between the two countries see as a backlash of feelings.

A rapid movement of Japanese during the 1980's - into many of the New York
metropolitan region's most affluent suburbs - has transformed neighborhoods and
school districts.

Once here, Japanese students tend to spend more time studying and earn better
grades than American students, educators say. #60,000 in Region Language and
cultural barriers, as well as the fact that most Japanese families are on
temporary assignment, have led to social isolation. And as the Japanese presence
has increased, there has been a growing resentment among many Americans who
believe the Japanese have usurped the United States' position in the world
economy.

Safety and good school districts have attracted many of the Japanese to suburbs
like Fort Lee, N.J., and Scarsdale, Hartsdale and Rye, all in Westchester
County, N.Y.

There are an estimated 60,000 Japanese men, women and children living in the New
York region, according to the Japanese Consulate. For the most part, they are
here for a few years with Japanese corporations, but there are also long-term
residents who never obtained United States citizenship and spouses of American
citizens.

''It's a new phenomenon that people have yet to absorb,'' said Daniel Bob, the
assistant director of studies and policy programs at the Japan Society, a
private organization committed to bettering understanding between the United
States and Japan.

Tensions Are Often Muted

''It's similar to the American invasion of Europe in the 1960's,'' he said.
''Initially, there was a great uproar over American investments and fear of an
American takeover. It's a natural reaction to something that happens so
quickly.''

Many Japanese say they have yet to encounter strained feelings. Moreover, signs
of tension are usually muted in the educated, sophisticated communities with the
greatest concentration of Japanese.

''You see Japan blamed and put down on television, in newspapers and in
political speeches,'' said Masato Matsuo, 53, a Scarsdale resident and president
of Nippon Zeon, a chemical company in White Plains. ''But I don't directly see
this in my personal relationships. The intellectuals know exactly what's going
on and don't blame me for it.''

In gestures grand and small, the Japanese have also tried to smooth relations.
Many drive American cars - a symbolic act bespeaking a respect for American
products at a time when Japanese consumer products dominate.

Tour for Educators

In Harrison, N.Y., another Westchester town, the founders of a new Japanese high
school gave the town $500,000 in thanks for its cooperation. In Rye, 48 Japanese
families donated 10 fully grown Japanese cherry trees to a school at graduation
this year.

And for the second year in a row, the Japanese Chamber of Commerce and Industry
of New York flew a dozen educators from the New York region to Japan for a
two-week tour.

''It was fantastic,'' said Dr. Barry Farnham, the Superintendent of the Rye
school district, after returning this month. ''I really got to know Japan as a
country and the Japanese as a people.''

Yet it is not unusual to overhear people castigating the Japanese in whispered
conversations for ''taking over'' their neighborhoods or schools or country
clubs. Racist outbursts have grown common, too. Motorists yell ''Japs'' at
Japanese golfers as they drive by.

''I've been playing golf for years, and I've never heard this as much as in the
last year,'' said Mr. Furumoto, who was born in an internment camp in California
during World War II.

Cultural Barriers

Recently Hisako Cunningham, a New Yorker for 23 years, approached a woman who
had illegally parked in a handicapped-parking space in Elmsford, N.Y. Mrs.
Cunningham, who works with handicapped people, said she asked the woman if she
had a permit, and was told to ''go back where you came from.''

''That wouldn't have happened 10 years ago,'' said Mrs. Cunningham, who is
married to an American citizen.

Mrs. Cunningham is also president of a self-help group in Westchester County
that serves some 90 Asian mothers, most of them Japanese.

She says she understands why many Japanese appear to shy from social connections
- they don't seek ''social expansion'' even in Japan, she said, and are hindered
by the language barrier. But the isolation worries her.

Confrontations at School

''Their attitude is 'As long as we don't become a social burden, as long as we
are law-abiding residents, then we're O.K.,' '' she said. ''They're not aware of
the impact their clinging tendency has on American society.''

This spring her group, Services to Parents of Exceptional Asian Children,
surveyed 147 Japanese households to see how parents felt about their children's
education and assimilation. An intitial look at the responses, she said, found
that parents were concerned about bullying and the mysterious disappearance of
their children's belongings, especially high-tech gadgets, in school.

Indeed, school seems to be the place where conflicts, real or perceived, are
played out most. Some American parents object that a teacher's attention is
diverted at the elementary level by children speaking Japanese. In high school,
some argue, the academic success of Japanese students who then return to Japan
for college is unfairly skewing the class rank of American students.

''By the time kids around here reach high school, they expect Japanese students
to win most of the high-achievement awards,'' said a mother in Rye. ''That can
be defeating.'' 'Extremely Distracting'

The mother, who has lived in Rye for 16 years and has three children, took her
son out of the public elementary school a few years ago in part because of what
she called the ''imbalance'' of Japanese students. She agreed to discuss her
reasons on condition that she not be named.

''There were 20 students in his class and six were Japanese,'' she said. ''It
was extremely distracting for my son to hear students speaking Japanese while
the teacher spoke English.''

Education and government leaders brush aside those concerns. ''You don't have to
give the Japanese students much attention because they pick up the language
rapidly,'' said Dr. Charles J. Murphy, the Superintendent of the Eastchester
school district, where 15 percent of the enrollment is Japanese, up from 8
percent 10 years ago.

Dr. Farnham of Rye said, ''My feeling is that we are a public school system, and
we need to respond to our constituents. If we have large numbers of Hispanic
students or Japanese students, we must adapt accordingly.''

'A Wonderful Challenge'

The competition from Japanese students at the high school level is healthy, in
the view of Charles Balancia, the Town Supervisor of Harrison, where the private
Keio High School of New York is to open soon.

''If it takes the Japanese children to show us how to excel, so be it,'' he
said. ''We have to become more competitive in the world marketplace. This is a
wonderful challenge.''

The relations between students themselves are becoming standoffish. When Maki
Morimoto arrived in Rye five years ago, he was one of five Japanese students in
the eighth grade, but the population has since grown.

''As the number of Japanese students increases, there's more isolation, both
because the Japanese are grouping together and Americans aren't making an effort
to know them,'' said Mr. Morimoto, the only one of 10 Japanese graduates from
Rye this year staying in the United States for college. He will enter Brown
University this fall.

''I think, too,'' he said, ''that the American students are probably jealous of
the Japanese math and science whizzes.''

Mr. Morimoto was unusual in high school, able to bridge the gap between the
communities. A member of the tennis, cross-country and ski teams, he attended
American parties, which few of the Japanese students did. His assimilation was
eased by his relatively long stay in the United States and by his father's
familiarity with American culture after graduate studies at the University of
Wisconson.

''I'm so happy being here,'' Mr. Morimoto said. ''Although there's tension
between Americans and Japanese -it's definitely there - I can deal with it.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Tak Furumoto, a Japanese-American from Fort Lee, N.J., who was
born in the United States and served in Vietnam, says he still encounters
bigotry (William E. Sauro/The New York Times); Daniel Bob of the Japan Society
in Manhattan, said the recent influx of Japanese immigrants is ''a new
phenomenon that people have yet to absorb'' (Don Hogan Charles/The New York
Times)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              75 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 22, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Western Europe, Its Births Falling, Wonders Who'll Do All the Work

BYLINE: By ALAN RIDING, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 1, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1418 words

DATELINE: PARIS, July 21


French families receive generous welfare and tax incentives to have more
children, but to no avail. Mothers in France are no longer averaging the 2.1
children needed to insure a natural replacement of the country's population.

In Italy, families are now smaller on average than they are in any other Western
European country. So the Government in Rome is trying to woo back descendants of
Italians who emigrated to Latin America.

Throughout Western Europe, the trend is clear. As birth rates tumble and life
expectancy grows, populations are aging rapidly.

Opposition to Immigration

The number of entrants to the job market will drop in the 1990's, demographers
say, and total populations will begin to fall early in the 21st century.

A product of prosperity, this population revolution is posing a complex new
challenge. Throughout Western Europe there is strong opposition to new
immigration, yet demographers say that foreign workers will be needed to keep up
living standards.

For the moment, with millions of Europeans out of work, a labor shortage is not
apparent. In several places, immigration is even blamed for unemployment. But
immigrants are needed to do the menial or low-paid jobs that out-of-work locals
refuse to do.

''A number of countries may be about to enter a long cycle of dependence on
migration even though a large proportion of public opinion and of the political
class is violently hostile to the idea,'' said Jean-Claude Chesnais, an expert
with the National Institute of Demographic Studies in France.

In the 1960's, immigration began changing Europe's social profile. Today, of the
327 million people in the 12-nation European Community, about 12 million are
immigrants or descendants of immigrants, with close to 4.5 million in France,
2.5 million in Britain and 1.8 million in West Germany.

Belgium and the Netherlands have large numbers of immigrants from their former
colonies in Africa, Asia and the Caribbean region. Over the last five years,
Arabs have begun flocking to Italy and Spain.

Even East Germany contracted laborers from Vietnam and Cuba to work in
factories.

Few Nations Deal With Issue

Beyond building child-care centers and extending maternity leave to encourage
mothers to keep working, experts say few governments have dealt with the link
between demographic trends and immigration, preferring instead to respond to
public pressure to keep out foreigners.

''People have tended to look at immigration as the problem,'' a British
sociologist said. ''But it really is the consequence. Look at the United States
and Mexico. As long as there are poverty and people in the third world and jobs
and capital in the first world, economic forces will work naturally.''

While these forces are also at work in the United States and Japan, the
demographic change is strongest in Western Europe. Of the European Community
members, only Ireland has a fertility rate that is keeping up with the natural
replacement level of 2.1 children.

In Italy and Spain, traditionally countries of large families, it is down to
1.3. And in the European Community as a whole, where there were 41,000 fewer
births in 1989 than in 1988, the average is only 1.58.

Demographers calculate the replacement level at 2.1 rather than 2 to take
account of people who die before they reach reproductive age.

Ranks of Elderly Growing

As life expectancy has surged, the ''graying of the population'' has
accelerated. ''There are already 100 million people in the European Community
nations over 50 years of age and their number is growing steadily,'' the
European Commission said in a recent report. ''By the early years of the next
century, Europe will have more older than younger people. The traditional 'age
pyramid' will stand on its head.''

One effect will be on social welfare budgets, with governments required to
switch the focus of spending from children and education toward senior citizens,
pensions and health care.

For example, a recent study in Madrid showed that the city had more people over
65 than under 15.

Still more significant will be the impact on a labor force that is being
squeezed by youths who are stretching out their years of education and older
workers seeking early retirement.

By the year 2020, according to the European Commission, nonworking dependents
will account for two-thirds to three-quarters of the people in the 12 European
Community nations.

Need for Immigrants Will Grow

For demographers, the statistical message is clear. ''The need for immigrants
will grow,'' Mr. Chesnais said. ''You'll have fewer people entering the labor
market and more leaving. You'll have an aging labor force that is tired and less
efficient but also wants higher salaries. What does a businessman do? He turns
to immigrants who earn less and work harder.''

Mass immigration to Western Europe began in the 1960's, with concentrations of
Algerians in France, Indians and Pakistanis in Britain and Turks and Yugoslavs
in West Germany. By the mid-1970's, political pressure brought restrictions. But
the flow continued as relatives joined immigrants and as illegal immigration
rose.

Today, with tens of thousands of third-world citizens entering the region each
year, either as illegals or as refugees, hostility towards immigrants is growing
in several countries, notably France and West Germany.

As it prepares to eliminate its internal borders in 1993, the European Community
is also planning a unified policy to keep out new immigrants.

Move on to Better Jobs

Foreign workers now pick crops on farms, wash up in restaurants, work on
assembly lines, keep city streets clean and run small shops in many countries.
Experts say that new immigrants will be needed because once immigrants have
settled down they tend to look for better jobs.

From an economic point of view, the need for a constantly replenished work force
- a labor reserve, as economists put it - is still greater. And as European
populations move deeper into the cycle of aging, stagnating and falling, experts
say that the European Community's labor deficit will grow.

During the 1990's, demographers said, some of the gap will be bridged by more
women entering the job market and by falling levels of unemployment. But noting
that a need for immigration will continue to coexist with unemployment, they
said the community would have to look elsewhere for cheap labor.

East Germans Take Over Jobs

In the short term, Germany will be an exception. A million East Germans arrived
in West Germany in the last year and many more East German are expected to lose
their jobs after economic unification.

Some third-world migrants in West Germany, notably Turks, are already being put
out of work. Yet a united Germany will still have one of Europe's lowest
fertility rates - an average of 1.5 children.

Some countries of Eastern Europe, on the other hand, may become suppliers of
labor to the European Community if their economic reforms bring high
unemployment. In the past, immigrants from countries like Poland, Romania and
Yugoslavia have been more easily assimilated than those from most third-world
countries.

North Africa is the region where European political concerns appear likely to
clash with economic needs. The birth rate in North Africa is more than three
times higher than in the European Community. This population growth and an acute
economic crisis are already combining to create enormous pressure on young North
Africans to emigrate.

More Muslims Are Expected

Calculating the ''pull'' of European labor needs and the ''push'' of third-world
poverty, one demographer has estimated that new immigrants and their children
could number between 25 million and 65 million by the year 2025, with the great
majority of them Muslims from Mediterranean nations.

When many Europeans express fear of immigration, they are usually refering to
North Africans. Muslims are perceived as having more difficulty than other
foreigners in integrating into Christian societies. For example, France's
largest immigrant population is Portuguese, yet Arabs are the main focus of
French hostility toward foreign immigrants.

''I don't think Europe is going to be hit by a tidal wave of immigration,'' said
a demographer who works for the European Community.

''I think it will be regulated by demand, although demand will grow at the end
of the century. But Europe's big challenge is not how to keep out immigrants but
how to integrate them.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Graph showing average number of children per mother for 1990 in
European Community countries (Source: Eurostat) (pg. 12)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              76 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 22, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Cambodian Says He Fears Risk of a Greater War

BYLINE: By STEVEN ERLANGER, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 909 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, July 21


Prince Norodom Ranariddh, son of Prince Norodom Sihanouk and the commander of
his army, says the American shift of policy on Cambodia offers Vietnam an
opportunity that he fears Hanoi will not seize, thus risking an intensification
of the war in Cambodia.

Vietnam is known for ''swallowing concessions'' and giving nothing in return,
Prince Ranariddh said in an interview on Friday. ''The whole question is whether
the Vietnamese see the American change as an opening to compromise or as a
victory.

''From the first reaction of Hanoi and Phnom Penh, they consider it a victory,''
he said. ''I fear that they will not compromise but harden their stance on a
peace settlement, especially regarding the role of the United Nations.''

On Wednesday in Paris, Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d announced that
Washington was withdrawing its diplomatic support at the United Nations for the
Cambodian coalition, dominated by the Communist Khmer Rouge and including the
non-Communist factions of Prince Sihanouk and a former Prime Minister, Son Sann.


Talks With Vietnam Planned

Mr. Baker, saying that he feared a Khmer Rouge victory in Cambodia, also
announced that Washington would begin direct talks with Vietnam on Cambodia and
would allow humanitarian aid inside Cambodia itself.

While Mr. Baker emphasized that Washington would continue its aid to the
non-Communists, their first reaction to his announcement was harsh. Mr. Son Sann
said in Paris that the change would hamper the search for peace and, by
isolating the Khmer Rouge, would force them to seek a military solution.

Prince Sihanouk issued a blistering telegram from Pyongyang, the North Korean
capital, calling the American move ''an act of very grave injustice'' that
offered ''a formidable reward'' to Vietnam and its ''traitorous'' ally in Phnom
Penh, Prime Minister Hun Sen.

Prince Ranariddh said on Wednesday that the United States move was ''a bad
thing'' and ''would not end the fighting,'' but only drive the opposition
coalition closer to China.

Concession by Prince

But on Friday, after discussions with American diplomats, Prince Ranariddh said
he had been too harsh. He conceded that Mr. Baker was trying to keep American
aid to the non-Communists in the face of increasing opposition to United States
policy in Congress.

Some in Congress argue that humanitarian aid to the non-Communists helps their
Khmer Rouge partners, particularly along supply routes deep inside the country.
But most military analysts regard the alliance with the non-Communists,
especially with Prince Sihanouk, the former Cambodian head of state, as
important politically and diplomatically to the Khmer Rouge, but nearly
irrelevant militarily.

Prince Ranariddh conceded that Washington, with Moscow, would now have more
leverage to push Hanoi and Phnom Penh to accept the outlines of a Cambodian
solution being negotiated among the five permanent members of the United Nations
Security Council, most recently last week in Paris. Sees Progress at the U.N.
The Prince saw promise in the work of the five members - the United States, the
Soviet Union, China, Britain and France. ''I fully trust this process,'' he
said. ''It should lead to free elections in Cambodia, and that can allow the
non-Communist resistance to regain the ground, when it seems we may have lost on
the battlefield.''

The Prince said important progress had been made at the United Nations meeting
in Paris. To replace the coalition in the United Nations seat, diplomats are
trying to forge a Cambodian Supreme National Council, made up of all four
factions, to embody Cambodian sovereignty up to the new elections.

Disagreement remains over the shape and purpose of such a council, as well as
over the size of a United Nations role in Cambodia, Western and Asian diplomats
said. Still, that disagreement is narrowing. The Soviet Union, Vietnam and Mr.
Hun Sen want a symbolic council, divided equally between the two rival
governments and with minimal Khmer Rouge representation. The United Nations role
would only be to organize and monitor the elections, with veto power over
government decisions that affect the fairness of the vote.

The Americans essentially agree with the Soviets on the council, but want Khmer
Rouge representatives sitting only as ''individuals.'' The Americans, along with
the nations of Southeast Asia, want a strong United Nations role to diminish the
influence of Mr. Hun Sen and to try to insure that no one steals the election.
#3 Options for Chinese The Chinese now have three options. First, they suggest a
strong council with Khmer Rouge representation, with governing powers over five
ministries - defense, foreign affairs, finance, information and interior - and a
limited United Nations role. Second, they suggest a weaker council, though still
with Khmer Rouge representatives, and a large United Nations role - running
Cambodia until elections.

And in Paris, diplomats say the Chinese have offered a third combination: A
council with Khmer Rouge, but only sitting as ''individuals'' and the United
Nations running those same five key ministries, while having only monitoring
rights over the rest.

''I do not want to bring Pol Pot back to power,'' Prince Ranariddh said,
referring to the leader of the Khmer Rouge, under whose rule from 1975 to 1979
at least a million Cambodians died. ''But kicking the Khmer Rouge out of the
U.N. process will not stop the war.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              77 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 22, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Fury Rising in Quebec Over Mohawk Standoff

BYLINE: By JOHN F. BURNS, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 10, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 941 words

DATELINE: TORONTO, July 21


For the last 10 days, Canadians watching television have been confronted with
the stark image of Mohawk Indians armed as if for war, in camouflage uniforms,
bandannas across their faces, blockading one of the most crucial transport
arteries in the country, the Mercier bridge across the St. Lawrence River into
Montreal.

Among some of the 60,000 Montreal-area commuters who have been barred from using
their normal route into the city, the situation has fostered a rising fury.

Since armed settlers and red-coated Mounties drove the country's original
inhabitants from their traditional lands a century and more ago, there have been
few such widely publicized instances of hostility between the descendants of
Canada's European settlers and the 1.2-million people of Indian descent, about
470,000 of whom are formally registered with the Government as Indians.

Residents of the Chateauguay suburb of Montreal have hung straw effigies of
Mohawks from lamp standards at the approaches to the bridge and burned them.
Angry crowds of as many as 3,000 at a time have gathered at police lines,
upending steel barriers and shouting angry epithets at the Mohawks blocking the
mile-long bridge. ''Savages! Savages!'' they have shouted, some in French and
some in English.

Bus Convoys for Commuters

Surging crowds attempting to reach the Mohawks have been turned back by squads
of Quebec provincial policemen and Mounties. Canadian Army units have been
reinforced in case the Quebec government decides to end the blockade by force.
But so far, provincial leaders have avoided a confrontation.

Instead, they have offered free bus convoys to ease the strain on commuters, who
have found a 30-minute trip to work in Canada's second-largest city turning into
a two-hour diversion across a bridge 10 miles downstream.

For the Mohawk leaders, and for dozens of other tribal leaders from across the
country who have gathered in Montreal, the stand at the bridge is a powerful act
of symbolism.

With their assault rifles, gas masks and handguns, as well as the huge piles of
earth they have dumped on the bridge with captured front-end loaders, the
Mohawks are seen as having put the rest of Canada on notice that native peoples
will no longer wait patiently for the federal and provincial governments to deal
with their grievances.

Dispute Over a Golf Course

But to many Canadians of European descent, the blockading of the bridge and a
similar armed standoff 20 miles away at Oka, Quebec, in which a policeman was
killed on July 11 in a dispute over a golf course extension, sends a different
kind of message.

To those people, scenes of provincial officials negotiating with the Mohawks,
and news conferences at which government ministers have pleaded with the Mohawks
to dismantle their barriers in return for title to the disputed land at Oka,
risk encouraging native groups to take up arms in support of their demands.

Tensions have been heightened by reports that at least some of the armed Mohawks
on the bridge and at the Oka barricades are from the United States.

Some Canadian reports have quoted Mohawk leaders as saying that the Americans
include Vietnam veterans from the St. Regis-Akwesasne Indian reservation that
straddles the United States-Canada border at the point where the boundaries of
New York State, Ontario and Quebec converge. The reports said their weaponry and
their expertise in digging foxholes and providing covering fire was crucial in
driving back police units that stormed the Mohawk barricades at Oka last week.

Stiffened Mohawk Position

Originally, the Mohawks' demanded a halt to the nine-hole golf course extension
at Oka and title to the 55 acres of land involved, which are said to cover a
sacred Mohawk burial ground.

That has been conceded by Quebec, after contacts with the federal Government
produced a commitment that Ottawa would seek to purchase the land and turn it
over to the Mohawks. But in recent days, the Mohawks have stiffened their
position, and the resulting impasse has led to fresh speculation that Quebec may
eventually resort to force.

Mohawk spokesmen have demanded that any prosecutions arising from the Oka
shootout be heard by the World Court in The Hague, that the 1,000 Quebec
troopers surrounding Oka be withdrawn before the barricades come down, and that
all the armed Mohawks be allowed to leave the town with their weapons on a
guarantee that there will be no police attempt to apprehend or search them.

A three-day gathering of 200 Indian chiefs from across the country ended on
Friday at the Kahnawake reserve, adjacent to the Mercier bridge, with an
endorsement of the Mohawks' demands.

Ottawa's Condition for Talks

The Quebec Premier, Robert Bourassa, has implied that there will be
prosecutions. But the federal Government has refused to negotiate with the
Mohawks while they maintain their armed defiance.

''Guns and blockades are not conducive to meaningful dialogue,'' Indian Affairs
Minister Thomas Siddon and Solicitor General Pierre Cadieux said in a statement
on Thursday.

After the chiefs' meeting on Friday, Indian leaders said they regarded the
Mohawk blockades as a watershed in Indians' attempts to regain lands they used
before they were consigned to 2,230 reserves across the country.

Since a series of court rulings in the early 1970's forced Ottawa to begin
negotiating the land claims, native bands have entered claims that federal
officials say cover three-quarters of Canada's 3.8-million square miles.

In the Mohawks' case, pending claims cover much of southern Quebec, including
all of the land now occupied by Montreal.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Mohawk chiefs arriving at the Kahnawake Reserve in Quebec on
Thursday for talks with the Canadian Government. The negotiators are trying to
resolve a 10-day confrontation between Mohawks and the police. (Reuters)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              78 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 22, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Soldier and General Alike To Feel Bite of Budget Ax

BYLINE: By ERIC SCHMITT, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 20, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1271 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 20


Driven by sharp budget cuts and a decrease in global tensions, the Pentagon is
drastically shrinking its all-volunteer force, and the effort is causing anxiety
at all levels of the military.

No one is spared, from admirals and generals to the soldiers and sailors of the
future. The military is cutting recruiting quotas, tightening re-enlistment
requirements, slashing commissions for new officers and forcing retirement on
thousands of senior officers.

Leaders in Congress and the Defense Department say the 2.1 million troops on
active duty could be cut by 100,000 a year through 1995, and perhaps through the
end of the decade. In the 1991 fiscal year alone, lawmakers have proposed
cutting troops by 100,000 or as many as 140,000, nearly four times what Defense
Secretary Dick Cheney has proposed.

''The kind of changes that would be required if I have to do that would include
laying a lot of people off,'' Mr. Cheney told a Senate panel last month. ''I am
going to have to throw people out on the street. I am going to have to freeze
promotions. I am going to end up doing great violence to our most important
military asset, our men and women in service.''

'Working Backwards'

With a vastly diminished Soviet threat, even the military's most vocal backers
concede that troop strength has to drop, particularly in Europe, where the
United States has more than 300,000 soldiers.

But Congress and the Pentagon are squaring off over the extent of the cuts,
particularly for the next fiscal year, which begins in October. The ballooning
Federal deficit has emerged as a powerful force in driving down military
spending, currently more than $300 billion a year, half of that for personnel.

Troop levels are likely to be set, at least in the short run, before Defense
Department officials decide what size the future military structure should be -
the Army divisions, Navy ships, Air Force planes and their home ports or bases
that the personnel will support.

''The process seems to be working backwards,'' said Vice Adm. Mike Boorda, the
chief of naval personnel.

The Cost of Savings

Pentagon planners fear that a Congressional craving for immediate budget
reductions may force deep cuts that yield annual savings of $1 billion but hurt
future recruiting, badly skew the balance of officers against enlisted personnel
and ultimately jeopardize battlefield readiness.

Military experts in Congress, like Senator Sam Nunn, the Georgia Democrat who is
chairman of the Senate Armed Services Committee, dispute the military's warnings
and insist that their plans offer prudent reductions without painful layoffs.
The committee has proposed cutting 100,000 troops next year.

The Senate panel's proposal would require the services, before laying anyone
off, to consider cuts in recruitment, reductions in re-enlistments and increases
in early releases from service commitments, in that order.

The Defense Department has scaled back sharply in the past; Army troop strength
fell by 200,000 to 300,000 soldiers a year shortly after the Vietnam War. But
wartime forces were made up largely of draftees eager to leave the service.
Since the all-voluntary force was established in 1973, most people have joined
with the intent of making the military a career.

Effect on the Army

Labor analysts say there is ample room in the national economy to absorb
displaced servicemen and servicewomen, many of whom have skills that civilian
employers seek. But fewer opportunities to join the services spell trouble for
many minority members, economists said. Blacks, in particular, have customarily
used the military, and especially the Army, as a ladder of upward mobility.

''The cuts will be a serious problem for black males coming out of high
school,'' said Barry M. Blechman, president of Defense Forecasts Inc., a
consulting organization in Washington.

The Army, the largest of the services, is bracing for the deepest cuts, largely
because one of its major abilities, fighting a conventional war in Europe, has
been made all but unnecessary by the emerging democracies in Eastern Europe and
the Soviet Union's promise to withdraw its troops there.

Under a House Armed Services subcommittee plan, the Army would shrink by nearly
82,000 troops next year, twice as many as Mr. Nunn's committee proposed. Under
the Bush Administration's plan, the Army would drop by 16,669 troops, virtually
all through attrition.

''If the cut is beyond 35,000 next year, I will have to decimate the enlisted
forces,'' said Brig. Gen. Theodore G. Stroup Jr., the Army's director of
military personnel.

Cuts in Officers

General Stroup said a reduction of 80,000 would result in enormous layoffs among
enlisted personnel, junior officers and retirement-age officers. Federal law
protects most mid-career officers from dismissal, a regulation that Mr. Cheney
is seeking to relax through new legislation.

This year the Army, using special review panels, forced out 646 lieutenants and
300 colonels eligible for retirement. The Navy and Air Force face less severe
cuts that service officials say they can handle through forced retirements and
less recruiting. The Pentagon plans to eliminate 78 general and admiral
positions within four years, 7 percent of the 1,073 top-ranking officer jobs.
The services this year reduced recruiting quotas by 60,000, or 23 percent, and
are projecting at least the same proportional reductions for next year.
Re-enlistment bonuses have been pared or eliminated.

Layoffs or a Top-Heavy Force

As the services study further cuts, personnel bosses face an agonizing choice:
sharply reduce recruiting and new officer commissions, creating a top-heavy
force, or make across-the-board cuts, including layoffs of mid-career officers
and enlisted personnel.

To cushion the blow for casualties of peace, Mr. Cheney and several lawmakers
have proposed separation pay for enlisted personnel, improved medical benefits,
extended military housing and commissary privileges, and job counseling, among
other things.

Despite assurances from nervous Pentagon officials that the Government will not
shortchange officers and enlisted personnel who remain in the trimmed-down
military, there are troubling signs that some young people aren't listening.

Air Force first-term re-enlistments have dropped to 46 percent from 59 percent a
year ago, in part because of an offer this year to allow officers and enlisted
personnel to leave before their commitments were up. The Air Force expected
6,000 to apply. Instead 17,000 people volunteered, and embarrassed officials had
to turn away 3,000 of them.

Disillusionment

Nearly 20 percent of the 1986 graduating class at the United States Military
Academy, the elite of the Army's newly commissioned officers, opted to resign
this year.

''You're seeing the beginning of a wave of disillusioned, uncertain young people
who are not going to find the Army attractive,'' said Brig. Gen. Robert B.
Rosenkranz, who is responsible for matching the Army's force needs with the
proper personnel levels.

Meanwhile, with no agreement imminent from the White House and Congressional
budget negotiators, and final Congressional approval of Pentagon spending in the
fiscal year 1991 months away, military planners must begin cutting.

''Give the services a goal, and they can plan how to achieve it,'' concluded a
recent Congressional Budget Office report on personnel cuts. ''Leave them with
uncertainty, and they must continually either make second-best choices or risk
taking irreversible actions that could have severe repercussions in later
years.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Table listing proposed military cuts by the Bush Administration and
Congress. (Source: Defense Dept., Bush Administration, Senate Armed Services
Committee, and House Armed Service Subcommittee on Military Personnel and
Compensation)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              79 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 22, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Campus Life:;
Summer's Hot Topics: East Bloc and the Earth

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2, Page 31, Column 1; Style Desk

LENGTH: 1805 words


Eastern Europe, particularly the Soviet Union, is this year's summer vacation
destination of choice for American students, who are flocking to glimpse the
rise of democracy or exchange cultural values in what were recently
less-friendly lands. For those sticking closer to home, environmental issues are
an increasing concern, while political internships in Washington and elsewhere
and archeological digs have maintained their traditional prestige.

An informal survey of leading colleges and universities indicates that the
pursuit of solid credentials to add to resumes is keener than ever, but that the
political and social developments of the last year have added spice to the
chase.

In an venture that reflects a number of these currents, an 18-member theater
company from the University of Illinois at Chicago will travel to Moscow and
Kiev to perform ''The Birds - a Recycled Play,'' an updated version of
Aristophanes's play emphasizing the theme of humanity's destruction of the
earth's natural resources. The troupe will then take ''The Birds'' on the road
to the Save Lake Michigan, Save Lake Baikal Environmental/Ecological and Theater
Festival in Ulan-Ude, Siberia.

Austin Goolsbee, a junior economics major from Yale, went to Poland ''to be part
of history in the making.'' He is part of a macroeconomic task force headed by
Jeffrey Sachs, the Harvard professor who has been advising the Solidarity
Government as it reshapes the Polish economy.

''It's a great opportunity to be here as the country moves toward a free-market
economy,'' said Mr. Goolsbee in a telephone interview from Poland.

'A Universal Language'

Kenzie Cameron, a junior at Northwestern University, is one of about 60 students
from colleges nationwide who are participating in an exchange organized by the
American Council of Teachers of Russian, a Washington-based nonprofit
organization. Ms. Cameron, who is majoring in Russian and communications
studies, is studying Russian at the Institute of Steel Alloys in Moscow and
going on field trips, including one to Lithuania earlier this month.

Fifty students from various American colleges are pursuing cultural enrichment
against the backdrop of history in the making as members of the American Soviet
Youth Orchestra. With 50 counterparts from the Soviet Union, they will appear
for two weeks at the Moscow Conservatory and then play in four other European
countries, including East Germany. The Youth Orchestra, which is jointly
sponsored by the Moscow Conservatory and Oberlin College, will perform in the
United States next month.

''I cannot express how excited I am to work with a group of individuals who
share a common interest that speaks a universal language,'' said Nathan Pawelek,
an English and horn performance major at Oberlin.

Fifteen American students, mostly from Rutgers University and sponsored by
Worldworks Foundation in Bridgewater, N.J., have also headed east this summer,
to study the problems of hunger. The students will meet with a delegation from
Moscow State University and visit Soviet farms, agricultural stations and
research centers.

'What We Both Can Do About It'

''We need to understand why there is hunger in our country, why there is hunger
in their country and what we both can do about it,'' said Krishna Patel, the
1990 class president of Douglass College at Rutgers.

Another Northwestern student, Gregory Schoof, spent his Fourth of July watching
political fireworks as he observed Canada's constitutional crisis. As one of 13
Northwestern students studying Canadian politics and French, he was in Ottawa
during the tense negotiations that preceded the collapse of the Meech Lake
Accord, the compromise meant to accommodate within the constitution Quebec's
aspirations for autonomy.

''We taped off the television history as it was happening,'' he said from Laval
University in Quebec City.

Nhat-Dien Nguyen, a senior engineering major at California Polytechnic State
University at San Luis Obispo, and Hien Lam, a senior biology major from the
University of California at Santa Barbara, are working as volunteers in
detention camps for Vietnamese refugees in Hong Kong. Both Mr. Nguyen and Ms.
Lam fled Vietnam as youths and spent time in detention camps themselves.

''It's not going to be easy,'' Ms. Lam said before leaving. ''But I know in my
heart that we can help free the boat people.''

Benjamin Tang, a recent graduate of the University of Texas who is fluent in
Chinese and who has lived in Taiwan, traveled to Beijing to observe the
aftermath of last summer's student massacre.

''It was remarkably serene,'' he said. ''It seemed like people remembered how
bad things were last year, and knew there would be terrible repercussions if it
happeneed again.''

France and Ibadan

Susan Gray, a senior Russian and history major, journeyed to northern France to
study the roles of 13th-century medieval noblewomen. She is hoping to refute
what she calls a common misconception that the political and economic power of
women declined after the 12th century.

College students traveling overseas are encountering at least one type of
cultural shock. Cigarettes, which are becoming increasingly declasse on American
college campuses, are coveted in the Soviet Union, for example, and savvy
Americans are using them to their advantage. David Schwimmer, a senior English
major at Yale, recently accompanied an American business executive to the Soviet
Union as a consultant and translator. He knew exactly what to pack.  ''Marlboros
go a lot farther than rubles,'' said Mr. Schwimmer, who always brings several
cartons.

Competition in Washington

A considerable number of aspiring politicians remained in the United States this
summer, heading for the nation's capital. But they had to overcome tough
competition for coveted internships. Only five of the 170 student applicants to
the Brookings Institution were selected, a spokeswoman for its Washington office
said. Jennifer Nelson, a Carleton College senior, said she submitted her resume
more than a year and a half before landing her present job in the office of
Representative Patricia Schroeder, Democrat of Colorado.

Shepley Orr, a junior psychology major at Vassar College, went to New York to
work for the city's Human Rights Commission. He is involved with local
communities and public schools as they promote the hiring of more minority
teachers.

Working in the Department of Human Services for Davenport, Iowa, gives Katherine
Holland, a University of Iowa senior, an opportunity to complete the necessary
requirements for her social work degree. Ms. Holland is taking part in a
substance-abuse program and helping redesign child-welfare programs.

Sarah Davis, a sophomore at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, is
viewing the gritty side of law enforcement this summer. Her job for the County
Council in San Mateo Couny, Calif., has taken her to the homes of a prostitute,
a petty and a heroin addict and on a helicopter chase of a drug dealer. Her most
vivid memory is of an autopsy. ''I was like a mechanic looking into the hood of
a car,'' she said.

History Begins at Home

Eleven students at the University of Kansas and Kansas State University have
discovered that they do not have to move far from their campus to study history.
For six hours of college credit, these summer students at the Kansas
Archeological Field School are sifting through dirt in Clearview, Kan., to find
remnants of lodges built by the Pomonas Indians between 900 and 1400 A.D.

Despite a rotating kitchen duty, a 10 P.M. curfew and the Kansas heat, several
of them report that the experience has encouraged them to consider careers in
archeology.

Two University of Iowa seniors, Carmen Jans and William Raatz, are also working
in the fields. The two geology majors are with the Utah Field Company in Park
City, Utah, where they are mapping mountains to uncover their geological
structures.

Joyce Whitney, an Ohio State senior, and Ellis Godard, a University of Virginia
sophomore, are also engaged in environmental work - rural and urban,
respectively. Ms. Whitney, an environmental-education major, is working in the
Tongass National Forest in Alaska. She flew across the national forest in a
helicopter in June, spotting and recording the location of 30 bald eagle nests.
The flight was made before egg-hatching time - if the search had been postponed,
Ms. Whitney said, ''the young eagles would probably have been frightened and
fallen to their deaths.''

Recycling and More

Mr. Godard is arranging the locations of recycling bins in the Charlottesville,
Va., area, but there is more than recycling on his mind. He has joined the fight
to legalize marijuana by writing a book on the subject, which he is seeking to
have published, and negotiating with the Charlottesville police department for a
'smoke in' scheduled for October on the university campus.

David Egelman, a sophomore majoring in space physics at Rice University, is not
averse to summer high jinks. Mr. Egelman recently gave to his agent an episode
to submit to the Fox Network for its show, ''Married With Children.'' The
resident of Albuquerque, N.M., has also completed a script for an episode of
NBC's ''Cheers.'' Between scripts he is revising a book of humor on the
college-admissions process.

Art of a different kind is being pursued by Miranda Junowicz, a Russian major at
the University of California at Berkeley, who boasts that this summer she has
seen eight Grateful Dead concerts across the nation. The 19-year-old is planning
to attend another in Chicago later this month.

Dirty Dishes

Not all summer activity was designed to change or discover the world. For many
students, the main goal has been income to enable them to return to school in
the fall. But every job can have its surprises.

Michael Warren, a junior at Carnegie Mellon University, may have got more than
he bargained for when he accepted the job as summer manager for his fraternity,
Sigma Alpha Epsilon. An architecture major from Pittsburgh, Mr. Warren spends
his days cleaning up after the nearly 30 occupants of the three-story fraternity
house. He has faced stacks of dirty dishes, a broken garbage disposal and
frequent visits from the city's health inspector.

Some, like Martin Grunder, a senior at the University of Dayton, are humble
about their summer plans.

''I don't really think what I do is a big deal,'' said Mr. Grunder, a management
major whose sales from his business enterprises are currently above $700,000.
The Bellbrook, Ohio, resident owns a truck wash, a landscaping business and is a
partner in a company that provides maintenance to commercial properties.

Mr. Grunder covers all college expenses and says he still has ''plenty of money
to have fun with.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Some of the college students who are participating in a variety
of summer activities. Stephanie Odle, above, of the University of Kansas, is
part of a team searching for the history of the Pomanas Indians. Joyce Whitney,
above right, an Ohio State senior, is working on a field survey project at
Tongass National Forest in Alaska. Katherine Holland, a senior at the University
of Iowa, at work at the Department of Human Services, where she is helping to
redesign child-welfare programs. (Dave Kaup/Robert Wetherell/Paul Jensen for The
New York Times)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              80 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 22, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THEATER;
Karen Finley's Rage, Pain, Hate and Hope

BYLINE: By MARCELLE CLEMENTS; Marcelle Clements is the author of ''The Dog Is
Us'' (Penguin), a collection of essays, and the novel ''Rock Me'' (Simon &
Schuster).

SECTION: Section 2; Page 5, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 2600 words


Karen Finley's subject is not obscenity. Her subject is pain, rage, love,
lovelessness, need, fear, dehumanization, oppression, brutality and consolation.
But obscenity is what will be on everyone's mind tonight, at Lincoln Center's
Serious Fun festival, when she performs her now notorious piece ''We Keep Our
Victims Ready.''

Like the other three performance artists who were denied grants recently by the
National Endowment for the Arts, Ms. Finley uses strong sexual images. In her
performances she is often nude and often places, dabs, smears, pours and
sprinkles food on her body to symbolize the violation of the female characters
whose tales she shrieks and whines on stage. It is not her sexuality but her
emotional intensity that engages her audiences. A conceptual and performing
artist, her most recurrent themes are incest, rape, violence, alcoholism,
suicide, poverty, homelessness and discrimination.

Karen Finley does on stage and in public what many of the bravest performers
practice only as exercises in the relative safety and privacy of acting classes.
Her work is nearly always shocking and invariably - some would say relentlessly
- political. It is also sometimes humorous and often fearsome. Her beat is the
intolerable.

Should public money pay for the expression of the intolerable? Should the
intolerable be censored?

Censorship was the recurrent subject during a conversation three weeks ago at
Ms. Finley's studio in Nyack, N.Y., which she shares with her husband and
manager, Michael Overn. It was the day the National Endowment for the Arts
announced it had rejected 4 of 18 grants recommended by the agency's theater
panel and two days after John E. Frohnmayer, the endowment chairman, said that
''political realities'' would likely lead to the veto of some grants. Karen
Finley, who is 34 years old, had cried on hearing she was one of the rejected.
''Yes, I really was surprised,'' she says. ''I consider myself a team player. I
really consider myself an artist in a tradition in which there's always been
subversive work, and I feel I'm being punished for trying to push the
boundaries. And I thought that that had been taken for granted years ago with
everyone from James Joyce to Allen Ginsberg. In that way I was very naive.''
Perched on an old chair, Ms. Finley searches for explanations. ''I was never
considered talented by many conservative journalists. Although I've been
schooled and educated, I was dismissed as a hysterical female by most of the
press. Which proves my point about what I'm trying to fight: the female is only
looked at as a sexual object and then she becomes the harlot, the whore, the
evil witch. And I was given that position with my work. And that's the reason
why I have to continue doing the type of work I do.''

Paradoxically, she has also been attacked by some women critics who don't
support her brand of feminism, but most of her attackers have been conservative
males. She says that many of her critics on the right, politicians and
journalists, don't understand the use of symbols. Her thesis is that the
patriarchal system is disintegrating. ''And that's the reason why these people
are very fearful of us. There wasn't fear 50 years ago when women were still
second-class citizens and most homosexuals were just hiding and blacks could not
even vote. Well, now their wall has crumbled and other voices are speaking up
besides the white, male, straight point of view. But it's a little bit late now
to try to stop it. It's already happened. Society is changing and that frightens
people.''

Among followers of the performance-art scene, the criticism most often heard is
that Karen Finley's ''text'' is more predictable, less original than the images
she creates, not as iconoclastic as the emotional states into which she leads
her audiences. In fact, much of her text is plain old 60's progressive rhetoric.

Born in 1956, she grew up in Evanston, Ill., the eldest of six children. Her
mother, a civil rights and environmental activist, ran a clothing business out
of their home. Her father, who sold cleaning appliances, was also a jazz
drummer. It was in watching him that Karen Finley first observed the
concentration of an artist. ''He used to play for a long time and kind of go
into a trance,'' she says. ''And I'd go into a trance listening to him.'' She
went to a Roman Catholic school for a few years, where she says she had an
unusually happy early school experience. ''But it was a very progressive
Catholic school,'' she points out, ''in the days when liberation theology was
becoming big.'' Her declamatory style on stage has often been referred to in the
press as incantatory, and may contain some of the cadences of Catholic liturgy,
but on reflection she thinks she may have been more influenced by the political
speeches she heard in her childhood, especially those on television. ''Dr.
Martin Luther King's Lincoln Memorial speech is the greatest work of art ever,''
she says. ''Just thinking about its emotion really gets me emotionally high. The
speech of John F. Kennedy's, 'do for your country,' that was a lot of my
inspiration.'' She remembers hearing certain phrases, certain segments of
speeches over and over again, as well as news program quotes from, for instance,
defendants and lawyers at the Chicago Seven trial. ''I remember statements,
things people said that really moved me, made me think differently.''

These first sound bites, delivered with the fervor of an earlier time, about the
Vietnam War, the civil rights movement, the war on poverty and the emotional
reality of the disadvantaged and the oppressed reverberated with uncanny power
for her. There, too, Karen Finley must have learned how to combine truth with
parody, the pedestrian with the gruesome, and most dramatically how to evoke
real-life violence with eerie vividness. In her current work, her presentations
of the emotional state of both the perpetrators and victims of incest can seem
unbearable to watch. Was she ever abused or raped as a child?  ''No, I wasn't,''
says Ms. Finley. Did she have friends who were? ''When I perform,'' she says,
''I connect with people in the audience who have had it happen to them.'' Was it
as a child that she first imagined what that would feel like? ''I think,'' says
Karen Finley, ''that a female knows it instinctively in some ways. Whenever I
walked down the alley, I was always looking behind me. I never feel that, as a
woman, I ever walk by myself. I'm always in constant fear.''

While a good deal of her work deals with the dysfunctional family, she explains
that this is only a layer, not the whole truth about her own family. She speaks
fondly of her siblings and grandparents. She is still close to her mother, who
comes to her performances and supports her work. ''She encourages me, tells me I
could go even further,'' says Ms. Finley. She seems to feel that her lack of
inhibition in her work is not the explosion of repressed childhood misery but
the reward for having been encouraged to express herself as a child. ''In my
family, we always talked everything out, endlessly.''

When she was 21 years old and on spring break from the San Francisco Art
Institute, her father went into their garage and shot himself. He left a vague,
unhappy note.

Ms. Finley says at the time she remembered a dream she had had years earlier
about her father's death. ''And the thing that was very strange in my dream,
this is very . . . in my dream I remember this Spic 'N Span and in my black
humor moment I said to them, 'Who's going to clean it up?' Because the image of
my father's brain being out there in the cold of the night really disturbed me.
And I said, who's going to get out the Spic 'N Span? I remember I just couldn't
go into the garage to see him. My youngest brothers found him.''

He had used a small gun no one had known about. Like other members of her
family, Ms. Finley was profoundly shocked. Later she searched her memory for
clues she had missed. ''Like one night my father kept saying, 'I have a
deadline, I have a deadline.' And what I said to him was, 'Well, why not think
of a lifeline?' So you can see how differently a healthy person thinks than an
unhealthy one.''

It is her father's suicide that is the wellspring of the pain she expresses on
stage. ''Yes, that's what everything comes from,'' she says. ''I have felt rage
I'm not going to lose. Because I lost everything. And, you know, you see in
those moments.''

It was only after his death that she understood how depressed her father must
have been and it was perhaps the last time she would allow herself to be so out
of sync with someone suffering. ''I couldn't paint after that because I couldn't
be alone by myself. I had to cut that feeling out and I think that was one
reason why I started performing. In time I could make images of him.'' She
points to a drawing on her drafting table. ''I'm working on these little
things,'' she says, leaning over the drawing. ''I do think it's sort of sad.''
The legend reads: ''I shot myself because I loved you. If I loved myself I'd be
shooting you.''

Though she had dabbled a bit as an adolescent, it is from her 21st year that
Karen Finley dates her development as a performance artist. ''My first
performance, the assignment was to use food. I put melons in my brassiere
because I remembered this time when I used to be heavier, I used to have 38-D
breasts, and I remembered once jogging and a group of men walked by me saying,
'Ooh, look at those melons.' And I never jogged after that. So I used that and I
ate the melon and people laughed.''

She was briefly married to her graduate adviser at the San Francisco Art
Institute, Brian Routh, one of the Kipper Kids performance artists. By then, the
scene was flourishing in San Francisco and elsewhere, along with other stylistic
hybrid descendants of 60's forms. This was an environment she felt comfortable
in. ''I had a strong sense that there was a whole movement, the punk music
scene, body art, so I've never lacked for peers. There were many artists doing
this work. And one of the things I wanted to do was to bring performance from
the avant-garde into more of the mainstream without selling art out and without
selling art.''

In a way, she has accomplished precisely that. On stage at Lincoln Center, she
will be a living referent of the unspeakable. Not just a tiny avant-garde
audience but even mainstream Americans will be interested to hear what symbols
Karen Finley has found to represent the unspeakable. Because of Ms. Finley, a
surprising number of people now associate chocolate with dirt, and sprouts with
sperm: falsely whimsical, these symbols now represent not only Ms. Finley's
beliefs about the degradation of women but also the battle for free creative
expression.

Because she doesn't rehearse and no two performances are ever the same, it's
difficult to predict precisely what she'll say or do at Lincoln Center tonight,
but if this presentation resembles other performances of ''We Keep Our Victims
Ready,'' she'll come out on stage and talk to the audience in a talk-show-like
monologue while she makes jokes about setting up her props. Then she'll pour
some gelatin into her brassiere, which gives her the crude silhouette and gross
gait of the first character she will assume, and speak the first taunting line
of her text: ''I woke up smelling the flowered flanneled sheets of my dog's
urine,'' and then, within moments, go into the state she describes as a kind of
trance. She uses a written script ''to avoid going into pure emotion,'' but to
someone who has met Karen Finley, what she does on stage is the closest one can
imagine to hearing someone speak in tongues.

Why does she use dirty words and frightening, ugly pictures? ''I can't paint
fields and flowers. My landscape is Grand Central Station and children dying of
AIDS in the hospital.'' The performances are very painful for her. ''It's like
going to a funeral.''

The only certainty about the performance is that it will be uncomfortable for
her audience. Well-dressed men and women will hear her scream ''I am more than a
hole'' and many will feel a complicated little shiver of voyeurism, distaste,
awe and, worst of all, recognition. There will be bursts of nervous laughter at
signature Finley references, including, but not limited to, remarks about bodily
functions, excrement, abortion, masturbation, mental illness and death.

Ms. Finley's installation of drawings and constructions at the Franklin Furnace
in lower Manhattan has been extended until Aug. 1 (in a largely positive review
in The New York Times, Michael Brenson said that though the show's ''success is
limited . . . it is clearly the work of a serious and highly moral artist''),
and a book of her writings will be published by the City Lights Press in
October. Her performance on Wednesday at Lincoln Center sold out, so tonight's
appearance was added. It might seem that the negative publicity has not dampened
her career.

But on the day it was announced that Ms. Finley had been denied a grant, she had
not worked. There were too many phone calls; there was too much to do and too
much anxiety of what this would mean for her and her work. She said she was
feeling exposed and vulnerable and she worried about how much she would be
ridiculed. But then she went back into one of her more defiant modes and spoke,
as she saw it, for all artists: ''They can't really think that we're going to be
going down in silence. We are going to definitely be bringing our art to the
street. We'll be standing ready as artist warriors to bring the message of
social change.''

'THE BLACK SHEEP'

Here is an excerpt from a poem from ''We Keep Our Victims Ready'' by Karen
Finley (in photograph above). The one-woman show will be performed tonight and
Wednesday as part of the Serious Fun festival at Lincoln Center.

After a funeral someone said to me -
you know I only see you at funerals.
It's been 3 since June -
been 5 since June for me -
He said I've made a vow -
I only go to death parties if I knew someone before they were sick -
Why?
Cause - cause - cause I feel I feel here so sad cause I never knew their life
and now I only know their death
And because I am a member of the
Black Sheep family - We are sheep
with no shepherd -
We are sheep with no straight & narrow
We are sheep with no meadow
We are sheep who take the dangerous pathway thru the mountain range
to get to the other side of our soul.
We are the black sheep of the family
called Black Sheep folk.
We always speak our mind
  appreciate differences in culture
  believe in sexual preference
  believe in no racism
   no sexism
   no religionism -
and we'll fight for what we believe
but usually we're pagans.
There's always one in every family
Even when we're surrounded by bodies
we're always alone -
You're born alone and you die alone
written by a black sheep.
You can't take it with you -
written by a former black sheep.
Black Sheep folk look different from their family
It's the way they look at the world
We're a quirk of nature -
We're a quirk of fate -
Usually our family, our city, our country never understands us -
We knew this from when we were very young that we weren't meant to be
understood.
That's right. That's our job.
Usually we're not appreciated until the next generation.
That's our life. That's our story.
Usually we're outcasts, outsiders in our own family.
Don't worry - get used to it.

Copyright c 1988 Karen Finley

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Karen Finley, in front of an exhibition of her work at the
Franklin Furnace in lower Manhattan-Recurrent themes are rape and incest (Jim
Wilson/The New York Times) (pg. 5); a dancer (Dona Ann McAdams) (pg. 7)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              81 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 22, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

FILM;
After 'True Love' There Comes the 'Dog Fight'

BYLINE: By JULIE LEW; Julie Lew, a journalist based in the San Francisco Bay
area, has written on culture for McCall's and other publications.

SECTION: Section 2; Page 20, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1239 words

DATELINE: SAN FRANCISCO


There's probably no intersection in California that better sums up the crazy
human mosaic of life than the one where Columbus Avenue meets Broadway.

Here, high culture coexists with dives and topless joints; cappuccino-sipping
yuppies meet with lowlifes; Italian North Beach meets with Chinatown meets with
a rainbow of other races. Less obviously, the bustling crossroad is also a
surviving symbol of the post-World War II political and social class struggles
that began with the Beat Generation here in the mid-1950's.

And, in the same exacting way in which she chose the small but telling details
that informed her prize-winning first film, ''True Love,'' set in an
Italian-American section of the Bronx, the director Nancy Savoca has picked this
intersection for a key scene in her current project, ''Dog Fight.''

Produced by her husband, Richard Guay, and Peter Newman, and written by Bob
Comfort, ''Dog Fight'' unfolds in the form of a flashback by an ex-Marine named
Birdlace, played by River Phoenix, who played the son of 60's radicals in
''Running on Empty.''

On a bus trip into San Francisco, Birdlace recalls the events of a night four
years before, in 1963, when he and three Marine buddies decide to spend their
last evening stateside picking up young women. But not just any young women. The
four place bets on who can pick up the ugliest one. The one with the most homely
date wins the ''Dog Fight.''

In his quest, Birdlace meets Rose, played by Lili Taylor, the feisty, emotional
waitress who could not commit to her boyfriend in ''Mystic Pizza.'' In ''Dog
Fight,'' she plays a shy waitress who is an aspiring folk singer, passionate
about her music. When Rose finds out about the bet, she leaves in anger and
humiliation. A guilt-ridden Birdlace goes after Rose to apologize and ask for a
real date. They spend the rest of the night together and discover emotional
truths about themselves.

The key scene was filmed on a recent evening with Mr. Phoenix, hardly
recognizable with a crewcut, and Ms. Taylor walking out of Kerouac Alley, past
Vesuvio Cafe, one of two surviving Beat hangouts in this former beatnik mecca.
The two are engaging in what boils down to age-old misunderstanding between men
and women.

''It's a big scene,'' said Ms. Savoca. ''You see how different they really are -
he's out on the right and she's out on the left - and you ask, 'What is this
couple doing here?' And that's what I think this movie is really about. It's
about men and women and the eternal question of how men and women don't get
along as wonderfully as we want to, and how is it that we can get on each
other's nerves and still love each other?''

Mr. Phoenix describes the relationship as simply one that ''shouldn't be, but
because of circumstance, they just somehow get together for the night. It
happens every day to different people.''

The relationship echoes ''True Love,'' a slice-of-life comedy about the joys and
conflicts a young couple face on their way to getting married. The movie won the
grand prize in the 1989 United States Film Festival.

''Dog Fight'' has so many similarities to ''True Love'' that her crew has been
teasing her about it, said Ms. Savoca, who co-wrote ''True Love'' with her
husband. ''It gets to the point,'' she said, ''where it sometimes gets
ridiculous, with some of the same things that have come up in this movie, even
though it's produced and written by somebody else.''

But ''Dog Fight'' also offers several other themes that intrigue Ms. Savoca.

''There's a part of this movie that deals with Vietnam, and I'm 30, so Vietnam
to me was a very distant issue,'' Ms. Savoca said. ''I had a lot of questions to
ask about that, like what it was that propels people to get involved in a
military life.''

In doing research, Ms. Savoca found a partial answer. ''I started to understand
the need to belong so much that you have to make an enemy in order for you to
feel in with your pals,'' she said. ''I mean, you've got to invent something.
You've got to have an enemy to fight a war. You have to dehumanize people. The
women were dehumanized in the dog fight so the men can go on and do the job they
had to do.''

Appropriately, Birdlace and Rose have their fight in front of City Lights Books,
San Francisco's most famous literary landmark and a beatnik haunt that was named
after Charlie Chaplin's movie.

The human tendency to invent myths to temper cold reality was a theme he wanted
to explore, said Mr. Comfort, a 49-year-old ex-Marine and former television
producer who based his screenplay on autobiographical experience.

''Throughout the West Coast, military people weren't much liked,'' Mr. Comfort
said, in a telephone interview from his home in Oregon. ''And the dog fight was
a good way to express your hostility for the civilized world itself, to get back
at them. In a way, it was a manifestation that people outside the corps didn't
really understand.''

In the original version of the script, Rose was supposed to be much fatter than
she appears as portrayed by Ms. Taylor, who was padded to look about 20 pounds
heavier.

''The fatter the girl would have been, the better the metaphor would have
worked,'' Mr. Comfort said. But trying to find a fat, unattractive actress was
one of the obstacles that kept the movie from being made.

''Hollywood's idea of an ugly girl is putting glasses on Daryl Hannah,'' Mr.
Comfort said.

Mr. Newman first came across the script in 1986. ''I could see it as a movie
immediately'', he said. Over the years, about 500 actresses tried out for the
part, said Mr. Newman, who most recently produced ''Lord of the Flies'' and
''Swimming to Cambodia.''

''We saw many girls who, in real life, were Rose, but yet they didn't have the
polish or the emotional weight to carry it,'' he said. ''There were at least six
serious contenders who literally went to pieces because they had some emotional
problem playing the part.''

''Eventually,'' said Mr. Newman, ''we had to go with the best available actress
and make it work physically in some way.''

Ms. Taylor, known for the guitar-strumming lovelorn teen-ager she played in
''Say Anything,'' as well as for her role in ''Mystic Pizza,'' said she
identified with Rose.

''In high school, I didn't fit into the respected mode of whatever that was that
was that attracted the men in high school,'' said the 23-year-old actress. ''I
dealt with it, but it hurt.

Mr. Phoenix, 19, not only had to acquaint himself with the social history of the
60's but also had to play a character that was his complete opposite.

As a result of his upbringing, Mr. Phoenix is an ardent environmentalist who
says he never played with a gun when he was growing up. But for the role, he
spent four weeks in simulated boot camp on Vachon Island, near Seattle, the city
in which most of the movie was filmed.

''If there's anything about River that he's not, it's military,'' Mr. Newman
said. ''I think this was a real dicey thing for River to do. This is his first
grown-up role. Up to now, he's been thought of as a boy star from 'Indiana
Jones' or 'Stand by Me,' and he's had to find the proper transformation into an
adult role.'' But Birdlace has been a smooth transition for Mr. Phoenix. ''I
like the character because he's a simpleton, an average, boring guy with a
boring life, like so many who joined the Marines,'' Mr. Phoenix said. ''I think
many people will be able to relate to him.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: River Phoenix as Birdlace the marine and Lili Taylor as Rose,
the aspiring folk singer in ''Dog Fight,'' set in 1963 (New Line Cinema)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              82 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 22, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THE WORLD;
Us vs. Them Is No Longer Enough

BYLINE: By THOMAS L. FRIEDMAN

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1002 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


THE Bush Administration's policy shift on Cambodia last week is the latest
evidence of how the thaw in American-Soviet relations is transforming both
superpowers' approach to regional conflicts.

That the United States could abruptly drop its diplomatic support of the rebel
coalition that includes the Khmer Rouge, decide to talk directly to Vietnam
about a settlement in Cambodia, and announce this in the presence of a top
Soviet official, says a lot about how much has come into question in the new
era.

Both sides can now be expected to redefine their real interests in the remote
corners of the world, where for 40 years they have often felt compelled to get
involved simply because there was an opportunity to deprive the other side of an
advantage.

''When you had a Stalinist in power in Moscow,'' one State Department policy
maker remarked, ''everything in the world was dichotomized. Anyone who was with
them was against us. Now when you have an ambiguous figure in Moscow, those who
are with them may not be against us. They may be with us. And those who were
with us, we may not want with us any more. For the first time in years you
really have to think about what your interests are.''

Outside Latin America and the Pacific rim of Asia, American involvement in
regional conflicts really began only after World War II, with the rise of the
Soviet challenge and the decline of the other Western powers as influences
outside Europe. The American policy was shaped by three factors: geopolitical
interests - or the desire of the United States to have influence in certain
regions for self-protection - economic interests and humanitarian interests.

Two Questions

For 45 years, in most of the world, the United States defined its geopolitical
interests fairly simply as stemming the spread of Soviet-inspired Communism.
This tended to override both economic and humanitarian interests. That meant
there were basically only two questions policy makers asked when considering
most regional conflicts: Would intervention help contain Communism? And how
could it be justified if it contradicted human rights concerns?

Today, as the struggle against the Soviet Union winds down, Soviet-American
competition no longer provides a built-in compass for choosing sides in regional
conflicts. It was somehow fitting that when Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d
announced Washington's shift in its Cambodia policy he did it on the steps of
the American Ambassador's residence in Paris with the Soviet Foreign Minister,
Eduard A. Shevardnadze, at his elbow.

For years, American policy in Cambodia was based on the notion that an enemy's
enemy is a friend. Moscow and Vietnam were America's enemies; their enemy in
Cambodia was the rebel coalition of two non-Communist groups and the Communist
Khmer Rouge. American Administrations were prepared to back the rebels on the
ground that Vietnam had installed the Hun Sen Government by force, with funding
from Moscow.

In deciding to talk with Vietnam and withdraw diplomatic support for the
Chinese-backed rebel coalition, the Bush Administration seemed to be saying
this: With the Soviets receding on the world stage, and with Vietnam having
withdrawn its army from Cambodia, the United States has no geopolitical stake
there, nor does it have an economic interest. So the Administration has to take
more seriously warnings from Congress that continued support for the coalition
could abet a return to power by the Khmer Rouge, who are held responsible for
the deaths of more than a million Cambodians in the 1970's.

By agreeing to negotiate with Hanoi, provide humanitarian aid to Cambodia under
Hun Sen and put diplomatic pressure on the Chinese-backed coalition, the
Administration is hoping, at best, to help persuade all the parties to take part
in a United Nations-sponsored cease-fire and election. At worst, it can disclaim
any responsibility if the Khmer Rouge win.

Said Robert W. Tucker, an expert on American diplomacy at the Johns Hopkins
School of Advanced International Studies: ''Our policy in Cambodia was a losing
proposition. The national security concern about the Soviet involvement there
has faded, and the enmity with the Vietnamese has faded. Absent these, human
rights is the big concern of Congress.''

A similar logic applies in Afghanistan. Without the threat that Soviet troops
could jump off from there to the Persian Gulf oilfields, the United States has
virtually no economic or geopolitical interests in Afghanistan. Washington and
Moscow are narrowing their differences on a transition process that would
encourage Moscow's proxy President, Najibullah, and America's proxies, the
Moslem rebels, to have an internationally supervised election. If they do not,
it may only be a matter of time before Washington asks what interest it has in
financing a military victory in Afghanistan of Moslem fundamentalist tribesmen
who have more in common with Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini than with Thomas
Jefferson.

In some ways, elections have become the ideal vehicle allowing the superpowers
to disengage from such conflicts. Each can say, ''We brought our proxies to the
elections and after that the people decided.'' At the same time, elections can
also promote reconciliations, as in Nicaragua or Namibia. ''If you are party to
an election, you are party to a political process,'' an American official said.
''Even if you lose, you may not have power but you have a certain right to be
involved.''

Representative Lee H. Hamilton, the Indiana Democrat who is chairman of the
House Foreign Affairs subcommittee on the Middle East, argues that the waning of
superpower conflict is encouraging negotiations in regional conflicts all over
the world.

''Regional players are getting nervous, in many cases, that they will not be
getting the backing they once did from their superpower,'' Mr. Hamilton said.
''This makes them more willing to negotiate. They worry about being isolated and
they are afraid of being forgotten.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              83 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 22, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

GIAP REMEMBERS

SECTION: Section 6; Page 8, Column 3; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 190 words


Gen. Vo Nguyen Giap, the Vietnamese Communist commander, is certainly a man of
deep commitment, and Stanley Karnow's fascination with his erudition and style
is understandable (''Giap Remembers,'' June 24). But before we grant Giap an
eminent place in the ''pantheon of military leaders,'' we ought to remember one
thing. Progressive military thinkers since Karl von Clausewitz (the Prussian
general and military strategist) have placed one criterion for brilliance above
all others: the ability to bend an enemy to one's political will while incurring
the least possible cost to one's own cause and causing the least possible
devastation in contested areas.

Giap's success, on the other hand, was rooted in attrition - in the ability of
the North Vietnamese people to absorb punishment. It was not strategic defeat
but self-disgust that drove the United States from Vietnam. The conflict was
analogous to an encounter between two artless boxers, one of whom finally leaves
the ring because he is stymied by his opponent's willingness to be pummeled and
sickened by his own capacity to do the pummeling. CALEB CARR
  New York, N.Y.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              84 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 22, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

When Beauty Shows No Mercy

BYLINE: By WILLIAM LOGAN; William Logan won last year's Peter I. B. Lavan
Younger Poets Award from the Academy of American Poets. His most recent
collection of poems is ''Sullen Weedy Lakes.''

SECTION: Section 7; Page 26, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1510 words



THE TRANSPARENT MAN
By Anthony Hecht.
75 pp. New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $18.95.

COLLECTED EARLIER POEMS
By Anthony Hecht.
Illustrated. 272 pp. New York:
Alfred A. Knopf. $22.95.

Anthony Hecht is a poet of classical unreason and classical violence. The
ancient world survives, not in the bleached bare ribs of the Parthenon or the
still polluted air of Athens, but in the pagan polychrome the temple was dressed
in, the jellied gore of Oedipus' eyes, the hot deaths at Thermopylae, betrayals
vanished from all but language. In the late witness of our century, no poet has
been more austere in his imaginative engagements than Mr. Hecht, or purer in his
sense of pacing and weight; his poetry at times approaches the condition of
sculpture. Even in nature, to which other poets would withdraw for solace, Mr.
Hecht can find only the solace of decay, the still life anything but still:

The lichens, like a gorgeous, soft disease
In rust and gold rosette
Emboss the bouldered wall, and creepers seize
      In their cup-footed fret,

Ravelled and bare, such purchase as affords.
      The sap-tide slides to ebb,
And leafstems, like the drumsticks of small birds,
      Lie snagged in a spiderweb.

Some poets are saved by grace, others by will. Mr. Hecht began as a poet of
convenience and charm, of difficult form and baroque extravagance, of rhetoric
as rheumatic and gouty as the Romans he described bathing in the hot springs at
Ischia. His first poems, a selection of which are gathered in ''Collected
Earlier Poems,'' smell of powder and the parlor, and seem to have come out of
Richard Wilbur's overcoat (as Randall Jarrell once said) and Wallace Stevens'
vest pocket. That is their surface, but underneath is a spiritual disease. The
Stevens in him titles a poem ''Le Masseur de Ma Soeur,'' and begins it, ''My
demoiselle.'' But there is no Stevens in ''Upstanding nipples under a sheer
blouse,'' or ''The fishy slime'' of Argus' eyes or ''The Man-in-the-Moon's
microcephalic grin.''

Those ruptures in a manner so stiff and proper - like that of a man sentenced to
life in a morning suit - could not predict the deepening, the darkening of a
willed burden, in the 13 years that separated his first book, ''A Summoning of
Stones'' (1954), from his second, ''The Hard Hours'' (1967), which won the
Pulitzer Prize. A style that had been overelaborate, fussy though occasionally
graceful, became elegantly severe, charged with moral authority and an almost
helpless despondency, losing all the sleights of expression that divide

      letting fall
Lamplight upon her dress till every small
Motion made visible seemed no mere endeavor
Of body to articulate its offer from:

It was the sentence. He was to be flayed alive,
As slowly as possible, to drag out the pain.
And we were made to watch. The king's personal
                doctor,
The one who had tended his back,
Came forward with a tray of surgical knives.
They began at the feet.

It was as if Osric had taken off his hat and turned into Hamlet.

Scarred by a history whose lessons will be ignored, and whose lessons will
murder us, Mr. Hecht has become our only poet who is able to horrify. He has
afflicted the modern with its own images: the muscles ''Clean as a Calder,'' the
service station where ''Andy Warhol's primary colors shine.'' In ''The Cost'' a
couple on a Vespa wheel carelessly around Trajan's column in Rome, but stanza by
stanza their innocence is shadowed by the spiraling figures on the column, the
thousands of raw recruits for the Emperor's Dacian Wars, wars long cast into
irrelevance. The ending delicately modulates its anger and ambivalence:

And why should they take thought
  Of all that ancient pain,
The Danube winters, the nameless young who
                fought,
  The blood's uncertain lease?
Or remember that that fifteen-year campaign
  Won seven years of peace?

That poem is haunted by Vietnam; but Mr. Hecht, who was present at the
liberation of a concentration camp at the end of World War II, has been haunted
by the longer memory of the Holocaust. The beauty of his language - and no poet
can be more beautiful when he wishes to be - is stilled by the horror of
knowledge, and that infection redeems many poems that would have been perfumed
into prettiness. He uses the beautiful in a cool, calculating way, as lure and
lull. A poem called, neutrally, ''Persistences,'' may begin, ''The leafless
trees are feathery, / A foxed, Victorian lace,'' but it ends with ''The burning,
voiceless Jews.''

In ''The Hard Hours'' and in the books that have followed, ''Millions of Strange
Shadows'' (1977), ''The Venetian Vespers'' (1979) and now, after another long
lapse, ''The Transparent Man,'' Mr. Hecht's value as a poet of accusation has
been complicated by poems, rarely straightforward or plainspoken, of personal
affliction. The grimness at the heart of grandeur prevents his work from
settling into the isolations of technique, or into what he once called in an
interview ''the matured and mellowed residue of what in childhood had been a
poisonous brew of fear, hatred, self-loathing, impotence, and deep
discouragement.'' No poem will fill such a horror vacui. Drawn toward their
merciless epiphanies, his strongest poems have refused the solicitudes of
postwar poetry.

Every poetic advantage has its corresponding limitation. Mr. Hecht has achieved
most at the length and intensity of the lyric, in poems that can be brought to
perfection. He is weaker at narrative, and his long dramatic monologues lack the
stress of structure; they are dignified, gorgeous in patches, but rambling and
never fully rendered. And when he writes in the voice of a chambermaid at an
Alpine resort; or about a pillowy alcoholic, Shirley Carson, and her husband,
Kit; or, in the title poem of his new book, as a woman dying of leukemia, he
cannot for all his sympathies escape an undertone of condescension. ''The
Transparent Man'' includes a masque for four voices, the lovers from ''A
Midsummer Night's Dream'' cast as the four instruments of a Haydn string
quartet. The resulting play of voice is lovely, but as a poem the masque is not
successful except as an overdetermined, high-arty, sweetly nutty idea. He is
addicted to wretched puns - ''Mens sana in men's sauna'' (echt Hecht, one might
say) was about as bad as those in previous volumes, but the new book includes
''Whirled without end,'' ''somewhat the worse for where'' and, amazingly,
''Between post oak and propter oak.''

''The Transparent Man'' is a strange, gorgeously moody, occasionally imperfect
(even Mr. Hecht can be left-handed) collection lit by Vermeer or La Tour. It
returns to the concerns that have troubled this troubled poet - death in Venice,
the woe that is in marriage, elegies at the heart of happiness and the
Holocaust. The subjects are not unusual - who isn't afraid of a poet with
unusual subjects? - but the conviction and darkening conscience contribute to
the pressure that blooms into style.

''The Book of Yolek'' is the most terrifying sestina I know; it is perhaps the
most unbearable in the language. Yet it is composed of events as plain as a
pocket mirror: a meal of brook trout, a lost day of childhood, an incident in
the war. Its effect depends on the quiet accretions of style, and a few lines
would not do it justice. Nor can I quote - I would like to quote - a complex
little nature poem like ''Curriculum Vitae,'' whose five stanzas mesh like
silver cogs. Each reading proves it more despairing. A few lines cannot suggest
the graveness, chased with charm, that animates his elegy for David Kalstone, an
elegy that begins, ''Lime-and-mint mayonnaise and salsa verde.'' Instead, I will
quote a meal from ''See Naples and Die,'' a lunch that might have been served at
Tiffany's:

    Slowly our eyes
Make out his pyramids of delicacies -
The Celtic coils and curves of primrose shrimp,
A speckled gleam of opalescent squid,
The mussel's pearl-blue niches, as unearthly
As Brazilian butterflies, and the grey turbot,
Like a Picasso lady with both eyes
On one side of her face.

When someone offers you lines like that, he must be Mephistopheles and you must
be Faust. You know you shouldn't succumb to such language, but you succumb.

''The Transparent Man'' has a respect for the reader's perception that has
almost been lost from contemporary poetry, with all its prosy ease and selfish
concern. From an early age Mr. Hecht has spoken like a biblical patriarch; when
he does speak, you feel you're about to be implicated in the evil that is the
world. That may seem a negative virtue, but his dry and melancholy authority has
been a brilliant counterirritant to the wastage of our language. The best poems
in ''The Transparent Man'' equal the difficult achievement of ''Collected
Earlier Poems'' in elegance, in cold pity, in the harsh, unamenable, cruel
condition of life.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Anthony Hecht (Michael J. Germana/Alfred A. Knopf) (pg. 27)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              85 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 22, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

SPIES & THRILLERS

BYLINE: By Newgate Callendar

SECTION: Section 7; Page 22, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 963 words


Double revenge is the motif of BLOOD TIDE by Robert F. Jones (Atlantic Monthly,
$19.95). The book is about a father and his daughter. He, a former Navy man as
strong and as patriotic as they come, was captured during the Vietnam War. He
was put through excruciating torture and held up through it all. But on his
return after the war he was accused of collaborating with the enemy. Somebody
lied about him. He retired and began drinking himself to death.

His daughter, who had left home years before, took to the sea and ran a charter
boat in exotic parts of the Pacific Ocean. She hired a young man as her deck
mate, and he ended up stealing her boat. She comes home and starts trying to
take care of her father. Word then gets to her that her boat has been sighted
around some islands in the Philippines. She scrapes some money together, fixes
up an old boat and sets out with her father to reclaim her property.

In the process, her father learns the whereabouts of the traitor who fingered
him. The traitor is also operating out of the Philippines. Father and daughter
want revenge. All kinds of complications ensue, including a finale that amounts
to a miniature naval action. The ins and outs of the plot are too complex to
describe. Suffice it to say that there is never a dull moment in ''Blood Tide,''
a book that (to paraphrase Dickens's Sam Weller) has more excitement than nine
monkeys with their tails tied together.

Mr. Jones is a superior writer who can turn a telling phrase and who - when he
writes about the sea - has a pronounced streak of poetry. His characters, too,
are beautifully developed. One of the most striking is a chilling, enigmatic
priest who works on the principle that the end justifies the means. He's scary.
There is only one tiny stylistic reservation to be mentioned. When Mr. Jones
describes killers, he gives them ''flat eyes.'' That's a private-eye cliche used
in lazy or bad writing, and Mr. Jones's is anything but that.

Just as full of action, though otherwise completely different, is A COLD KILLING
by Deforest Day (Carroll & Graf, $17.95). This is a heady, rather unusual novel
about an insurance scam, a businessman-killer, man-eating hogs, vicious
rednecks, game poaching, the Pennsylvania Game Commission and a hero who is
short, smart, resourceful and an epicure with an all-encompassing knowledge of
wines and food. The book ends with a great shoot-out that should satisfy the
most discriminating connoisseur of such matters.

''A Cold Killing'' is expertly written. Mr. Day's prose flows along
unfalteringly, with no wasted motion and with a keen feeling for structure. From
the opening pages there is a sense of purpose and development. Mr. Day also
seems to know a good deal about Appalachia, with its tough, beer-swilling
characters who take the law into their own hands.

*  *  *

There are three Big Books this week: THE DOWNING OF FLIGHT SIX HEAVY by Perry
Lafferty (Donald I. Fine, $18.95), WARRIORS by Barrett Tillman (Bantam, paper,
$8.95) and COUNTDOWN by David Hagberg (St. Martin's, $18.95). None of them
breaks any conventions. All have a prologue, as Big Books invariably do. All are
very well versed in military or aviation procedures. All are written with a kind
of dogged prose lacking in style or imagination. All use short takes. That is,
the action within a chapter hops from one location or country to another. This
probably is supposed to lend a breathless quality to the writing.

The prologue of ''The Downing of Flight Six Heavy'' tells the reader about a
United States military invention that will immobilize enemy missile guidance
systems. Naturally, this is top-secret. The C.I.A. wants to test it in a foreign
country but does not want it to fall into Russian hands. So a scheme is worked
out in which the device will be placed on board a commercial aircraft, and the
skipper will ''hijack'' his plane for delivery to a special location. It's a
cockamamie idea, and of course all kinds of things go wrong. At the end there is
a feeble gimmick that is just as unbelievable as the rest of the plot. The only
thing going for ''Six Heavy'' is the built-in excitement of a hijacking that
goes wrong.

In ''Warriors'' we have a retired United States Navy pilot approached by Saudi
Arabia. He is asked to build up a great air force for the country, price no
object. So he goes to work, finding experienced combat fliers from around the
world to serve as instructors, recruiting the cream of young Saudis for
training, trying out pet combat ideas of his own. Everything points to an Arab
invasion of Israel. This time the Arabs will control the air. Goodbye, Israel.

As a plot idea, it's not bad. In execution, it is didactic, dull, too full of
technical details that take over the story. The only reason one keeps reading is
to find out what will happen when war breaks out. Will the Israelis and their
exquisitely trained air force be able to command the situation? Finally we get
action, and the aerial confrontations feel like the real thing.

As for ''Countdown,'' it brings back the ''evil empire'' in a plot that seems
remarkably silly today, now that the Soviet Union is disintegrating. Anyway, in
this book the United States and Russia play their little, predictable chess
game. There is a K.G.B. assassin, the top Soviet man in his field, and an
American called back into service to stop him. The writing in ''Countdown'' is
simply wretched. People smile ''tight'' smiles. They are all snappers. '' 'This
is as far as it goes,' the doctor snapped.'' We have a snapping heroine and a
snapping Russian. Characters hiss at one another, and almost always the hisses
are unhissable. '' 'Do it,' Kurshin hissed.'' '' 'No,' Baranov hissed.'' ''
'Why?' Baranov hissed.'' Have fun.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              86 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 22, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

BEST SELLERS: July 22, 1990

SECTION: Section 7; Page 30, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1474 words



   Weeks This Last On Week Week List Fiction    1 1 6 THE BURDEN OF PROOF, by
Scott Turow.  (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $22.95.) An attorney tries to unravel
the mystery of his wife's death while defending his wheeler-dealer
brother-in-law.     2 2 5 MESSAGE FROM NAM, by Danielle Steel.  (Delacorte,
$21.95.) A woman journalist's coming of age in the years between the
assassination of John F. Kennedy and the fall of Saigon.     3 3 3 COYOTE WAITS,
by Tony Hillerman.  (HarperCollins, $19.95.) The murder of a Navajo tribal
policeman turns out to be a surprisingly complex crime involving an ancient
artifact.     4 6 11 THE STAND, by Stephen King. (Doubleday, $24.95.) Doomsday
brings horrors to America; the uncut version of a novel first published in 1978.

   5 5 14 SEPTEMBER, by Rosamunde Pilcher. (Dunne/St.  Martin's, $22.95.) Guests
from many parts of the world at a get-together in a small Scottish town.     6 4
22 OH, THE PLACES YOU'LL GO! by Dr. Seuss.  (Random House, $12.95.) The problems
of finding your way through life; in verse and pictures.     7 8 11 DRAGON, by
Clive Cussler. (Simon & Schuster, $21.95.) In 1993, Dirk Pitt moves fast to save
America from a Japanese extremist.     8 7 11 AN INCONVENIENT WOMAN, by Dominick
Dunne. (Crown, $19.95.) Manners, morals and murder in Los Angeles's high
society.     9 10 19 THE BOURNE ULTIMATUM, by Robert Ludlum.  (Random House,
$21.95.) Jason Bourne plans to infiltrate the ruthless Medusa Brigade.    10 11
2 MOUNTAIN LAUREL, by Jude Deveraux. (Pocket, $18.95.) An Army officer's
assignment, on the eve of the Civil War, to escort a glamorous singer during her
tour of the Colorado gold fields.    11 9 5 SULLIVAN'S STING, by Lawrence
Sanders.  (Putnam, $19.95.) The ordeals of a female cop assigned to track down a
Florida con man.    12 12 10 THE GOLDEN ORANGE, by Joseph Wambaugh.
(Perigord/Morrow, $19.95.) Murder and chicanery amid Orange County's yachts and
mansions.    13 11 THE GOLD COAST, by Nelson DeMille. (Warner, $19.95.) How life
changes for an old WASP family when the head of a crime family becomes its
neighbor on Long Island's North Shore.    14 * 15 3 SECOND CHILD, by John Saul.
(Bantam, $14.95.) A horrible crime committed 100 years ago comes back to haunt a
quiet Maine village.    15 14 14 SKINNY LEGS AND ALL, by Tom Robbins.  (Bantam,
$19.95.) The horror and humor of the upcoming apocalypse.    $ Weeks This Last
On Week Week List Nonfiction    1 1 15 MEN AT WORK, by George F. Will.
(Macmillan, $19.95.) The political pundit and baseball buff describes the craft
of the game as practiced by three players and a manager.     2 2 8 DAVE BARRY
TURNS 40, by Dave Barry. (Crown, $16.95.) Reflections on the crises of middle
age by the syndicated humorist.     3 4 7 FATHER, SON & CO., by Thomas J. Watson
Jr. and Peter Petre. (Bantam, $22.95.) The autobiography of the man who
succeeded his father as head of I.B.M.     4 6 26 MEGATRENDS 2000, by John
Naisbitt and Patricia Aburdene. (Morrow, $21.95.) Prognostications for the next
decade.     5 3 26 BARBARIANS AT THE GATE, by Bryan Burrough and John Helyar.
(HarperCollins, $22.95.) The 1988 battle for control of RJR Nabisco.     6 8 7
DON'T SHOOT, IT'S ONLY ME, by Bob Hope with Melville Shavelson. (Putnam,
$19.95.) The comedian reminisces about more than 50 years in show business.
7 7 3 CAPTAIN SIR RICHARD FRANCIS BURTON, by Edward Rice. (Scribners, $35.) The
strange and remarkable career of the 19th-century British explorer.     8 5 44
IT WAS ON FIRE WHEN I LAY DOWN ON IT, by Robert Fulghum. (Villard, $17.95.) A
new collection of inspirational essays.     9 15 2 BEHIND THE MASK, by Dave
Pallone with Alan Steinberg. (Viking, $18.95.) The memoirs of the controversial
former National League umpire.    10 9 37 LIAR'S POKER, by Michael Lewis.
(Norton, $19.95.) Wall Street's tumultuous 1980's, as witnessed by a young bond
trader.    11 11 89 ALL I REALLY NEED TO KNOW I LEARNED IN KINDERGARTEN, by
Robert Fulghum. (Villard, $17.95.) Inspirational essays.    12 10 5 PERIL AND
PROMISE, by John Chancellor.  (HarperCollins, $17.95.) Observations about
contemporary America by a television newscaster.    13 16 MEANS OF ASCENT, by
Robert A. Caro. (Knopf, $24.95.) Lyndon Johnson's seven-year pursuit of a seat
in the Senate, won in 1948 by 87 votes.    14 1 DISTURBING THE PEACE, by Vaclav
Havel.  (Knopf, $19.95.) Reminiscences and reflections of the playwright who
became President of Czechoslovakia in December 1989.    15 13 5 MY LIFE IN THREE
ACTS, by Helen Hayes with Katherine Hatch. (Wolff/Harcourt Brace Jovanovich,
$19.95.) The actress's memoirs.    $ Weeks This Last On Week Week List Advice,
How-to and Miscellaneous    1 2 75 WEALTH WITHOUT RISK, by Charles J. Givens.
(Simon & Schuster, $19.95.) A Florida entrepreneur's financial advice.     2 1
32 THE GREAT WALDO SEARCH, by Martin Handford. (Little, Brown, $10.95.) A book
of illustrations in which the game is to find a ubiquitous chap named Waldo.
   3 4 2 LIFE 101, by John-Roger and Peter McWilliams.  (Prelude Press, $18.95.)
Advice about coping with the human condition.     4 28 WEBSTER'S NEW WORLD
DICTIONARY.  (Simon & Schuster, $17.95.) The Third College Edition of a standard
work, revised in 1988.     5 1 HOMECOMING, by John Bradshaw. (Bantam, $18.95.)
How to find the child you once were that lives within you and use it to deal
with today's problems.

These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,000
bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 28,000 other
retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets. The figures are
statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United
States.

*An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect
the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of
the book above.

AND BEAR IN MIND
(Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)

MARS BECKONS: The Mysteries, the Challenges, the Expectations of Our Next Great
Adventure in Space, by John Noble Wilford. (Knopf, $24.95.) What shall we do
about Mars? A science correspondent of The Times examines our relationship with
Mars so far and weighs the issues and options for the future.

THE CARNAL PRAYER MAT, by Li Yu. (Available Press/ Ballantine, paper, $8.95.)
The first complete English version of a Chinese erotic classic of the 17th
century, fiercely comic and satirical, currently prohibited in the country of
origin.

BOHIN MANOR, by Tadeusz Konwicki. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $19.95.) A
beautiful, grave novel that connects the 19th and 20th centuries, the historic
point of view and the personal voice.

THE WORLD OF NAGARAJ, by R. K. Narayan. (Viking, $18.95.) In his mid-80's and
still at the top of his form, Mr. Narayan returns to his imaginary Mysore with a
comic novel about some universal truths, among them the importance of
personality and family.

A HISTORY OF SOUTH AFRICA, by Leonard Thompson. (Yale University, $29.95.) An
admirably objective one-volume history of that rich but unfortunate land that
offers some grounds to hope that compromise and reconciliation may indeed
prevail.

EVERY SPY A PRINCE: The Complete History of Israel's Intelligence Community, by
Dan Raviv and Yossi Melman. (Houghton Mifflin, $24.95.) A fascinating account of
an intelligence establishment to which nearly supernatural powers are often
attributed, but which makes mistakes like all the others.

REBUILDING THE HOUSE, by Laurie Graham. (Viking, $17.95.) An affecting record of
life reconstructed after the death of the elder partner in a remarkably happy
transgenerational marriage.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: LIST

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              87 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 23, 1990, Monday, Late Edition - Final

The Wait On Death Row;
Legal Delays Thwart Death Penalty

BYLINE: By ANDREW H. MALCOLM, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 3481 words

DATELINE: CONRAD, Mont.


Sixteen years afterward, the year 1974 flickers like a dim dot in a vast night
sky. At this time in 1974, President Richard M. Nixon had yet to resign.
''Jaws'' was a runaway best seller for beach reading. Streaking was a fad. ''The
Sting'' had won the Oscar for Best Picture.

Charles Lindbergh died in 1974, along with Tex Ritter, Dizzy Dean, Walter
Lippmann and Duke Ellington. So did Lana Harding and Steve Orlando.

Miss Harding, a 21-year-old teacher in a one-room schoolhouse north of here, was
found in a field without her clothes and the top of her head.

Mr. Orlando, who was 18, was found lying on his back near a garbage dump outside
Jacksonville, Fla. He had been shot in the left ear, and a note, signed by the
Black Liberation Army, was stuck into his stomach with a knife.

These gruesome killings were unrelated. One was urban, one rural. One was
sexual, the other racial. Two men, one for each murder, were methodically
tracked down by veteran investigators using drops of blood, partial heel- and
fingerprints, a shell casing, a hunch or two, a dog named Chopper and even a
forgotten letter, found in an old cardboard box.

Both of the accused were convicted by juries. And both were sentenced to die,
one in Florida, a state where executions have become fairly frequent, and the
other in Montana, which has not hanged anyone since 1942.

Cases Named for Convicts

But 16 years after the crimes were committed, the two convicted murderers still
sit safely in their cement cells, watching TV, reading, receiving meals through
slots and showering every other day. Their days are like those of the 2,345
other men and women who inhabit death rows in 34 states.

Some 2,000 miles apart, the legal battles over the two murder cases - now named
for the convicts, not the victims - are a tiny fraction of the legal struggles
surrounding the 320,000 homicides in the United States since 1974. But they
reveal the conscientious and cumbersome nature of American justice and the
powerful moral and emotional ambivalence of a population and its political
leaders who cling to execution as the ultimate penalty, political rallying point
and divisive debate topic, but who seem very reluctant to use it.

In recent weeks this system has come under growing attack. Senators,
representatives and the Chief Justice of the United States have offered a number
of proposals to speed the process, which now averages more than eight years,
while those who would abolish the death penalty seek new legal theorems to
undermine it.

Speedier Process Is Urged

The deadly dance of appeals, unique in the Western world, is performed through
volumes of written briefs and rebuttals, frequent postponements and extensions,
dramatic oral arguments and surprisingly swift, secret deliberations at shiny
wooden tables behind closed doors. The ensuing judicial debates pass silently
down hallways in clerks' hands or invisibly through electronic networks in
exchanges that continue for years, unnoticed by the public. This public watches
as another death sentence is handed down somewhere virtually every working day,
while ignoring the quiet reality that one of every three is eventually
overturned.

Drawing from thousands of pages of court documents and police reports and from
scores of interviews with prosecutors, defense lawyers, judges, police officers,
families and prisoners, this is the story of the two killings that occurred 16
years ago and of their ensuing legal lives, which continue day after day with no
sign of ending and which may well last longer than the lives of the murder
victims.

Sex Attack in Montana
Teacher Dies; Stranger Is Held

When the call came at 9:33 Tuesday morning, Jan. 22, 1974, Sheriff Walter
Hammermeister was sipping coffee in his office in Conrad. Danny Pearson, a
farmer who lived across the dirt road from the schoolhouse 13 miles from town,
said the school's five students were milling around without a teacher.

Serious crime was a rarity in Pondera County, a vast, flat chunk of northern
Montana with only 7,000 people. But the sheriff raced to the scene with lights
flashing.

There he found a pile of half-corrected school papers and a woman's shoe in the
yard near a man's boot print.

As the sheriff and five deputies combed the yard, Mr. Pearson told them that on
the previous evening, a man had appeared at his door seeking a tow for his
stalled pickup. Mr. Pearson showed the sheriff where the truck had been stalled.
There, sticky in the frozen dust, was a pool of blood and, just to the side, a
woman's wristwatch.

Led to Seed Company Worker

The farmer's story led the sheriff to Duncan P. McKenzie, a 23-year-old in just
his second week of employment at a seed company. Co-workers told officers that
the new man sometimes talked strangely, that he had admiringly mentioned the
teacher he saw as he drove by the schoolyard every day and that he had said he
liked to break in every new pickup he owned by having sex in it.

That evening Sheriff Hammermeister visited the McKenzie house and asked if Mr.
McKenzie had seen the missing teacher. Mr. McKenzie said he knew nothing.

Outside, the sheriff arrested Mr. McKenzie for simple assault and read him his
rights and the search warrant. Within three hours deputies had seized
blood-stained clothing, boots that matched the print, and the pickup,
spray-painted but with visible bloodstains.

On a hunch, Deputy Jerry Hoover and his hunting dog, Chopper, checked fields
near the seed company, and there in the early afternoon Chopper froze and
pointed.

Miss Harding had been raped and her head bashed by heavy metal objects. Her body
was thrown over some farm machinery.

The sheriff was methodical in his investigation. Dozens of rolls of film were
shot at every scene. Two officers attended and taped every interview.

Defense Team Grows

The county attorney appointed a special prosecutor, Douglas Anderson, who later
became county attorney himself. The local judge appointed Charlie Jacobson, a
Conrad lawyer, as defense counsel. But when the assault charge jumped to
aggravated kidnapping and deliberate homicide, he added Barney Reagan to the
defense.

Neither man had handled a murder defense, and Montana's new criminal statutes
were just three weeks old. The future of executions was uncertain. The defense
got the trial moved 63 miles to Great Falls, but drew a tough judge, Robert J.
Nelson.

Mr. McKenzie, who had served prison time for assaulting a woman, refused to
cooperate beyond suggesting that the real murderer had borrowed his truck.

Eleven months after the crime and one month before trial, Mr. Reagan and Mr.
Jacobson sought a meeting with Mr. Anderson in a session that the prosecutor now
sees as a defense time bomb that would assist in seeking appeals. Mr. Reagan
recalls agreeing on a 60-year prison term. As is usual, the prosecutor discussed
the proposed bargain with the victim's family.

''We wanted nothing to do with a plea bargain,'' said Lana's mother, Ethel
Harding, who is now a State Senator. ''We don't have a justice system to sell
away the parts.''

The January 1974 trial lasted three weeks. Mr. McKenzie was convicted of
deliberate homicide. In March 1975, Judge Nelson sentenced him to hang. That, as
it turned out, was just the beginning.

Torture in Florida
A Killing On Father's Day

It was the evening of June 16, 1974, Father's Day. But 18-year-old Steve Orlando
was not celebrating. His parents were divorced, and he lived with his mother in
Jacksonville, Fla.

Mr. Orlando had played pool with friends at a Howard Johnson motel. Now, he was
going to walk five blocks to fetch his stalled car.

The next morning, Mr. Orlando was found lying in the middle of the sandy road
that leads to a dump. He had been pummeled and then tortured with a knife. He
had been shot in the left cheek. And then in the left ear. A note, impaled in
his stomach with the knife, called for revolution by oppressed blacks and vowed
to kill other whites. Indeed, a week after Mr. Orlando's death, another white
teen-age boy was killed in the Jacksonville area under similar circumstances.

On tape recordings sent to the victims' families and TV stations, a man
described in gruesome detail the torture of Mr. Orlando. But despite all the
fear in the town, the news media attention and political pressures, the
investigation reached a dead end in two months. Tommy Reeves, a veteran homicide
sergeant, was placed in charge in August.

In the cardboard box that contained files and literature initially collected by
many detectives was a handwritten letter of resignation from some anti-poverty
program. It looked familiar.

Sergeant Reeves reached for the note found by the Orlando body. The writing was
the same. The letter was signed by Jacob Dougan, a Vietnam veteran and an
organizer for black causes, with no criminal record.

Fingerprint on a Tape Recording

The detective sent the letters to the Federal Bureau of Investigation, which got
Mr. Dougan's fingerprints from the Air Force. The agency said both letters were
Mr. Dougan's. It also said there was a Dougan fingerprint on one of the tape
recordings. In late September Sergeant Reeves and other officers arrested the
28-year-old Mr. Dougan.

Ernest Jackson, a respected civil rights lawyer, agreed to be defense counsel.
It was a tough assignment.

In return for reduced charges, William Hearn, who had driven the car used in the
kidnapping of Mr. Orlando, made a full statement naming Mr. Dougan as the leader
of a plot to seize a ''white devil'' and execute him to promote black
revolution.

Duval County, which includes Jacksonville, has about 200 homicide prosecutions a
year. The seven-member homicide panel, headed by the prosecutor, Ed Austin,
votes to seek the death penalty in 1 percent to 5 percent of murders. The
Orlando killing was one.

Mr. Dougan's devoted adoptive parents and church upbringing and even his Eagle
Scout badge erased any doubt in Mr. Austin's mind that the young man knew right
from wrong. There was little room for the defense to maneuver, except to argue
temporary insanity caused by racial problems. Mr. Hearn's testimony persuaded
the jury to find Mr. Dougan guilty.

After the penalty hearing, the jury recommended death, 10 to 2. On April 10,
1975, a month later, Judge R. Hudson Olliff ordered that Mr. Dougan be
electrocuted. In his decades at the Duval County courthouse, the 64-year-old
Judge Olliff has issued nine death sentences, but to seven men. With appeals
over the years, Mr. Dougan has been in Courtroom 8 three times for the same
crime.

Dance on Death Row
2 Convicts Battle to Live

There have been 34 legal steps in the decorous struggle over whether Jacob
Dougan will someday sit in Florida's worn wooden electric chair, the seven
leather straps buckled around his chest and limbs, and have 2,000 volts pass
through his body.

Both sides have been waiting nearly 17 months for the latest opinion from the
Florida Supreme Court. All this has taken more than 15 years, and many more
years lie ahead; the Dougan case has not gone the Federal appeals court route.

It is a far cry from 1933, when Giuseppe Zangara shot at President Franklin D.
Roosevelt, instead killing Anton Cermak, the Mayor of Chicago. The shooting
occurred Feb. 15 in Miami. On March 9, Zangara pleaded guilty. He was sentenced
March 10. Ten days later, he was executed.  Besides Zangara's guilty plea, the
difference today is a measure of the changing rules, procedures, precedents and
concern paid to the death penalty on each layer of the court system, time after
time, with each loser appealing every loss all the way up the system. An example
from the Dougan case: On April 23, 1975, the defense notified the State Supreme
Court that it would appeal the conviction. Three hundred sixty-one days later,
the defense filed its brief. Forty-six days later, the state responded. Fifteen
weeks later, the court heard oral arguments. Six months later, the court
affirmed the conviction. Two weeks later, the defense sought a rehearing. One
week later, that was denied.

Nearly five months later, the defense sought a hearing before the United States
Supreme Court. Fourteen months later, that was denied. But meanwhile, following
Supreme Court precedent in another evolving legal area, the top Florida court
developed doubts that Mr. Dougan's defense had had a chance to rebut everything
in the pre-sentence report. The case was sent back to Judge Olliff for further
argument. Briefs were filed. Response briefs were also written and filed. New
arguments were set. Delays occurred because of illnesses.

Two months later, Judge Olliff issued a new sentence - the death penalty again
-and this was also briefed and argued and appealed and affirmed and taken to the
High Court, which took 89 days to turn it down. Elapsed time: six and a half
years. Re-arguments on Punishment But fearing that in the original sentencing
hearing, the first jury might have been tainted by a reference to the killing of
the second teen-ager, the State Supreme Court ordered that a new jury hear
re-arguments on a punishment. This required that complete sets of new lawyers on
both sides study the several large boxes of papers where the ink is fading.

After six months, James S. Thomson, a California lawyer and one of a national
network of death penalty opponents who donate their services, sought several
months to prepare the defense. Judge Olliff said no. Mr. Thomson resigned. A new
defense lawyer was appointed and given several months to learn the case. The new
jury reached the same penalty verdict, 9 to 3.

Mr. Dougan's current lawyer, James E. Ferguson, works closely with the NAACP
Legal Defense and Educational Fund Inc., which, with the American Civil
Liberties Union, is among the nation's most prominent opponents of the death
penalty. Mr. Ferguson's future arguments relate to the racial prejudice he sees
permeating the case, the murder as a ''tragic aberration'' for an ''otherwise
superlative citizen,'' and the alleged incompetence of Mr. Dougan's first
lawyer, who is now dead.

'A Legal Game'

''It's become a legal game,'' said H. R. Fallin, another former Dougan lawyer.
''These appellate hotshots come in here and take a year to find error with
something I had five minutes to decide at trial. For them, Dougan is a tool in a
moral crusade against the death penalty. The issues are limited only by their
imaginations. And the whole theory is delay, delay, delay. Every day without the
execution is another little victory for them.''

But Joseph Nursey, who worked on the Dougan case for a similar group, Team
Defense Project, denied that delay was the strategy. ''Death row is a
psychological death,'' he said. ''You want those people off there as fast as
possible.''

He said fairness required full examination of every point. But he added, ''I
don't see any way of killing people fairly in the name of justice.''

Few argue against safeguards for such an irrevocable punishment. It is the
degree of safeguard that is in dispute. Prosecutors suspect that the
characteristic approach of piecemeal appeals is at best a delaying tactic by the
defense designed to await more favorable precedent-making rulings in other
courts, and at worst sabotage intended to jam the legal system so that society
will simply give up on the death penalty.

There are signs that this is happening. While 37 states have the death penalty,
22 of them have never used it. And in recent years, half the states have added a
new penalty, true life without parole, without rescinding execution.

Montana's Attorney General, Marc Racicot, sees the death penalty as helpful in
encouraging plea bargaining. He says he knows of cases in which county
prosecutors have avoided seeking the death penalty, knowing the time and costs
of future appeals.

While Mr. Racicot vows to uphold the law, he does wonder sometimes about the
price of a fight that is never finished. At a cost estimated in millions, seven
assistant attorneys general have handled the McKenzie case. ''My personal
experiences cause me to wonder about the investment of society's resources,
judging by our results,'' Mr. Racicot said. ''If these cases become an endurance
contest for our legal system's survival, then maybe life imprisonment without
ever getting out would be an adequate ultimate punishment.''

Mr. Racicot's legal opponent in the McKenzie case is Timothy K. Ford, a
41-year-old Seattle lawyer who is now fighting eight executions. Mr. Ford, who
devotes half his work and much personal time to cases referred by the N.A.A.C.P.
organization, estimates that he has got 25 prisoners off death row.

Both sides have been waiting since September for a three-judge panel of the
Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit, in San Francisco, to rule on a defense
appeal of a district court judgment that there was no improper influence when
the special prosecutor met to discuss his overdue pay with Judge Nelson, a month
before sentencing, in 1975. Mr. Anderson says the case was not mentioned. The
judge is now dead.

Several proposals to change the system are being debated or carried out. One
would require that all major appeals points be consolidated in one Federal
appeal. But such streamlining is occurring only in Federal courts. Each state
has its own system and procedures. Florida's Supreme Court spends one-third of
its time on death penalty cases, which represent barely 12 percent of its case
load.

Toll in 2 States
'The Pain Is So Awful'

The legal impact and personal tolls of these two death penalty cases continue to
mount.

''We will not be beaten procedurally,'' vowed Mr. Austin, the prosecutor in the
Dougan case. ''We'll execute him sometime.''

But the trail is getting colder. Several experts and witnesses have died or
moved.

Mr. Austin does not blame the defense for the laborious appeals. ''It's the
judiciary that's permitting itself to be manipulated,'' he said. ''They set the
rules for all these appeals, so they can change them. They tell me I must give
every felon a speedy trial, within 180 days, or else he walks free. We've got to
do something about capital punishment. Clean it up or abolish it because it's
eroding confidence in our entire justice system when there's no punishment.''

In Montana, Pondera County is still paying off its initial trial costs of nearly
$300,000.

In light of the McKenzie case, the state has modified its strategies, and the
courts have clarified their rules. After Mr. Reagan submitted a 515-page
''brief,'' the court set a 50-page maximum. In case hanging is prohibited under
the Constitution as a cruel punishment, the Legislature has added lethal
injection and given the prisoner a choice.

Mr. McKenzie, now 38, is one of seven prisoners awaiting execution in Montana.
He spends his days watching TV or napping in the State Prison in Deer Lodge. He
says his initial defense lawyers meant well, but were incompetent.

''Living with a death sentence is just a state of mind,'' he said in an
interview conducted through a glass wall. ''I take one day at a time.''

He added: ''Some days, I get so down, and the thought of that trailer out back
sticks its head up and says, 'I'm still here, Duncan.' ''

Sitting out back less than 50 paces from his cell is the converted house trailer
with the gurney, the curtain, the witness chairs and the three switches used to
administer poison.

The law practice of Mr. Jacobson, one of the defense lawyers, pretty much
collapsed after the McKenzie verdict. Old friends would not sit next to him at
the cafe. He says he received some death threats. His children were ridiculed at
school.

The other defense lawyer, Mr. Reagan, who practiced in Cut Bank, 47 miles away,
was ostracized, too, for defending a teacher-killer. He figures he lost $15,000
in unpaid work for Mr. McKenzie. ''Somebody had to do it,'' he said, ''but I
regret I was ever involved.''

In 1982, when the NAACP organization took over the appeals, Mr. Reagan locked up
his office and walked away, leaving the files on his desk.

Mrs. Harding, the mother of the slain teacher, is now a widow. She said her
husband could not work for 18 months after the slaying and was never himself
again. She continues as a State Senator and still supports the death penalty.

Everett Orlando, the father of the murder victim Steve Orlando, is now 60 and a
retired police officer in New Brunswick, N.J. ''The pain is so awful, I can't
tell you,'' he said. ''Every day they don't go through with the sentencing keeps
it all alive. They have sentenced him three times. How many times must we do
that to be fair to the murderer when my son, the victim, got no appeals?''

Mr. Dougan, who refused to be interviewed, is said to read a lot and to be a
good prisoner among the 319 on Florida's death row.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Steve Orlando, above, was killed in 1974 near Jacksonville,
Fla., by Jacob Dougan, right, who is still being held on death row for the
crime. (The Florida Times-Union/Stan Badz); Lana Harding was also killed in
1974, in Conrad, Mont., by Duncan P. McKenzie, who also still awaits execution.
(Larry Mayer) (pg. A1); James E. Ferguson, the current lawyer for Jacob Dougan,
calls the murder of Steve Orlando a ''tragic aberration'' for an ''otherwise
superlative citizen.'' (Duane Hall for The New York Times); Ed Austin,
prosecutor in the Florida case, had no doubt that Mr. Dougan knew right from
wrong.; Sgt. Tommy Reeves, the homicide detective who headed the case. (Stan
Badz for The New York Times); Timothy K. Ford, who is now fighting eight
executions, including one for Duncan P. M

TYPE: A special report.

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              88 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 24, 1990, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Allies in Southeast Asia Criticize Washington's Shift on Cambodia

BYLINE: By STEVEN ERLANGER, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 953 words

DATELINE: JAKARTA, Indonesia, July 23


America's allies in Southeast Asia criticized Washington today for its shift in
Cambodia policy, saying that without further progress toward peace they would
work to keep Cambodia's seat at the United Nations in the possession of the
current owners, the Khmer Rouge and their two guerrilla coalition partners.

The members of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations, or Asean, were
stunned last week when Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d announced that the
United States was withdrawing its diplomatic support for the guerrilla coalition
at the United Nations. Mr. Baker said he was acting because the coalition
included the Khmer Rouge, who presided over the deaths of more than a million
Cambodians during their rule in the 1970's.

Asean has always said that the Khmer Rouge, however heinous, are an important
part of the opposition and must be included in any political settlement for it
to be lasting. The Americans are now explicit about saying they see the Khmer
Rouge as a greater threat to Cambodia than the Government in Phnom Penh, which
was installed by the Vietnamese.

Break With Longstanding Policy

The American move was a sign of Washington's break with its longstanding
willingness, since Vietnam invaded Cambodia in December 1978 and expelled the
Khmer Rouge, to let Asean take the lead on Cambodia policy. Asean consists of
the ''frontline states'' to the Indochinese conflict: Thailand, Indonesia,
Malaysia, Singapore, Brunei and the Philippines.

The Indonesian Foreign Minister, Ali Alatas, who has helped lead Asean's peace
efforts, said he did not see how the American move would advance negotiations.

Singapore's Prime Minister, Lee Kuan Yew, an architect of original Asean policy,
said he was ''puzzled'' about how the American shift would prevent the Khmer
Rouge from returning to power. It would be more likely to encourage the Khmer
Rouge to seek a military solution, he said.

Mr. Baker, announcing the new policy, made it clear that he did not want
Cambodia's United Nations seat to go to the Phnom Penh Government of Prime
Minister Hun Sen, which the United States regards as illegitimate.

But Mr. Baker implied that if the four rival Cambodian entities - the three
coalition partners and the Government - could not come together on a Supreme
National Council to represent the nation until new elections could be held,
Washington would prefer to leave the seat vacant.

Foreign Ministers Disagree

But Asean's Foreign Ministers, meeting here tonight, disagreed sharply. In a
joint statement, they said that ''attempts to change the representation of
Cambodia'' now, without an acceptable Supreme National Council, ''would set back
the search for a comprehensive political solution to the Cambodian problem.''

The point is not merely symbolic, Asean diplomats said. The United Nations seat
is one of the political pressure points the coalition has to urge a settlement
on Phnom Penh and Hanoi.

The Khmer Rouge's coalition partners are two non-Communist factions led by
Prince Norodom Sihanouk and a former Prime Minister, Son Sann. Mr. Baker said
the United States would still support the non-Communists.

But Asean diplomats said the American move would undercut the credibility of the
Cambodian rebels, bolster the Hun Sen Government and encourage Hanoi to continue
to resist concessions for a settlement.

The Asean foreign ministers made it clear that they, like the Americans, hoped
that the Cambodians could form a Supreme National Council by the time the next
United Nations General Assembly is convened in September. If so, the problem
would go away. If not, Asean diplomats said, they would work to keep the current
coalition in the seat. Although the European Community withdrew its support for
the coalition even before the Americans did, the Asean diplomats said the
coalition should be able to keep the seat with the support of China, other Asian
countries and many African countries.

Attitude of Third World

''There are a lot of countries in the developing world who don't like the idea
of being voted out of the United Nations,'' one diplomat said. ''It's a bad
precedent.''

In fact, Washington is not likely to care if the coalition keeps the seat, just
so long as the United States is no longer seen to be supporting the Khmer Rouge,
a position that had become untenable domestically and in Congress.

The five permanent members of the United Nations Security Council, meeting to
try to draft a peace settlement for Cambodia, said last week that a Supreme
National Council should consist of notable individuals, not necessarily directly
representing the four factions but acceptable to them.

This is a way to reduce any emphasis on the involvement of the Khmer Rouge. The
Asean foreign ministers agreed with the approach, but said the representative
individuals should come from all shades of political opinion, including the
Khmer Rouge.

''We agree with the United States about ends - a comprehensive settlement
leading to free and fair elections in Cambodia supervised by the United
Nations,'' an Asean diplomat said. ''But we disagree about the pressures
required to get there.''

Mr. Baker arrives here on Friday for an annual meeting of Asean allies that
follows the foreign ministers' meeting. ''What we're really saying to Baker is,
'We've got our doubts. Convince us,' '' the diplomat said.

U.S. to Examine Remains

BANGKOK, Thailand, July 23 (AP) - A United States military team is to go to
Cambodia on Tuesday to examine what may be remains of Americans missing from the
war in Indochina, an American military spokesman said today.

It will be the first such mission since the 1975 Communist takeover in Cambodia.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              89 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 24, 1990, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Navy Suspends a Plan to Use Dolphins as Guards

BYLINE: Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 987 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 23


Under mounting legal pressure from animal rights groups, the Navy has suspended
its plan to use bottle-nosed dolphins to guard a nuclear submarine base.

Though the Navy declines to discuss the classified program in detail, former
Navy trainers of the dolphins say the animals are being taught to kill enemy
divers with nose-mounted guns and explosives. They say more than a dozen of the
dolphins have been killed or injured in training.

Thomas LaPuzza, a spokesman for the Naval Ocean Systems Center in San Diego, one
of several bases where dolphins are trained, said: ''We use dolphins only for
underwater surveillance, object detection, location, marking and recovery. The
Navy has said very pointedly that we don't train animals to kill people.''

The Navy was to begin using the dolphins this year to patrol the 3.5-mile Hood
Canal along the Trident nuclear submarine base in Bangor, Wash. They were to
detect possible saboteurs.

Settlement Reached

But a lawsuit filed last year by 15 environmental and animal rights groups ended
in a settlement on May 3 in which the Navy agreed to suspend the project and
stop taking dolphins from the wild pending a review of the environment's impact
on the dolphins. The warm-water animals are not accustomed to the colder waters
in Washington.

''Surely they must be kidding about training Flipper to guard a nuclear
submarine,'' said Mitchell Fox, a spokesman for the Progressive Animal Welfare
Society in Lynnwood, Wash., the group that initiated the lawsuit.

While the Navy has used dolphins for 30 years for research and military
purposes, details of their military uses were not generally known until trainers
began to speak up about practices and abuses. Those comments and publicity
generated by the animal rights groups have set off a debate over the $20
million-a-year training program.

''We are the only kinder, gentler nation on this planet that's training dolphins
as advanced weapons systems,'' said Richard O'Barry, trainer of television's
''Flipper'' who now heads the Dolphin Project in Miami, a nonprofit group that
works to protect dolphins. ''Historically, we have used domesticated animals in
warfare situations, but no country has ever used wild animals.''

Military Use Condemned

At a symposium on whales and dolphins in captivity this month in Geneva, more
than 30 international conservation groups condemned the training of dolphins for
military purposes. While their proclamation did not cite the United States Navy,
it called the practice ''morally repugnant and ethically untenable.''

The Navy's dolphin research program began in 1960. At the time Navy researchers
hoped to learn more about improving the propulsion and hydrodynamics of
torpedoes by studying dolphins, which have keen sonar systems and can swim up to
26 miles an hour.

In the Vietnam War, dolphins were used to protect ships and submarines at the
American base at Cam Rahn Bay, although their exact role has never been
disclosed. In the Iran-Iraq war, the United States Navy used dolphin teams to
provide surveillance around its vessels and a floating helicopter platform in
the Persian Gulf.

Today, 141 marine mammals, including dolphins, sea lions and whales, are kept in
enclosures at naval bases in Kailua, Hawaii; San Diego, and Key West, Fla.,
where they are taught tasks like how to recover military hardware from the ocean
floor.

'Dangerous and Expensive'

''It's dangerous and expensive to put people down there,'' Mr. LaPuzza said.
''These animals have incredibly good sonar systems and can dive deep.''

But the Navy's marine mammal program drew sharp criticism from animal rights
advocates as well as former trainers, who attribute the 16 deaths and a number
of injuries in three years to poor, often cruel, training procedures.

An investigation of the program was undertaken by the Marine Mammal Commission,
a Federal agency. Its study, completed in February 1989, found that the Navy
program was being run in a professional and humane manner but nonetheless the
commission urged the Navy to make several changes, including less restrictive
muzzling of dolphins and sea lions in training.

The report said one dolphin drowned after becoming entangled in its net in a
storm, another died of disease in an exercise in the Persian Gulf and the third
stopped eating and died while being operated on for a stomach disorder.

Another dolphin died last year in a training run in Puget Sound, Wash.,
prompting animal rights advocates to argue that the sometimes icy waters of
Washington State were unsuitable for the warm-water dolphins. The doctor who
performed the autopsy on the animal attributed its death to heart failure
brought on by the cold water.

Accusations of Armed Dolphins

The specific tasks of the Navy's 111 bottle-nosed dolphins are classified. But
two former Navy trainers said the dolphins are being trained to ram enemy
divers. Small cannisters strapped to the dolphins' snouts are designed to detach
on impact and fire a .45-caliber bullet.

''We were training dolphins and sea lions specifically for swimmer
nullification,'' said Richard L. Trout, a civilian mammal trainer for the Navy
from 1985 to 1989. ''They were learning to kill enemy divers.''

Another former Navy civilian trainer, who spoke only on condition of anonymity,
confirmed Mr. Trout's account.

Other civilian marine mammal experts say dolphins are too benign and unreliable
to be suitable for military tasks.

''The only leverage we have with these animals is when they're hungry,'' Mr. Fox
said. '' Once they have a belly full of fish, they can be quite unpredicable.''

Mr. Trout said the dolphins did not do well in the program designed to kill
enemy divers.

''When they were supposed to ram us with the guns,,'' he said, ''they either
swam away or put their snouts on our shoulders, very affectionately. They were
the worst at taking orders.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              90 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 24, 1990, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

What's Wrong With Legalizing Drugs

SECTION: Section A; Page 20, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 418 words


To the Editor:

The call for drug legalization by Jann S. Wenner, publisher of Rolling Stone
magazine (''Drug War: Another Vietnam,'' Op-Ed, June 23), shows dangerous
ignorance about our nation's drug crisis.

Mr. Wenner asks alarmingly: ''Would legalization produce a flood of new addicts?
With crack, which is abhorred by society at large, this question is simply
irrelevant.'' Yet how can this be irrelevant if addicts are dying due to crack
use while we choose to look the other way? ''Abhorred by society at large?'' The
society to which Mr. Wenner refers is obviously not the one being oppressed by
the drug pushers who control the streets and corrupt young minds before antidrug
education programs can reach them - that is, if these communities are fortunate
enough to have such programs. Many do not, but what child would pay attention to
warnings by a Government that gave up the fight against drugs? Many people would
wish the problem away by legalizing illicit drugs, thus abolishing the black
market. Unfortunately, this vision is unrealistic and deadly.

Mr. Wenner states, ''Legalization would eliminate the inner-city violence
associated with competitive drug dealing.'' Under legalization, drugs will be
cheaper and readily accessible, which will in turn increase use and the number
of addicts. He concedes this, stating, ''If the legalization of drugs will
result in a few more abusers, let us accept the consequences.'' Although illegal
drug trafficking violence will be gone, a new crime source will be created from
this influx of new addicts. Hyperactive reactions to such drugs as cocaine will
spur criminal behavior.

In addition to escalating health costs under any scheme of legalization, what
type of health care for addicts would we provide? Mr. Wenner offers, ''Most
middle-class Americans have access to a social safety net.'' What about the
poverty-stricken people in whose cities deaths from drug abuse exceed those in
middle-class areas? Addicts who stay in treatment have a better chance of
reducing their drug dependency, and under legal compulsion, they stay in the
programs longer, reducing dependency and often becoming working members of
society. Under legalization, with no legal compulsion, addicts will not pay much
attention to warnings by clinicians, much less become involved in the long-range
treatment vital to calming dependency.

Rep.) CHARLES B. RANGEL
Chairman, House Select Committee
on Narcotics Abuse and Control
  Washington, July 5, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              91 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 24, 1990, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

Mighty Fire Ants March Out of the South

BYLINE: By PETER H. LEWIS

SECTION: Section C; Page 1, Column 3; Science Desk

LENGTH: 2056 words

DATELINE: COLLEGE STATION, Tex.


IN the annals of entomological villainy, few insects are as despised, as feared
and as meticulously investigated as the tiny imported fire ant, which attacks
humans, animals, plants, other insects and even electrical devices.

Government and private researchers have spent hundreds of millions of dollars in
unsuccessful efforts to eradicate the ferocious little arthropod, which is no
larger than the ''G'' at the start of this sentence. Scientists are mapping its
mitochondrial DNA and studying its most intimate chemical scents. Frustrated
homeowners spend tens of millions more on the counterattack, with tactics
ranging from pesticides to electric prods, even fighting fire ants with fire.

Yet true to its name, Solenopsis invicta, from the Latin for ''invincible,'' has
marched through the South like General Sherman. From its initial pincer-hold in
Mobile, Ala., where it arrived on a ship from South America half a century ago,
invicta now infests 250 million acres in 11 Southern states.

Researchers say it has just established a successful colony in Santa Barbara,
Calif., its first foray into the country's richest agricultural state.
Entomologists say invicta also seems to be undergoing a fundamental evolution in
its social system, establishing giant colonies with multiple queens instead of
the smaller and more manageable single-queen colonies that had been
characteristic.

''It's just a matter of time before we have fire ant infestations in California
and Arizona that we cannot control,'' said Dr. William P. MacKay, a specialist
in ant ecology and systematics at the Fire Ant Laboratory at Texas A & M
University here. ''It's going to go all the way up the West Coast, all the way
to Washington State.'' Colonies have been found as far north as Virginia.

The ant's inexorable spread has occurred not only in spite of, but partly
because of, nearly four decades of determined campaigns to eradicate it with
chemical pesticides. Through it all, the fire ant has thrived because the
pesticides destroyed its enemies and paved the way for far larger colonies than
had previously existed. An airborne pesticide assault in the 1960's and 70's,
designed to eradicate the ant from American soil, has been described by the
Harvard biologist Edward O. Wilson as ''the Vietnam of entomology.'' A more
modest attempt to control the ant with pesticide applications on the ground also
failed.

The campaigns backfired, many entomologists say, because the efforts to kill
invicta with the chemicals chlordane, heptachlor, dieldrin and mirex were
effective only in wiping out the ant's natural enemies, principally other ant
species, and parasites, thus making it easier for the ant to spread.

The pesticides also killed birds and other non-target species. Mirex, in
particular, left significant residues in human and animal tissues. Mirex was
determined to be a possible human carcinogen in 1977, and the Government's
aerial spraying was halted in 1978.

Today, in a reversal, most state and Federal agencies now discourage the use of
pesticides against the ant. They urge the public to learn to live with the ant,
which is more a nuisance than a health hazard, and they hold out hope that
scientists will enlist beneficial organisms to attack the ants or develop new
compounds to disrupt their reproduction.

But agriculture officials said there was again growing pressure from farmers and
ranchers to explore the option of spraying. The cost of such a new program would
be prohibitive, the officials said.

Adversity seems to have brought invicta new strength. Initially the species had
a single queen ant in each colony, and each colony was fiercely territorial. As
a result, researchers said, the average density of infestation was rarely
greater than 20 or 30 mounds an acre.

But researchers have recently found that single-queen colonies are being driven
out by ''supercolonies'' containing multiple queens and tens of millions of
workers. Researchers do not know what is causing the change, but they note that
the older single-queen colonies, which were a nuisance, are now viewed as the
best defense against the newer, more powerful colonies, which are an economic
disaster.

In Texas, where the multiple-queen colonies now outnumber single-queen colonies,
densities of 450 mounds an acre have been reported. In a draft report prepared
for the Texas Fire Ant Advisory Board, the state Department of Agriculture
estimated that fire ants caused $47 million in crop losses and pest control
expenses in the state last year.

No national loss figures are available. ''We don't see any hope at this point of
eliminating the pest from the United States,'' said William A. Banks, a fire ant
researcher at the United States Department of Agriculture's fire ant research
service in Gainesville, Fla. ''The hope is that we can find better ways of
coping, so that we can learn to live with it.''

If Bite's Bad, Sting's Worse

The prospect of peaceful co-existence with invicta is hard for many Southerners
to accept, especially for those who know its sting, which is often mistakenly
referred to as a bite. The ant does bite, but only to anchor itself while it
stings. Unlike bees, which eviscerate themselves with each sting, the fire ant
stings repeatedly with a gusto that belies its size.

The bite is sometimes felt as a minor irritation, but the sting is immediately
sensed as a burning sensation, worse than a mosquito bite but not as painful as
a bee sting. It is common for people to be stung many times, since the ants are
highly aggressive and swarm onto an intruder in seconds. Some victims have
reported suffering hundreds of stings.

A sting later results in redness and swelling and, because invicta injects
bacteria along with its alkaloid venom, creates a small pustule on the skin. The
pustule, typically the size of a pinhead, later causes itching, and sometimes
the pustules leave small brown scars that last for months.

Fire ant stings are potentially fatal to people who are allergic to bee stings
and other venoms. Ryan Wingard, a 2-year-old in Anderson, Tex., nearly died in
May when he was stung by fire ants in his yard. His mother noticed that he was
having trouble breathing, and soon Ryan's lips turned blue, his tongue swelled
and red blotches appeared on his body. He was rushed to the hospital and treated
for a severe allergic reaction. For Ryan and many others in the South, playing
or picnicking in the grass is now just a memory.

''I went to Willie Nelson's Fourth of July picnic and watched people popping up
like popcorn, slapping their legs,'' said Dr. Edward Vargo, an entomologist
studying fire ants at the University of Texas's Balcones Research Center in
Austin.

Indiscriminating Palate

Dr. Vargo noted that the multiple-queen colonies can be elaborate structures
that comprise hundreds of mounds covering dozens of acres, allowing worker ants
- sterile females - to forage with astonishing efficiency. ''Basically, anything
that stands still for longer than 15 or 20 seconds is fire ant food,'' he said.

Food, to a fire ant, is a broad term. Its diet includes everything from insects
to germinating crop seeds to the rubber expansion joints on highway bridges. The
ants feed day or night, as long as the temperature is 70 to 95 degrees
Fahrenheit.

The impact on the ecology is especially worrisome to researchers, who note that
invicta drives out other ant and insect species, including native fire ants,
which are less aggressive. Increasingly, landowners say the ants are driving off
ground-nesting birds, lizards, rabbits and larger wildlife. The Small Animal
Clinic in the College of Veterinary Medicine at Texas A & M has treated 28 fawns
this year for severe fire ant stings.

Because invicta is omnivorous, it also has some benefits. Invicta attacks corn
worms, boll weevils and other costly agricultural pests, and is actually
welcomed on cotton and sugar cane fields. The fire ant has also shown a fondness
for fleas. However, ''Using fire ants to control the flea population does seem a
lot like trading a headache for an upset stomach,'' said Kathy Palma, a
researcher at Texas A & M. Fire ants do not live by food alone, Dr. MacKay at
Texas A & M reported. He has found that the ant is attracted to electrical
fields, the stronger the better. It is common for the ants to swarm on
electrical relay switches inside air-conditioning units, until their charred
bodies cause a short circuit. Municipal officials throughout Texas say fire ants
are the leading cause of traffic light failures. Telephone companies say the
ants can knock out switching devices. Dr. MacKay said the ants have been found
in aircraft altimeters, in computers, and even in the electronic gear in boats
and submarines.

The ants are aquatic at times, stinging people in swimming pools and rivers. In
flood conditions hundreds or thousands of workers will form a living raft to
carry the queen and her larvae to safety. Some researchers suggest that such
living rafts will help carry invicta west.

Fatal Mating Flight

More commonly, the ants hitchhike in shipments of grass sod, trees and other
nursery stock. They also spread as the queens seek new homes after their
mysterious nuptial flights. Only queens and males develop wings, and because
fire ants do not mate in captivity, and because it is difficult to observe tiny
insects frolicking 500 to 800 feet in the air, researchers surmise that the
mating is airborne.

On the first sunny day after rain, Southerners can see hundreds of winged male
fire ants emerge from the soil and ascend on a sexual kamikaze mission. They fly
only once, rising to several hundred feet, where they compete to mate with a
flying queen who has summoned them by some unknown chemical signal. Only one
will succeed, and then all the males, perhaps exhausted, fall back to earth to
their deaths.

''If they mate they die happy, and if they don't, they die anyway,'' said Dr.
Daniel Clair, an urban pest management specialist with the Texas Department of
Agriculture.

The fertilized queen sheds her wings, burrows and either starts a new colony or
joins an existing one. She stores the sperm from her nuptial flight, and for the
next five or six years produces offspring, often laying her own weight in eggs
each day.

Chastened by the failure of pesticides, researchers are focusing on two areas:
chemical growth regulators and biological controls.

Dr. Vargo and others are trying to isolate and synthesize the chemical signals,
or pheromones, given off by invicta queens. Pheromones are chemicals that act on
other individuals, unlike hormones, which act within an individual.

Wanted: an Enemy

Among the queen pheromones of particular interest to researchers are signals
that cause workers to assassinate rival queens and signals that keep immature
females from developing sexually. If such pheromones can be developed, they
could disrupt communications in the colony and the ants would eventually die.

The most promising chemical control, said Ronald Mulder of the Texas Department
of Agriculture, is fenoxycarb ethyl, essentially a ''birth control'' agent that
destroys the ovaries of sexual female ants. It is sold commercially under the
brand name Logic and is believed to be much more environmentally safe than
pesticides. To the frustration of homeowners, Logic is also slower acting,
taking three to six months after a springtime application to take effect.

Dr. MacKay said there was also promise in biological controls. He and other
entomologists who have visited invicta's native home in South America found that
the ant was much less of a problem there than in the United States.

He said invicta mounds in Brazil are shared by several types of parasitic ants,
beetles, wasps and flies. If one of these or some other natural fire ant enemy
can be identified as a control agent and brought to the United States, assuming
it does not pose a threat worse than fire ants, it could help keep invicta in
check.

How about South American anteaters? ''The ones that could do the job are four
feet tall with claws that could take your arm off,'' said Mr. Banks of the
United States Agriculture Department. ''If we imported enough anteaters to have
an impact, in a few years we'd be looking for something to control the
anteaters.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: July 28, 1990, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

CORRECTION:

An article in Science Times on Tuesday about fire ants misstated Dr. Edward
Vargo's affiliation at the University of Texas. He works at the university's
Brackenridge Field Laboratory.

GRAPHIC: Photo: Tiny fire ants, which can sting more than once, are spreading
from Southern states; welts caused by fire ant stings. (United States Department
of Agriculture) (pg. C5); Map: States with fire ant infestation

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              92 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 25, 1990, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

U.S. Policies Criticized by Allies in Asia

BYLINE: By STEVEN ERLANGER, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1133 words

DATELINE: JAKARTA, Indonesia, July 24


America's allies in Southeast Asia today bitterly criticized Washington's
policies on Indochina and refugees as inconsistent and counterproductive.

The nations at the annual meeting of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
here issued a joint statement repeating their collective threat to stop giving
asylum to Vietnamese boat people unless Washington altered its stand and allowed
the mandatory repatriation of Vietnamese judged to be not refugees but economic
migrants.

The open and sometimes patronizing criticism of American policy by the foreign
ministers of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations, or Asean, will make the
visit here of Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d, starting late Thursday, less
ceremonial and polite than usual.

''I think Mr. Baker is in for a rough time,'' a senior Asean official said.

Criticism of Washington Policy

The Foreign Ministers of Asean members - Indonesia, Thailand, Singapore,
Malaysia, Brunei and the Philippines - are here for their annual meeting, which
is followed by discussions that are usually routine with their colleagues from
major allies like the United States, Canada, Australia and Japan.

Criticism from the Asean nations continued today over the American shift on
Cambodian policy last week, when Washington withdrew diplomatic support at the
United Nations for an opposition coalition including the Khmer Rouge. Among
those who complained about the shift today was Singapore's Foreign Minister,
Wong Kan Seng, who said he was unable to understand the logic of the American
move.

But after a joint Asean statement on Cambodia issued Monday night, it was
Washington's policy on Vietnamese boat people that got the most attention today.

A joint statement by Asean criticized the United States for being inconsistent
and risking the ''breakdown of international understanding'' on protecting
refugees.

Screening of Boat People

The statement repeated Asean's threat to abandon its commitment to provide
refuge to boat people ''in a more coordinated and concerted manner'' unless
Washington shifted position. For over a year now, only Malaysia has been turning
away Vietnamese boats.

In Geneva two weeks ago, a 28-nation conference on Vietnamese boat people, which
was to have been held at the headquarters of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, was postponed when it became clear that differences
between the United States and Vietnam on one side and the Southeast Asian
nations and Hong Kong on the other had not been bridged.

In June 1989 Washington agreed that Vietnamese boat people landing in the region
should be screened to see if they are real refugees, fleeing persecution, or
only economic migrants seeking a better life. But unlike its policy with
Haitians or Mexicans, Washington will not allow Vietnamese economic migrants to
be deported against their will back to Vietnam.

In that policy, which ''sees Vietnam as a uniquely reprehensible nation,'' an
Asean diplomat said, the United States finds itself in agreement only with
Vietnam, which says it will not accept the forcible repatriation of its citizens
on humanitarian grounds.

Threat to First Asylum

The American position has infuriated Hong Kong and the Asean countries, who
provide first asylum, or temporary refuge, to the boat people. While those
judged refugees are guaranteed resettlement in the West, the rest are ''piling
up,'' as a Malaysian official said.

The Malaysian Foreign Minister, Abu Hassan Omar, said today that the American
position only ''provides comfort and protection to Vietnamese intransigence.''
By insisting Vietnamese migrants are different, he said, America ''puts the very
principle of first asylum in peril.''

American and United Nations officials say that Malaysia has already done that by
pushing off the boats of Vietnamese refuge seekers. Since May 1989, United
Nations officials say, the Malaysians have pushed off more than 8,700
Vietnamese, many of whom have since landed in Indonesia. How many may have died
on the way is unknown.

In an effort to change Washington's stand, or at least get Washington and
Vietnam to house those rejected economic migrants on their territory, the Asean
countries and Hong Kong said in May that they reserved the right to abandon
first asylum ''to safeguard their national interests.''

Forced Repatriation

The countries set a deadline of July 1, but only Malaysia is now pushing off
boats. They wanted to allow the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees to
try to work out a deal with Washington.

The Commissioner has pursued a distinction between ''involuntary repatriation,''
which Hanoi says it will accept, and ''forcible repatriation,'' which it will
not. If migrants can be induced to return home without volunteering to do so,
but without the use of force. Hanoi, it seems, is satisfied.

But Washington is not, officials say. The Bush Administration, in particular the
National Security Council, ''has put so many conditions on involuntary
repatriation that it is in reality voluntary,'' an Asean diplomat said today.

''We need a clear statement from the U.S. supporting involuntary repatriation,''
he continued. ''Otherwise there is no solution and no deterrent.''

Flexible Stance for Baker

WASHINGTON, July 24 (Special to The New York Times) - Secretary of State Baker
will try to head off confrontations with the Asean nations in Jakarta by seeking
to take flexible positions on Cambodia and Vietnamese refugees, State Department
officials said today.

As Mr. Baker prepared to leave Wednesday for a 12-day tour of Indonesia,
Singapore, the Soviet Union and Mongolia, American officials privately commented
that it was a sign of the times that his easiest stops would be in the two
Communist countries.

On the Administration's Cambodia policy, one State Department official said Mr.
Baker would combine ''explanation and co-optation'' to demonstrate to the Asean
officials that ''we have not shifted our policy as much as reports seem to
indicate.''

Administration officials say Mr. Baker will stress that the Administration
remains pledged to providing assistance to the two non-Communist guerrilla
groups loosely aligned with the Khmer Rouge, who presided over the deaths of
more than a million Cambodians during their reign in the 1970's.

He will continue to oppose the involuntary return of Vietnamese, which is
proposed by Hong Kong and the Southeast Asian nations to clear out their teaming
refugee camps. But Mr. Baker will discuss ways in which the nations might
cooperate in generating ''voluntary repatriation,'' stressing improved screening
and counseling to convince Vietnamese that life in the refugee camps will be
hard and will not necessarily lead them to lives in the United States.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              93 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 25, 1990, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Union Weighs 'Miss Saigon' Casting

BYLINE: By ALEX WITCHEL

SECTION: Section C; Page 12, Column 4; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 901 words


Members of the Actors' Equity Association failed to decide yesterday whether the
union would permit the English actor Jonathan Pryce to repeat his performance as
a Eurasian when the hit musical ''Miss Saigon'' moves to Broadway from London.

No decision on allowing Mr. Pryce to perform in New York was reached in a
three-hour meeting at Equity's offices on West 46th Street. No date has been set
for another meeting.

The show's producer, Cameron Mackintosh, said he would not comment until a
decision was made. The musical is scheduled to open in New York in March and has
already generated $24 million in advance ticket sales, the largest advance sale
in Broadway history.

A complaint about the casting of Mr. Pryce as the Eurasian owner of a bar and
brothel in Saigon during the Vietnam War was filed with the Asian division of
the ethnic minorities committee of Actors' Equity by the playwright David Henry
Hwang, who won a Tony Award for ''M. Butterfly'' in 1988, and the actor B. D.
Wong, who won a Tony as best supporting actor in that play.

The two expressed indignation that the role of a Eurasian was being played by a
Caucasian. Mr. Pryce won an Olivier Award as best actor for his work in ''Miss
Saigon'' and won a Tony Award as best actor in the 1976 Broadway production of
''Comedians.''

'Irreparable Damage' Cited

Mr. Hwang wrote a letter to Equity in which he said, ''Mr. Pryce is an excellent
actor, but I would be equally upset were he cast as Boy Willie in 'The Piano
Lesson.' ''

Mr. Wong wrote three letters, one to the president of Equity, Colleen Dewhurst,
in which he said, ''There is no doubt in my mind of the irreparable damage to my
rights as an actor that would be wrought if (at the threshold of the 21st
century) Asian actors are kept from bringing their unique dignity to the
specifically Asian roles in 'Miss Saigon,' and therefore to all racially
specific roles in every future production which will look to the precedent 'Miss
Saigon' is about to set as a concrete model.''

In a letter to the chairmen of Equity's committee for racial equality and its
alien committee, he wrote: ''We may never be able to do the real work we dream
to do if a Caucasian actor with taped eyelids hops on the Concorde. . . .
Chances to nail the big guys like this don't come often. Let's do it.''

Neither Mr. Wong nor Mr. Hwang returned telephone calls this week.

In his letter to Ms. Dewhurst, Mr. Wong also said: ''Allowing such a blatant
example of high profile, racially false casting in our own back yard because
British Equity has not taken care of its own members the way A.E.A. aims to
would be passive and self-destructive.''

No Complaints in Britain

Peter Plouviez, general secretary of British Equity, said in a telephone
interview yesterday: ''We have had no complaints from our Asian members. In this
country extensive efforts were made to cast the role with an Asian actor, but
none of them thought they could do it. If American Equity believes it is racist
in all circumstances to 'black up' or 'yellow up,' the rule should apply to
their own members first. You shouldn't use the coincidence of someone needing a
work permit to enforce something they don't want to enforce in relation to their
own people. If there was an American Equity rule that said no non-Asian artist
shall be able to be 'yellowed up' to play in American theater, then Cameron
Mackintosh would never have dreamed of employing Jonathan Pryce. But there is no
such rule.''

The casting director for ''Miss Saigon,'' Vincent G. Liff of the Johnson, Liff &
Zerman casting agency, wrote to Mr. Mackintosh in response to the complaint. He
said that ''there has been no professional venue for the development of the
Asian actor or Asian actor/singer to exercise his talents on the Broadway stage
between 'Flower Drum Song' and 'The World of Suzie Wong' in 1958 and 'M.
Butterfly' in 1988, a 30-year span.''

''With the exception of the original and revival companies of 'Pacific
Overtures' and two Broadway revivals of 'The King and I,' there was nothing in
between,'' Mr. Liff continued. ''The bottom line is there was just no product to
provide Asian actors with successful, financially viable acting careers in the
mainstream venues of Broadway, film and television.''

'Endless' Auditions

Mr. Liff went on: ''We have overall auditioned hundreds more Asian performers in
the continental United States and Hawaii than we have Caucasian performers. . .
. We have conducted endless totally open calls in New York City (many), Los
Angeles (3 occasions), San Francisco (3 occasions), Hawaii (3 occasions), Manila
(3 occasions), San Jose (once), Orange County (once),'' Mr. Liff's letter said.
''We are currently on our way to Daly City (California), Vancouver and Toronto
continuing our quest for Asian talent in these Asian centers of population.''

Mr. Liff went on to say that he and on of the show's musical supervisors had
held an eight-hour open call in New York City, where they auditioned 189 Asian
candidates for the show. In six days they saw 750 Asian performers, he said. ''I
can say with the greatest assurance,'' he added, ''that if there were an Asian
actor of 45-50 years, with classical stage background and an international
stature and reputation, we would surely have sniffed him out by now.
Furthermore, if we hadn't found him, he certainly would have found us.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Jonathan Pryce as a Eurasian bar owner in ''Miss Saigon.''
(Michael Le Poer Trench/Miss Saigon)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              94 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 26, 1990, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

At Love Canal, Land Rush on a Burial Ground

BYLINE: By SAM HOWE VERHOVEK, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1455 words

DATELINE: NIAGARA FALLS, N.Y.


In Love Canal, the abandoned neighborhood built around 21,800 tons of buried
toxic chemicals and sludge, lawns are being reseeded, roofs reshingled and
houses painted a gleaming white.

A decade after the Government declared a health emergency and bought out
hundreds of homeowners, making Love Canal the most notorious hazardous-waste
dump in the country, parts of the area are on the verge of being settled again.

More than 200 people, including at least five who grew up in the neighborhood,
have responded to the Federal Government's declaration that some blocks are
habitable by applying to move in. Dozens more stop by each day to look at a wall
map of new listings in the office of the Love Canal Area Revitalization Agency,
which owns the houses and will offer the first 10 for sale beginning Aug. 15.

''It has all the characteristics of a terrific neighborhood,'' said James E.
Carr, the agency's director of planning. ''The street pattern is very good, the
vegetation is mature, there's a mall nearby, and the first people in will
certainly be getting themselves a bargain, because they're pioneers of a sort.''

Why do people want to buy homes around the nation's first waste dump to be
declared a Federal disaster area?

Some say the health hazards were overstated to begin with; indeed, only after
intense pressure from residents did the Federal Government reluctantly buy out
hundreds of houses beyond the core area where the highest concentrations of
chemicals were found.

Others say that regardless of what happened here, including the illnesses and
deformities found among children living in houses built on or next to the
filled-in toxic dump, the Government would not allow people to return unless it
was now safe.

And many people seem to have concluded that their only chance of owning a home
is in Love Canal, or Black Creek Village, as the agency has renamed it. With
prices reflecting what officials call a stigma factor, the houses will sell for
$30,000 to $80,000, about 20 percent below what comparable ones cost in nearby
suburbs.

''I'd like a place where there's some sense of values, where you can take pride
in where you live,'' said Leon Morgan, a chef who lives with his wife and five
children in a $375-a-month apartment downtown. Crime and drugs are problems
there, and the noise from a fast-food restaurant keeps them awake at night, he
said. ''People are living too close to each other.''

Most of the toxic waste that prompted the emergency is still here. But now it is
encased in layers of clay and plastic beneath a long grassy knoll fenced off
with signs that warn: ''Dangerous -Hazardous Waste Area - Keep Out.''

Officially Habitable

Tests by the state and Federal governments have deemed much of the neighborhood
around the former canal ''habitable,'' though scientific constraints prevent
them from declaring Love Canal - or any other place -''safe'' to live in.
Technically the studies found that living here would pose no greater risk than
living in other parts of Niagara Falls.

''Yes, it's possible Love Canal could leak again,'' Mr. Carr conceded during a
recent tour of the neighborhood. ''But the chances of this are absolutely
remote. This is not some rusty oil barrel along the Monongahela River.''

The revitalization agency, a local organization that bought the houses with
state and Federal money, plans to sell up to 236 abandoned homes north and west
of the canal. About 200 built on or nearest the canal were razed; 250 more are
being studied.

The agency will sell the houses much as ordinary homeowners do: it will list a
home's price and sell to the first qualified buyer who agrees to it. Officials
have not yet decided whether they will accept offers below the asking prices.

Many environmental groups are appalled by the recent Environmental Protection
Agency decision that cleared the way for resettlement. They contend that none of
the studies adequately addressed questions about the long-term safety of living
in the neighborhood. They also say the process could set a dangerous precedent
for resettling at lesser-known dumps.

Six groups are seeking an injunction on sales of Love Canal homes.

''The dump is still there, and so is the danger,'' said Lois Marie Gibbs,
perhaps the best known of the former residents who fled Love Canal with her
children. She moved to Washington and founded the Citizens' Clearinghouse for
Hazardous Wastes, one of the groups seeking the injunction.

Snapshot of Better Days

The cheery offices of the revitalization agency, in the offices of a former Head
Start center for children, offer scant memory of the environmental disaster. A
black and white photograph at the entrance shows some laughing boys swimming in
the original canal in the early 1940's, just before the Hooker Chemicals and
Plastics Corporation filled it in and began dumping chemicals, solvents,
processed sludge and fly ash.

The Mayor of Niagara Falls, Michael O'Laughlin, suggested Sunrise Village as a
new name for the neighborhood. But Mr. Carr and others favored Black Creek
Village, after a creek that meanders through it.

One of the many families looking at houses is Delford and Banda Rowh, who live
in a downtown duplex with their 4-year-old son, Clifford, not far from three
chemical factories. ''When the wind blows it's terrible,'' said Mr. Rowh, a
taxi-meter repairman.

''We have been looking for the right place for a long, long time,'' Mrs. Rowh
said. They have their eye on a cozy brick house with green trim and an awning at
1130 93d Street, with the creek running just along the back yard.

Mrs. Rowh said that with all the attention focused on Love Canal, ''they must
have cleaned it up pretty well.''

''It's probably one of the safest places to live in Niagara Falls by now,'' she
said. Anyway, she added with a shrug, ''There are problems no matter where you
live in the world.''

A Landscape of Former Dumps

Niagara Falls practically grew up around the chemical industry, but at a price.
There are more than 200 former toxic-waste dumps within 50 miles of Love Canal,
and leaking chemicals have been detected at 22 sites along the Niagara River
alone, according to state and Federal records.

Some people looking for houses in Love Canal seemed to justify their search in
part by questioning whether they are any safer where they live now.

''There are chemicals all over this town,'' said Edmund H. Janiszewski, a
Vietnam War veteran who wants to move with his mother to a house on Moschel
Court in Love Canal. ''Forest Glen, S-Area Dump, Bloody Creek Run,'' he added,
rattling off the names of other places in the city where hazardous leaks have
been found.

Mr. Janiszewski now rents a house on the East Side, above an old sewer line that
carries the discharge from four chemical companies into the Niagara River.

'All a Lot of Hooey'

''My attitude,'' he said, ''is if you find a place where they've at least paid
attention to cleaning it up, you should go. If there is a potential danger,
you're more likely to hear about it there than here.''

When the problems at Love Canal were first made known, many people were
skeptical, even though a New York study found levels of dioxin that the State
Attorney General said were ''among the highest ever found in the human
environment.'' One such skeptic was Philip Palmisano.

''I think it was all a lot of hooey,'' said Mr. Palmisano, a retired used car
dealer who wants to buy a brick ranch house at 41 Mason Court that Mr. Rowh said
was ''everyone's fantasy'' but that Mr. Palmisano said is beyond his family's
means.

''This street should never have been condemned to begin with,'' Mr. Palmisano
said, gesturing down the empty block. ''If it was contaminated, I don't think
you'd be seeing so many green trees.''

''Or all these squirrels,'' added his wife, Marianne.

The Palmisanos now rent an apartment above an abandoned tavern in the nearby
town of Wheatfield. They feel confident that with their savings and Mrs.
Palmisano's income as a substitute teacher they can afford to move to Love
Canal.

Mr. Morgan, the chef, is less sure that he can afford a house in Love Canal but
no less eager to move there.

''I know the area,'' said Mr. Morgan, who had moved from the area before the
contamination became public but had spent several years of his childhood with
his parents on 93d Street in Love Canal.

''It wasn't like living around here, where you have to watch your back all the
time,'' he said with faint smile. ''It was the kind of place where you had
street parties all the time, where you really knew the people next door. It was
the kind of place where if a father was taking his kids for ice cream, he'd take
the whole block along.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: A decade after buried toxic waste led to evacuation of Love
Canal, people like Marianne and Philip Palmisano hope to buy homes in the
Niagara Falls, N.Y., neighborhood under a Government revitalization plan. (Joe
Traver for The New York Times) (pg. A1); Delford and Banda Rowh with their son,
Clifford, outside a house they would like to buy in the Black Creek Village
section of Niagara Falls, N.Y., formerly called Love Canal. The Government,
which declared a health emergency and bought out residents a decade ago after it
was revealed that the neighborhood was built on a toxic waste dump, is now
selling the houses for $30,000 to $80,000. (Joe Traver for The New York Times);
Map: Niagra Falls, N.Y. (pg. B2)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              95 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 26, 1990, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

What New Policy Toward Cambodia?

BYLINE: By Stephen J. Solarz; Stephen J. Solarz, Democrat of Brooklyn, heads the
House Subcommittee on Asian and Pacific Affairs.

SECTION: Section A; Page 19, Column 2; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 705 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


Secretary of State James A. Baker's statement on Cambodia, while constructive,
has produced more confusion than clarity on U.S. policy toward Southeast Asia.

There is a widespread impression - even among our Southeast Asian friends - that
the decision to open a dialogue with Vietnam, provide humanitarian aid to
Cambodia, and deny Cambodia's U.N. seat to a coalition that includes the Khmer
Rouge and non-Communist forces means the Administration has altered its
fundamental approach to the Cambodian problem. Nothing could be further from the
truth.

Although the Baker announcement represents a timely adjustment in some aspects
of our policy, Washington is still pursuing the basic course it set nine months
ago. It is trying to broker a U.N.-managed comprehensive political settlement
that would end the fighting, introduce a U.N. peacekeeping force, verify the
withdrawal of all Vietnamese forces, haltthe external supply of arms to the
Cambodian factions and disarm their forces, and facilitate an internationally
supervised free and fair election.

There seems to be a widespread impression that America's withdrawal of support
for the coalition's occupancy of the U.N. seat means the Administration is
terminating its nonlethal assistance for the non-Communist forces. This, too, is
incorrect.

The Administration fully intends to continue providing aid to those forces. A
cutoff would jeopardize the prospects of an overall settlement, because it would
reduce Hanoi's and Phnom Penh's incentive to negotiate in good faith. It would
also deny the Cambodian people a democratic alternative to Khmer Rouge Maoists
and Phnom Penh leninists.

The Administration is pursuing negotiations, rather than simply supporting the
Vietnamese-installed Phnom Penh regime, because it believes that a comprehensive
settlement involving all factions is the best way - and probably the only way
-of preventing the Khmer Rouge from returning to power. There is no guarantee
that this strategy will succeed. But without a political settlement, the
fighting will continue, producing an unending civil war at best or a return to
the ''killing fields'' at worst. The new Baker agenda is intended to enhance the
prospects for a political settlement. Humanitarian aid should assure the regime
in Phnom Penh that we bear it no permanent ill will. The dialogue with Vietnam
will enable us to convey clearly to Hanoi that if it accepts a significant U.N.
role in a comprehensive settlement, we will normalize relations and lift our
economic embargo. Ending support for the coalition at the U.N. should signal
that our policy is not dictated by China but is motivated by a desire for peace.

As significant as these adjustments to our policy may be, they will do little by
themselves to prevent a Khmer Rouge battlefield victory. Far more important in
forestalling such an outcome was the progress in Paris last week toward a
settlement by the U.S., France, Britain, China and the Soviet Union.

While these major powers must still resolve a few lesser issues, they have
reached agreement on the two most critical and controversial points: how to
demilitarize the conflict and how to create a neutral political environment
during the period between a cease-fire and an election.

This framework for peace must now be sold to the four Cambodian factions. It
will not be easy. Yet it seems prudent to assume that Moscow and Beijing would
not have signed off on such an agreement unless they believed their clients
could be brought to accept it. And with Moscow and Beijing in apparent
agreement, peace appears to be closer than at any time in the last decade.

If there is no settlement, it will not be because of the U.S. With Mr. Baker's
policy adjustments, there should be no doubt that we stand on the side of peace.
With the progress on the diplomatic front, there is new hope that the conflict
can be moved from the battlefield to the ballot box. Instead of abandoning the
non-Communist resistance, giving up the effort to achieve a political settlement
and embracing the Phnom Penh regime, as critics of U.S. policy would have us do,
the Administration should continue its quest for a grand compromise and true
freedom for the Cambodians.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              96 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 27, 1990, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Cambodia Turns Over Remains Thought to Be Those of U.S. Soldiers

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: For the first time since the Vietnam War ended in April 1975,
Communist authorities in Cambodia yesterday turned over what may be the remains
of six servicemen listed as missing in action. The Government in Phnom Penh has
announced that it will cooperate with the United States in future efforts to
locate M.I.A.'s. Buddhist monks prayed over the coffins at the airport before
they were shipped home. (Associated Press)

TYPE: Caption

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              97 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 27, 1990, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Scientist Criticized for Dioxin Stand

BYLINE: By KEITH SCHNEIDER, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 373 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 26


A House subcommittee chairman accused a top Federal scientist today of
improperly aiding the paper industry's campaign to loosen restrictions on dioxin
pollution in water.

The scientist, Dr. Vernon N. Houk, is the Assistant Surgeon General and director
of the Center for Environmental Health and Injury Control at the Centers for
Disease Control. He told a hearing by the subcommittee that late last year he
reviewed dioxin studies prepared by the paper industry, but he was asked to do
so by the state of Georgia. He said the request fell within his Federal
responsibilities.

The disagreement between Dr. Houk and Representative Ted Weiss, the New York
Democrat who heads the House Government Operations Subcommittee on Human
Resources, stems from a decision in March by the Georgia Department of Natural
Resources to adopt a new standard for dioxin contamination in water. The levels
considered safe by the Federal Environmental Protection Agency are hundreds of
times the level set by Georgia.

Mr. Weiss's committee is exploring the effects of exposure to dioxin on human
health. Dioxin, a byproduct of petrochemical manufacturing, paper making and
other industrial processes, is said by many scientists to be among the most
toxic substances known. Dr. Houk, however, is one of a small but growing number
of environmental experts who say new scientific evidence, including a study of
survivors of a chemical plant explosion in Italy in 1976, shows dioxin to be
less hazardous than was once thought. Dr. Houk argues that state and Federal
water quality laws should be eased to reflect the new information.

The outcome of the debate about the hazards of dioxin has considerable financial
implications for several industries, including the paper industry, which has
said that buying new pollution control equipment and changing manufacturing
procedures to meet the agency's strict standard could cost $2 billion. The
overall scientific dispute also is being closely watched by Vietnam veterans
exposed to Agent Orange, which contained dioxin, and neighbors of toxic waste
dumps who have sought compensation from the Government and private companies for
injuries and deaths they believe were caused by exposure to the substance.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Dr. Vernon N. Houk, a scientist from the Federal Centers for
Disease Control, testifying yesterday on the health risks from dioxin. (Paul
Hosefros/The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              98 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 27, 1990, Friday, Late Edition - Final

ABROAD AT HOME;
Models For a Justice

BYLINE: By Anthony Lewis

SECTION: Section A; Page 27, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 760 words

DATELINE: BOSTON


Senator Warren Rudman of New Hampshire was asked the other day whether Judge
David Souter especially admired any past members of the Supreme Court. Senator
Rudman said he thought the Souter favorites were Justices Oliver Wendell Holmes
Jr. and John Marshall Harlan the younger.

If that is so - and as a close friend Senator Rudman should know - it is an
extremely interesting answer. It does not tell what everyone in Washington is
panting to know: how Judge Souter would vote on this issue or that as a member
of the Court. But it gives intriguing insight into how he may see the job.

Justice Holmes, who served from 1902 to 1932, generally believed in judicial
deference to legislative choices. When the Court tried to stop economic reforms,
for example when it held restrictions on child labor unconstitutional, he wrote
eloquent dissents. He thought that democracy meant that majorities must usually
have their way - but not when it came to freedom of speech.

''If there is any principle of the Constitution that more imperatively calls for
attachment than any other,'' Holmes wrote in 1929, ''it is the principle of free
thought - not free thought for those who agree with us but freedom for the
thought that we hate.''

He was dissenting there from a decision that denied American citizenship to a
woman because she was a pacifist and said she would not bear arms to defend the
Constitution. A later Court overruled the decision and came to Holmes's view of
free speech.

Justice Harlan served from 1955 to 1971. For many of us who knew the Court in
that period, he is a model of what a Supreme Court justice should be. That is
not because he reached results that always pleased us - far from it - but
because of his craftsmanship and the way he committed himself to deciding cases.

He had no agenda. He did not go into a case with certainty about how it should
come out. He struggled to be disinterested. That did not mean unconcerned; he
cared deeply. It meant that he tried genuinely to understand both sides of the
argument.

He was respectful of the past. He believed in stare decisis, the principle that
precedent should ordinarily be followed; and he accepted rules, once
established, from which he had earlier dissented. But his mind was open to fresh
applications of the Constitution to meet new threats.

When the Supreme Court first considered a Connecticut law against the use of
contraceptives, in 1961, Justice Harlan saw the law as a violation of the
liberty guaranteed by the 14th Amendment. The state, he said, was intruding on
''the most intimate details of the marital relation with the full power of the
criminal law.''

Justice Harlan had been a Wall Street lawyer, and he was a thorough gentleman.
But he had the rare empathic ability to see issues from the viewpoint of others
with different backgrounds and different premises.

In 1971, during the Vietnam War, the Court considered the case of a young man
convicted of disturbing the peace when he wore a sweatshirt bearing an obscenity
against the draft. Justice Harlan would no doubt have been outraged, personally,
at such behavior. But he wrote the opinion reversing the conviction.

''The constitutional right of free expression is powerful medicine in a society
as diverse and populous as ours,'' he said.

''It is designed and intended to remove governmental restraints from the arena
of public discussion, putting the decision as to what views shall be voiced
largely into the hands of each of us, in the hope that use of such freedom will
ultimately produce a more capable citizenry and more perfect polity and in the
belief that no other approach would comport with the premise of individual
dignity and choice upon which our political system rests.''

Judge Souter is described as a conservative. But indications are that he comes
to this great appointment with no ideological agenda: no list of legal wrongs he
is determined to right.

In Washington both conservatives and liberals seem discontented with that. They
want to make him register his votes in advance: for a constitutional right to
abortion or against, for affirmative action or against. I think that is a
terrible idea.

Requiring a nominee to fill out a scorecard on particular issues would be
contemptuous of the Court and of the judicial process. It would tell a judge
that he must make up his mind before hearing the facts and arguments in a
particular case. It would reduce the Supreme Court to sheer politics and wound
an institution on which all of us ultimately depend for our freedom.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              99 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 28, 1990, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Baker Hints at Direct Contact With Phnom Penh

BYLINE: By CLIFFORD KRAUSS, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 5, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 800 words

DATELINE: JAKARTA, Indonesia, July 27


Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d said today that Washington might further
modify its Indochina policy by opening direct diplomatic contacts with the
Communist Government of Cambodia.

His suggestion that the United States might drop its 11-year isolation of Phnom
Penh came as part of a blunt retort to the steady criticism of recent American
policies on Indochina and refugees. Several governments represented here at the
meeting of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations, or Asean, have attacked
the United States policy.

During the previous three days, several Southeast Asian foreign ministers said
the Bush Administration's withdrawal of diplomatic support for a Cambodian
guerrilla coalition including the Communist Khmer Rouge would only encourage the
Khmer Rouge to step up efforts on the battlefield. The United States policy
change included the opening of talks with Vietnam on Cambodia.

Indonesia and Singapore have been particularly harsh in their comments. The
other Asean nations -the Philippines, Malaysia, Thailand and Brunei - have
generally followed suit.

'Dialogue of Death' Condemned

Mr. Baker responded to the criticism today by saying, ''Continued support for
the coalition at the United Nations is only providing the Khmer Rouge diplomatic
cover for its military maneuvers.'' He added that other nations must show ''no
tolerance for the Khmer Rouge's dialogue of death.''

The Khmer Rouge are responsible for the killing or starvation of at least one
million people from 1975 to 1979. They were overthrown in January 1979 after the
Vietnamese invaded in December 1978. The Vietnamese later installed Hun Sen, a
Khmer Rouge defector, as Prime Minister.

Mr. Baker suggested that international diplomatic efforts between the Hun Sen
Government and the guerrilla coalition to settle the 11-year Cambodian conflict
could be wasted by ''a failure to recognize the steady, threatening movement''
of the Khmer Rouge, who are gaining in a rainy season offensive.

Further reverses on the battlefield can be averted, he said, only by stepping up
diplomatic exchanges with China, the Soviet Union and Vietnam to set up an
interim government and United Nations-supervised elections.

Mr. Baker said that to ''advance our election goals, we are also considering
contacts with the Phnom Penh regime.''

First Such Statement by Baker

While lower-level State Department officials had previously suggested that the
Administration was considering a move to improve relations with Cambodia, this
was the first time that Mr. Baker had publicly brought up the possibility.

State Department officials who favor further modifications of Cambodia policy
say that if Mr. Baker can overcome Asean concerns here, he could increase
efforts to improve relations with Phnom Penh and Hanoi and eventually cut all
military aid to the two non-Communist rebel groups aligned with the Khmer Rouge.
Such a realignment, these officials say, has been blocked so far by the National
Security Council.

In his 20-minute address to the Southeast Asian foreign ministers, Mr. Baker
also tried to narrow differences on how to deal with the continuing emigration
of Vietnamese refugees.

The Southeast Asian nations urged in a communique this week that the United
States agree to their proposal for involuntary return of boat people who leave
Vietnam for economic rather than political reasons. Otherwise, they warn, they
may have to stop accepting thousands of people who land on their shores every
year.

The United States, which cooperates with Southeast Asian countries in dealing
with refugee resettlement, has argued that no one should be forced to return to
a country as repressive as Vietnam.

U.N. Compromise Urged

Mr. Baker reiterated that position, but he asked that the Southeast Asian group
join the United States in accepting a compromise proposal offered by the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.

That proposal designates a new category of refugees - ''those who do not
object.'' Such people are to be convinced through screening and counseling that
a voluntary return to Vietnam is preferable to living for years in a wretched
refugee camp with little hope of finding permanent resettlement.

The Asean delegates appeared unwilling to criticize Mr. Baker directly, but they
did not seem impressed with his speech either.

''We're not interested in finger-pointing,'' said Datuk A. Kamil Jaafar,
Secretary General of the Malaysian Ministry of Foreign Affairs, ''but we can't
understand the choices the United States has made recently.'' He was
particularly critical of Mr. Baker's position on the Vietnamese refugees, saying
they were no different from the Haitians, Mexicans and Central Americans that
the United States has forcibly returned to their homes.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d, right, who said yesterday
that the United States might open direct diplomatic relations with Cambodia for
the first time in 11 years, with Foreign Minister Taro Nakayama of Japan at a
meeting of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations in Jakarta, Indonesia.
(Associated Press)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              100 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 28, 1990, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Acting Silly About Color

SECTION: Section 1; Page 20, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 344 words


Actors' Equity doesn't like the idea of a British actor ''painted yellow''
playing the lead role of a Eurasian in ''Miss Saigon'' when the musical comes to
Broadway from London next spring. That, it says, would be ''an affront to the
Asian community.''

Nonsense. The union is up to its old game of protecting members' jobs from
foreign talent and twisting agreed rules in the process. Actors' Equity and
British Equity have an arrangement allowing each other's established stars to
cross the Atlantic on a reciprocal basis. The agreement contains no prohibition
against actors of one race playing characters of another.

Moreover, there is no such ban in the American theater. If the ''Miss Saigon''
role went to a white American, the union wouldn't have a leg to stand on.
Indeed, if the race test were applied to American shows, Morgan Freeman couldn't
have starred in ''The Taming of the Shrew'' in Central Park this summer; whites
could never portray Othello on an American stage; and who on earth would have
played the King of Siam? ''Miss Saigon,'' produced by Cameron Mackintosh of
big-London-musical fame, doesn't open in New York until next March, but has
already broken the record for advance ticket sales. Set in Saigon during the
Vietnam War, it stars Jonathan Pryce as the Eurasian owner of a bar and brothel.
Mr. Mackintosh wants him on Broadway, too.

The American union hasn't actually said Mr. Pryce can't come; it has said that
it ''condemns'' the casting of an English actor made up to look Eurasian. But if
the condemnation develops into outright exclusion of Mr. Pryce, Mr. Mackintosh
threatens to cancel the March opening. And then what would Actors' Equity tell
all the jobless American actors and actresses who yearn for supporting roles in
the Broadway and touring companies?

British Equity says it has had no complaints from its Asian members about the
casting of Mr. Pryce. If he is no affront to Britain's substantial Asian
community, why should he offend America's Asians? Actors' Equity ought to heed
its name -actors' equity.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              101 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 29, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Testimony Begins in Lawsuit Over Effort to Aid Contras

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 24, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 828 words

DATELINE: MIAMI, July 28


Testimony has begun in the Federal trial of a civil suit pitting Eugene
Hasenfus, the only survivor of a plane crash that helped to expose the
Iran-contra affair, against Richard V. Secord, a leading figure in the scandal.

Mr. Hasenfus, a cargo handler, filed the Federal lawsuit in 1988 along with the
family of the plane's co-pilot, Wallace B. Sawyer Jr., who was among three
people killed in the Sandinista rocket attack on the rebel supply plane in
Nicaragua. They seek a preliminary estimate of $3.4 million in damages,
including expenses caused by the crash and lost income.

The downing of the C-123 cargo plane on Oct. 5, 1986, led to the discovery of an
extensive United States contra supply operation that was based in El Salvador
and financed by the profits from the American sale of arms to Iran.

After the crash, President Ronald Reagan denied that there was any Government
connection to the flight. But Mr. Hasenfus, and documents in the wreckage of the
plane, linked the crew to Government involvement.

The suit by Mr. Hasenfus and Mr. Sawyer's family is not only against Mr. Secord,
a retired Air Force general, but also against Southern Air Transport, a
Miami-based company that was owned by the Central Intelligence Agency until
1973. It alleges that they misled the crew and negligently used aircraft without
adequate safety equipment.

Mr. Secord and Southern Air deny they were legally responsible for Mr. Hasenfus
and Mr. Sawyer. They also contend that the two men knew the risks they were
taking in ferrying supplies to rebels fighting the Nicaraguan Government.

Mr. Hasenfus managed to parachute out of the plane after it was hit. He was
captured, convicted of terrorism and sentenced to 30 years in prison. The
Sandinista Government released him after he served three months, and he is now a
construction worker in Marinette, Wis.

Contract for Services

Mr. Hasenfus, 49 years old, testified Thursday that he worked for the
C.I.A.-owned airline Air America in the Vietnam War. When hostilities in Central
America heated up in July 1986, he said, he was contacted by William B. Cooper,
with whom he used to work in Southeast Asia, and was offered a job similar to
the work they had done there. Mr. Cooper was flying the plane that was shot down
in Nicaragua.

After talking to Mr. Cooper, Mr. Hasenfus said, he was taken to the Southern Air
headquarters at Miami International Airport, where he signed a contract with
Corporate Air Services. He said, however, he understood that Corporate Air was a
front for Southern Air, which was paying his expenses.

Mr. Hasenfus said the crews complained that there was no safety equipment like
parachutes or survival gear in the plane, and that the navigation radios did not
work properly. But he said he accepted the defects, thinking that the supply
operation was a patriotic, shoestring effort to fight communists in Central
America.

Only when the Iran-contra affair became public, he said, did he become aware
that Oliver L. North, Mr. Secord and Southern Air were running the supply effort
as a profit-making enterprise.

Effort to Conceal Operation

Richard Gadd, who helped Mr. North, Mr. Secord and Southern Air set up the
supply operation, said in written testimony on Friday that the use of Corporate
Air and other companies was designed to hide who was behind the supply effort.

Southern Air continued to do contract work for the United States Government even
after he was no longer owned by the C.I.A., Mr. Gadd said.

Mr. Gadd and the president of Southern Air, William Langton, decided that the
effort ''should be treated as a clandestine or covert activity (so the) media
could not attempt to trace it back to the owners and the United States
Government,'' the deposition said.

Mr. Gadd said Mr. Secord directed the money and made policy decisions in the
enterprise, a major point for Mr. Hasenfus, who is trying to prove that Mr.
Secord, an officer in Corporate Air, was his real employer.

Name on Tax Returns

On cross-examination, the lawyer for Southern Air, Robert Beckman, focused on
the role of Corporate Air, forcing Mr. Hasenfus to show that his pay drafts, tax
returns and unemployment compensation claim all reflected that company's name,
not Southern Air.

Mr. Beckman also sought to show that Mr. Hasenfus had violated a secrecy
agreement he signed with Corporate Air. Mr. Hasenfus said the case ''was already
blown by Congress'' when he later sold the rights to his story for $10,000 to
CBS. The account has never been made public, he said.

Mr. Secord's lawyers have said their client never had any legal relationship
with Mr. Hasenfus and Mr. Sawyer, and indeed had never met them.

Mr. Secord pleaded guilty on Nov. 8, 1989, to lying to Congressional
investigators when he said he was not aware of any money that went to Mr.
North's benefit from the maze of companies he used in the Iran-contra affair. He
was sentenced to two years' probation.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Eugene Hasenfus, who survived a plane crash that helped uncover
the Iran-contra affair, is suing Richard V. Secord and Southern Air Transport.
(Associated Press)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              102 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 29, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

1960's Troupe Celebrates 25 Years of Enthusiasm

BYLINE: By DIRK JOHNSON, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 18, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1163 words

DATELINE: DENVER, July 28


For those who were alarmed by the shaggy hair and radical politics on college
campuses in the 1960's, the traveling musical troupe Up With People was a
comforting reminder that some of America's youth, at least, had interests other
than insurrection.

With a broad smile for a trademark, the singing and dancing ambassadors of good
will celebrated their 25th anniversary here this weekend, marking a journey that
has touched every state and 69 nations.

In glitzy ceremonies, panel discussions and a black-tie dinner, Up With People
members, former members and supporters advanced the theme of peace, freedom and
togetherness. ''Someday soon, the day will come there's going to be room for
everyone,'' went the words to one song.

Dignitaries Arrive

Scores of dignitaries came to honor the troupe, including Princess Margriet of
the Netherlands; Eugene A. Cernan, the last astronaut to walk on the Moon, and
Shoichiro Toyoda, president of the Toyota Motor Corporation. Pope John Paul II
sent a message of congratulations. President Bush sent warm wishes, too, saying
he was sorry that other matters had kept him and his wife, Barbara, from making
their scheduled appearance here.

Yet to many people, this troupe with its boundless cheerfulness and
choreographed paeans to harmony remains something of an enigma.

Indeed, the organization still routinely explains itself in terms of what it is
not.

''We're not a religious organization and we're not political - left, right, up
or down,'' said J. Blanton Belk, who founded the group in 1965 and is still its
leader.

''The 60's were a very turbulent period, with the Vietnam War and all the
protests,'' he said. ''And there was a certain feeling of 'How can we put this
down?' But I did not share that feeling. I simply wanted to tap the creative
energy of these young people in a way that could touch the world.''

'A Positive Voice'

Mr. Belk, who formerly worked with Moral Re-armament, a conservative ecumenical
organization that sought to promote world understanding, gathered student
leaders from half a dozen universities. He challenged them to find a ''positive
voice'' as an alternative to what he regarded as the negativism of the times.

For the first two years, the group was sponsored by Moral Re-armament and the
Readers Digest Foundation. In 1968, Up With People incorporated as an
independent, tax-exempt cultural and educational organization. In contrast to
the slogans attacking the war, school, adults and a host of other targets, the
organization sought a more uplifting message, and so chose its name, Up With
People.

These days, the group does not seem to get as much attention in the media. In
fact, some people are a bit surprised to learn that it still exists.

But experts on popular culture say the group's homespun values still find
profound resonance in some quarters.

'Gorgeous Contrast'

''Look at 2 Live Crew and some of the foul-mouthed entertainers around,'' said
Dr. Richard A. Bogg, associate professor of sociology at Ball State University
in Muncie, Ind. ''In the minds of some people, especially parents, a group like
Up With People serves as a more gorgeous contrast than ever.

''A squeaky-clean group like this represents the hope of tomorrow. It's like
Christmas around the fireplace. And their message of peace and togetherness -
there's nothing new or unusual about it. It's based on a kind of a Utopian idea,
a kind of secular religion.''

With its unfettered enthusiasm, the group gets more than its share of smirks
from people who regard it as a bit too cheerful. But the conservative image
rankles some members, who say they are diverse in ideology.

Ideologies Vary

Sheila Quinlin, for example, a former member who now serves as the group's media
consultant, worked for the Presidential campaign of Gov. Michael S. Dukakis in
1988, while another alumna, Lindsey Johnson, was the leader of Coalition for
Women in George Bush's campaign that year.

''If I had the perception of this group as some kind of conservative
organization, I wouldn't have joined it,'' said Ms. Quinlin. ''When I first saw
the Up With People cast, I looked up at that stage and I saw whites, Chinese,
Indians and all shades of black people. And I thought, 'What a way to learn
about different cultures.' ''

As they travel around the country and the world, cast members stay in the homes
of sponsors.

The group's alumni include Ember Reichgott, the youngest woman ever elected to
the Minnesota Senate; Glenn Close, the actress, and Ardell Ruiz Chandler, an
American Indian tribal leader.

Nearly 50 percent of the 650 cast members each year come from outside the United
States. Among the Americans, members of racial minorities account for about 15
percent of the total.

Applications for Up With People outnumber slots by nearly 10 to 1, the group
says. Recruiters look chiefly for people 18 to 26 years old who demonstrate a
desire to learn about other cultures. While it is understood that cast members
all sing and dance, there is no performance audition.

With an annual budget of more than $19 million, the group receives contributions
from scores of national and international corporations, including Coca-Cola,
General Electric and Volvo.

To participate for a year, each member must pay $9,200, but more than 30 percent
of them receive financial aid from the organization. Many others secure
financial help independently, typically through a local company or service club,
like the Rotary.

''The biggest misconception is that we're an entertainment show, but that's only
our vehicle,'' said Steve Woods, vice president of Up With People. ''Our mission
is to teach people about the world, to help them learn about diversity in a way
that can help them become better leaders.''

In addition to musical performances, members of Up With People serve as
volunteers at shelters for the homeless, drug rehabilitation centers and
impoverished schools. When a tornado hit Limon, Colo., this month, cast members
helped in cleanup efforts. #5,000 Alumni Attend Nearly 5,000 former members of
the troupe gathered here this week.

In a hotel lobby, an American couple bumped into old friends, a couple from
Japan. The men each bowed, then shook hands. The women looked at one another,
and bowed, then let out a joyful squeal, jumped in the air, reached out with
their arms and joined in a tearful embrace.

''I was a young kid in a small, white, mostly blue-collar town,'' said Thomas
Kelly, 35, who now runs a kitchen appliances business in Marblehead, Mass. ''My
year of touring really taught me - now I know it sounds corny - it taught me
that people from all the different races and creeds all have the same wants and
needs.''

Roxanne Trump-Miles of Milwaukee said she had been a Girl Scout and a regular
churchgoer who had expected the other cast members to be ''even more
conservative than me.''

''But then you learn that things aren't always like they seem,'' she said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Members of the Up With People traveling musical troupe, which
has brought its message of peace, freedom and togetherness to every state and to
69 countries since 1965, celebrating the troupe's 25th anniversary during a
glitzy ceremony last week in Denver. (Eric Bakke for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              103 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 29, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Canada Proposes Settlement in Mohawk Standoff

BYLINE: By JOHN F. BURNS, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 6, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 677 words

DATELINE: TORONTO, July 28


After nearly three weeks of armed confrontation between the Quebec police and
Mohawk Indians at two locations outside Montreal, the Canadian Government and
the Quebec authorities have put forth a series of proposals to end the dispute.

How the Mohawks will respond is uncertain; a settlement remains snagged over the
issue of how the authorities pursue an investigation into the killing of a
police officer at the outset of the confrontation.

The proposals, announced on Friday, were intended to resolve what has become one
of the most bitter disputes involving Canadian Indians this century. It began
with the shooting death of the police corporal and escalated quickly into a
siege involving 1,500 Quebec police officers. Across Canada, the siege has
reopened old debates about the historic usurpation of Indian lands.

The authorities offered to end the standoffs by withdrawing officers at the two
sites, by surrendering to the Mohawks land in dispute at the tourist town of
Oka, Quebec, and by opening talks on broader Mohawk land claims.

The Ottawa Government's announcement that it has already begun purchasing 55
acres at the center of the Oka dispute, and that it is ready to negotiate with
the Mohawks over an additional 260 square miles, appeared to meet the central
demand made by the Mohawk community at Oka.

Prime Minister Brian Mulroney, entering the dispute for the first time, said on
Friday that it was time for Canada to heed Indian grievances. ''I believe that
our native people, over decades and centuries, have not been well treated by
Canada and by Canadians,'' Mr. Mulroney said.

The Quebec Government proposed elaborate arrangements for an end to the standoff
that would remove all but about two dozen of the police officers surrounding the
Mohawk barricades at Oka, 20 miles northwest of Montreal, and at the Mercier
bridge across the St. Lawrence south of the city, which has been closed to more
than 60,000 commuters by the Mohawk occupation.

Dispute Over Officer's Death

But prospects for an end to the confrontation continued to be snagged by the
death of Cpl. Marcel Lemay, a 31-year-old marksman who died in a shootout as
police units attempted unsuccessfully to storm the Mohawk barricades at Oka on
July 11.

In the proposals for a settlement at Oka and at the bridge, Quebec officials
released information implying that there could be murder charges brought against
Mohawks in the death of Corporal Lemay, and suggesting arrangements that would
assist investigators in determining who fired the shot that killed the officer.

Saying that they were anxious not to worsen an already tense situation, the
Quebec officials had refused previously to disclose the results of ballistics
tests conducted on the bullet that killed Corporal Lemay, leaving it unclear
whether the officer was killed by fire from Mohawks or by crossfire from another
police officer, as the Mohawks asserted.

But on Friday, the officials said that the bullet was of a type not used by the
Quebec Police, and that they would insist that all the weapons used by the
Indians at Oka be surrendered.

How the dispute is resolved will have reverberations across the border in New
York State, where the state police face a similar challenge from Mohawks on the
Akwesasne reserve. The Canadian connection to the Akwesasne confrontation arises
from reports that as many as 40 of the 150 Mohawk gunmen at Oka are Americans
from Akwesasne, some of them reportedly Vietnam veterans. According to accounts
by Canadian reporters who have been behind the Oka barricades, the Americans are
among those at the Mohawk barricades opposing any concessions, including those
that involve cooperating with police inquiries into Corporal Lemay's death.

Quebec has proposed that the two sides monitor arrangements under which the
Mohawks would deposit all of their weapons, including AK-47 assault rifles, in a
box before leaving Oka. But spokesmen for the Mohawks have insisted that the
tribesmen manning the barricades be allowed to leave with their weapons.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              104 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 29, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THEATER;
Orchestrators Are Tired of Playing Second Fiddle

BYLINE: By LAURIE WINER

SECTION: Section 2; Page 5, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 2105 words


When the ''City of Angels'' composer Cy Coleman accepted his Tony award for best
score last month, he thanked his producer, his director, his cast, his
designers, the ''most awesome music group that I've ever worked with, and the
best band in a Broadway pit ever.''

Billy Byers, the veteran 63-year-old orchestrator who outfitted ''City of
Angels'' with its quintessential swing arrangement, was conspicuously not
mentioned by name. Of course, it's virtually impossible to thank everyone at the
crucial moment, and Mr. Coleman said later, with considerable emotion, that he
considers Mr. Byers an artist. ''He puts into his orchestrations everything I
put into my music,'' he said. ''I would do every show with him.''

Although some Broadway composers, Stephen Sondheim, for example, never fail to
recognize their orchestrators when collecting prizes, the art of orchestration
remains a largely thankless and mysterious one, at least in the theater.

On the simplest level, the orchestrator, or arranger (most musicians use the
terms interchangeably), writes out the composer's full score on paper. He
determines, according to restraints placed on him by the show's producer, how
many musicians will play how many instruments, what those instruments will be
and what notes each of the instruments will play.

Orchestrating a musical, however, goes beyond the dictionary definition of the
word. ''Most people think that we simply assign notes to instruments in the
orchestra, from written music that already presupposes harmony and
counterpoint,'' says Jonathan Tunick, who has arranged all of Stephen Sondheim's
shows since ''Company'' (1970) except ''Sunday in the Park With George'' (1984).
''But we are responsible for far more than that. We become the final arbiter of
how the music is written, just as the musical director is responsible for how
the music is performed. It's the orchestrator who interprets the composer's
intentions, who deals with the copyists, and usually composes the overture and
entr'acte.'' If you subscribe to Mr. Tunick's theory that an orchestrator's
contribution is as essential to the success of a musical as that of the
lighting, set or costume designers, then you may wonder why there is no Tony
award for orchestration, or why the names of the great Broadway orchestrators -
Robert Russell Bennett, Don Walker, Philip J. Lang, Ralph Burns, Robert Ginzler
and Mr. Tunick, to name a few - are generally known only to the most devoted
theater aficionados. If anything, the orchestrator's lot has improved:
historically, some of the best of them were badly paid and only grudgingly given
recognition. There is at least one documented case of a composer, Richard
Rodgers, willfully playing down the contribution of his orchestrator, Robert
Russell Bennett. In his autobiography, ''Musical Stages,'' Rodgers recalls
writing the score for ''Victory at Sea,'' the 1952 NBC documentary series. ''For
the difficult technical task of timing, cutting and orchestrating,'' wrote
Rodgers, ''I turned to my old friend Russell Bennett, who has no equal in this
kind of work. He fully deserves the credit, which I give him without undue
modesty, for making my music sound better than it was.''

It is widely believed among orchestratorsthat Russell Bennett did more, in the
case of ''Victory at Sea,'' than make Rodgers's music sound better than it was.
Even David Ewen, who published a thoroughly noncontroversial biography of the
composer in 1957, declared: ''Simple honesty dictates the admission that much of
the 13 hours of music was created not by Rodgers but by his orchestrator, Robert
Russell Bennett, who not only provided the orchestral dress but also many of the
transitional passages.''

Simple honesty must also dictate that ''Victory at Sea'' is not Rodgers's finest
composing moment. If Russell Bennett did in fact write much of it, Rodgers could
have acknowledged that without undue harm to his reputation. What is perhaps
most telling is that he defines orchestration as a ''difficult technical task.''
In Rodgers's day that would have been an understatement touched with
condescension; today, as the thematic ambitions of the musical play grow more
and more sophisticated, an orchestrator must be not only a technician but,
increasingly, an imaginative historian and musicologist, as well as an astute
interpretive artist in his own right.

According to Mr. Tunick, there are three basic styles of orchestration in the
Broadway musical. The first comes out of old vaudeville and from military bands;
it's what orchestrators call the ''Broadway sound'' and may be best typified by
''Hello, Dolly!'' The second, the ''academic school,'' is based mainly on
classical operetta. ''Candide'' would be a case in point. Finally, there is the
''interpretive style,'' says Mr. Tunick, ''where the arranger draws from many
sources to interpret the lyric in a dramatic sense. Russell Bennett's
orchestration of 'Lonely Room' in 'Oklahoma' is a great example of an
orchestration that helps set the mood and character, much like a piece of
theater design, like sets and lighting.''

One of Mr. Tunick's favorite bits of orchestration is in ''Bye, Bye Birdie,''
arranged by his mentor, Robert (Red) Ginzler, who was himself the assistant to
Don Walker during the heyday of the musical (Walker orchestrated more than 100
Broadway shows, including ''Fiddler on the Roof,'' ''The Music Man'' and ''The
Most Happy Fella'').

'' 'Bye, Bye Birdie' was the first Broadway show that I thought was as
sophisticated as a film score,'' says Mr. Tunick, who is also a respected
composer of film and TV scores and is now at work on an opera with the lyricist
Sheldon Harnick. ''I thought it was brilliant how Red rode the laughs in the
song 'Spanish Rose,' how he underplayed the jokes like the best comedians.''

For Mr. Tunick, the art of understatement was well learned. He has orchestrated
some of the most complex, dramatically, of all the Broadway musicals. ''The rule
in theater is 'Don't tell me, show me.' Orchestration has to get under the
number and express the unsaid,'' he explains. ''There's no sense in repeating
what the lyrics are already saying. If you can find what's not being said in a
song, you've found gold.''

In ''No More,'' from Mr. Sondheim's ''Into the Woods,'' for instance, Mr. Tunick
takes a very dark and nuanced moment - a man coveting death after his wife has
died - and underscores it with a light, hopeful sound that delicately prefigures
the solace and emotional reawakening the character will find in the next number,
''No One Is Alone.''

''Restraint is one of the hardest things to learn,'' says Michael Starobin, at
34, the youngest of today's sought-after theater orchestrators. Mr. Starobin has
to his credit ''March of the Falsettos,'' ''Sunday in the Park With George'' and
''Once on This Island,'' and can be seen playing the piano at Playwrights
Horizons, where he is the musical director and orchestrator for the new William
Finn musical, ''Falsettoland.'' He is also at work on the new Stephen Sondheim
musical, ''Assassins,'' which is scheduled to have its premiere at Playwrights
Horizons early next year.

In an emotional song, says Mr. Starobin, ''you just want to jump in the wave and
get swept away by it. As an orchestrator, though, you have to have objectivity
and step back - often you have to leave room so that the voices can create the
exultation in a song.''

Mr. Starobin's work has so far distinguished him in two areas. He is
particularly good at writing arrangements that communicate the frenetic thoughts
of neurotic, driven characters, like Marvin in ''March of the Falsettos'' and
George in ''Sunday in the Park.'' ''Players and copyists complain that I write
too many notes,'' he says. ''I love virtuosity. I love hearing musicians
working.'' Mr. Starobin is also known for his dexterous use of the synthesizer,
now a staple instrument in the theater orchestra.''The sound that defines a
musical is changing drastically; I just don't know what it's changing to,'' he
says. ''But the synthesizer is a wonderful tool. Because it can imitate other
instruments, the biggest mistake that people make is to use it as an economic
means to eliminate instruments. It's fine to use it sparingly to beef up a small
orchestra. An ersatz trumpet can be fun. But you have to remember that it has
its own personality, and if you write for it as if it's a real trumpet, you're
going to get a very tinny, unsatisfying sound. The synthesizer cannot sing - it
cannot soar, emotionally speaking. For that, you need a real violin or
trumpet.''

William Brohn, the orchestrator for the West End hit ''Miss Saigon,'' with music
by Claude-Michel Schonberg (''Les Miserables''), agrees that the synthesizer
should be used judiciously. Mr. Brohn is still polishing the arrangements for
the Broadway opening of the musical, scheduled for April 1991.

In ''Miss Saigon,'' the lyricists Alain Boublil and Richard Maltby Jr. transpose
the ''Madama Butterfly'' story to Vietnam, circa 1975. Mr. Brohn used the
synthesizer to simulate indigenous Asian instruments that would have been
extremely costly to hire. ''The synth can imitate very well several exotic
percussive sounds as well as some Vietnamese lutes and strings, such as the dan
tranh, a three-stringed guitarlike thing with a peculiar sound,'' he says.

There was, however, a Japanese flute that Mr. Brohn found the synthesizer could
not replicate, the shakuchacui, which has a haunting tone that is first sounded
in the show's overture. ''That is an instrument that requires the emotion of a
player; it needs a heart,'' explains Mr. Brohn. ''It represents Kim, the
heroine, and the tragedy of her life. It couldn't be synthesized.''

A sometime partner of Mr. Brohn's is Sid Ramin, who arranged ''Jerome Robbins's
Broadway'' with him. Mr. Ramin also orchestrated ''West Side Story'' with
Leonard Bernstein and Irwin Kostal, and ''Gypsy'' with Robert Ginzler. The
Jerome Robbins project marked Mr. Ramin's return to the theater after several
years of pop arranging and commerical scoring (''I hated how rushed it always
was in the theater''). His and Mr. Ginzler's classic orchestration for ''Gypsy''
can currently be heard at the St. James Theater.

''If we had only known then what we know now,'' says Mr. Ramin, who receives no
royalties from his work on several frequently produced shows. ''The fee that we
got on 'West Side Story' would be ridiculously low by today's standards. We got
paid $12 a page for about 800 pages of score. And that was it. We never received
a sou again. Don Walker was the first to ask for a percentage of the box office
gross. Russell Bennett wasn't even in favor of the idea. But all in all, I'd
have to say I was adequately paid, considering how much joy I got from it. I
mean, to go to the theater now and hear the orchestra tune up for 'Gypsy,' and
out of that cacophony to hear the first consonant sound, and then the tap of a
baton. I still get goose bumps.''

MINDING THE SCORE

Orchestrators often sound like painters: they speak of the instruments as their
palettes and assign to them color, emotion, even gender. Most, in fact, are
musicians.

Several first-rate orchestrators have been trombonists. Billy Byers (''City of
Angels'') and Michael Gibson (''Meet Me in St. Louis,'' the 1987 ''Anything
Goes'' revival) played the trombone. So did Nelson Riddle, Philip Lang
(''Camelot'') and ''most of the better jazz arrangers,'' says Mr. Byers.
''Trombonists sit in the center of the orchestra,'' he explains. ''They develop
an empathy for more instruments that way.''

Mr. Byers played with Benny Goodman's orchestra, composed jazz and pop tunes
and, in the 1950's, wrote the arrangements for the Sid Caesar television program
''Your Show of Shows'' with Irwin Kostal and Sid Ramin.

Mr. Ramin (''West Side Story,'' ''Gypsy''), oddly, has no musical training.
''But the paradox is that if you like to study scores and you read a few books,
it's not too mysterious,'' he says. ''You just have to know what the top and
bottom notes are, and you have to be able to mix colors in your head.'' ''Of
course,'' he adds ''every arranger is a frustrated composer.''

Michael Starobin (''Sunday in the Park With George''), who trained as a
classical musician, agrees. ''Sometimes when I'm orchestrating someone else's
work I think, 'I could write a better number here.' But there are major
advantages as well. After three months I leave and go on to another show.
Composers can take five years to write a show. If that show folds, I haven't
lost five years of my life to it.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Scott Waara, center, and the Angel City 4, a singing group in
''City of Angels''-music for the Broadway show was written by Cy Coleman and
orchestrated by Billy Byers (Martha Swope/''City of Angels''); Billy Byers-His
arrangements help ''City of Angels'' swing. (Gary Moss/Outline for The New York
Times) (pg. 5); Michael Starobin, 34, orchestrated ''Sunday in the Park With
George.'' (G. Paul Burnett/The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              105 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 29, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

TELEVISION;
There's Been a Change In the Weather

BYLINE: By JAN HOFFMAN; Jan Hoffman writes for The Village Voice, Premiere and
other publications.

SECTION: Section 2; Page 25, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1358 words


On May 14, as a beloved broadcaster bade farewell to San Francisco, crestfallen
viewers were taped vowing that they could not cope without him. During KRON-TV's
lavish 13-minute salute to Mark Thompson, the rock-concert promoter Bill Graham
gratefully solicited Mr. Thompson's advice about scheduling headliners, and San
Francisco Giants slugger Will Clark begged him for hitting tips.

The object of all this tongue-in-cheek reverence was neither a retiring anchor
nor a sage commentator. The 32-year-old Mr. Thompson, easily the most popular
personality on KRON's news show, forecasts the weather.

Mr. Thompson, who would wryly deliver his forecast in a tuxedo or jeans and a
T-shirt from a front porch or a llama farm around the city, is among a new
generation of weather forecasters who include ''entertainer'' as part of their
job description. At KTTV, a Fox-owned station in Los Angeles, where he will
deliver his first weather forecast a week from tomorrow, Mr. Thompson's
high-six- figure contract stipulates that the network will create an additional
program for him, possibly even a sitcom.

According to a number of TV news directors, the trend toward making the weather
report a veritable entertainment segment has risen in proportion to the
bloodletting and general gloominess reported on the nightly news. Now that even
sportscasts are rife with reports about prison terms and blackmail, the weather
forecaster, by default, has become the audience's much-needed comic relief.

This approach doesn't go over well when the occasional blizzard or hurricane
strikes or in traditionally weather-battered parts of the country and a
no-nonsense broadcaster is crucial. Cable's 8-year-old Weather Channel, watched
daily in an estimated 45 million households nationally, has thrived, says its
president, Michael J. Eckert, because viewers rely on it ''for information, not
to be entertained.''

But on most days around the country, that information is mundane, uneventful -
yet necessary. As Eric Sorensen, executive producer of the CBS ''This Morning''
show, points out, ''The research shows that weather is the most important reason
people watch TV in the morning.''

So, the ratings-hungry national morning shows have sought weather announcers
with a performer's flair: ABC's punning but dignified Spencer Christian, NBC's
antic Willard Scott and CBS's thrill-seeking Mark McEwen - none of whom prepare
their own weather reports (the programs have staff meteorologists).
Occasionally, show biz threatens to submerge the forecast itself. Dressed in a
wet suit and mask, ''This Morning's'' Mark McEwen recently broadcast from inside
a shark tank.

Will it swamp the hard stuff? Tom Petner, vice president of news for WWOR-TV, ex
presses mock impatience when he says, ''I put all this thought into complex news
stories and the first thing people always ask is: 'Can you get Lloyd Lindsay
Young to say ''Hellooo'' to my family tomorrow night?' ''

Don Fitzpatrick, a San Francisco-based headhunter for TV personnel, says that
because of the demand for on-air personalities capable of delivering
temperatures and jokes at the same time, the weather forecaster has become the
most challenging job slot to fill. In the 1950's and 60's, it was the
quintessential entry-level position occupied by, as Mr. Fitzpatrick calls them,
skimpily clad ''weather bunnies''; as feminist awareness increased during the
70's, station managers began hiring ''weather nerds'' - professional
meteorologists who refuse to crack a smile.

But the need for a weather forecaster to provide comic relief, says Mr.
Fitzpatrick, became increasingly apparent during the Vietnam War as TV news grew
more somber. By 1980, NBC's ''Today'' recruited a former Bozo the Clown and
Ronald McDon ald named Willard Scott to dress up its weather forecast. Mr.
Scott's growth in popularity eventually broadened the job's narrow focus and
elevated its lowly status.

These days weather forecasting is a desirable, high-profile position, with
salaries in local markets topping $500,000. It is no longer deemed ''women's
work'' - only 120 of roughly 2,400 weather slots nationwide are staffed by
women. More men do make a formal study of meteorology, but that's only a partial
explanation. The viewing public still tends to see funny women, like Roseanne
Barr, as aberrations, and more readily accepts Elvis impersonations from men
like Tod Tongen, who vaulted from a small station in Little Rock to a major one
in Miami by using an infant and a python as map pointers.

The weather forecaster has also become the member of a broadcast team with whom
the audience can bond - a wise-mouth younger brother, a plump, dotty uncle,
''the one you'd most like to invite to your barbecue,'' says Mr. Fitzpatrick,
citing the national brouhaha that erupted last year when, as he said, ''smart,
arrogant Bryant Gumbel insulted warm, fuzzy Willard Scott.'' The job also
involves being a station's good-will ambassador - the one most likely to kiss
babies and seals. According to NBC, Mr. Scott gets more requests for public
appearances than any of its other celebrities, including Bill Cosby.

Mr. Fitzpatrick's candidate for brightest future star is Al Roker, Mr. Scott's
''Today'' fill-in and a ''Sunday Today'' contributor. The genial Mr. Roker, a
frustrated cartoonist with meteorological training and much-remarked-upon socks,
is becoming known as the hardest man to dislike in broadcasting. He also does
local weekday forecasts, which he festoons with his own hand-drawn animation,
and with labels such as ''Driving Miss Cloudy'' and ''Robo-Sun,'' as well as
specials on baldness and the travails of his dieting.

Mr. Roker's easy wit doesn't impinge on his credibility; locally he is known for
his cool-headed reporting during atmospheric crises like Hurricanes Gloria and
Hugo. ''It's not brain surgery,'' he said in a recent interview, ''but you are
having an impact. People ask if this is a jumping-off point for another kind of
posi tion, and I say, 'I thought it was a pretty good job, pardon me.' ''

Earlier in his career, Mr. Roker affected a manic personality. ''I would pop out
of a manhole in a groundhog suit,'' he said. ''But I was a sophomore in college
then, and that stuff was sophomoric. For a 36-year-old to do that . . .'' and he
rolled his eyes.

Mark McEwen, 35, cheerfully admits to having no background in weather. He was
hired by the CBS entertainment division for ''This Morning'' in 1987, after he
was fired from his morning disk-jockey slot at WNEW-FM, a New York City rock
station. Mr. McEwen, who still moonlights as a stand-up comic, has been turning
his segments on the CBS morning show into a kind of Evel Knievel routine at 8:35
A.M.: recently he belly-flopped across a wet tarpaulin at Wrigley Field, flew in
a hot-air balloon at the Dayton Air Show and water-skied for the first time -
making an inordinately big splash. Mr. McEwen, who is also the show's music
correspondent and its lure for youthful viewers, calls his escapades
''rock-and-roll weather.'' Like Mr. Roker and Mr. Thompson, Mr. McEwen considers
Willard Scott his role model. Mr. Scott doesn't dispute that tribute, but
prefers to think he induced scientists to be humorous rather than encouraged
comics to mangle science. ''A whole generation watched the fun and then studied
meteorology in college,'' Mr. Scott says. ''They've taken the gimmicks and added
professionalism.'' Indeed, in 1984, Pennsylvania State University started
offering a TV forecasting course in its meteorology department.

Mr. Scott believes the real reason, however, for the growing popularity of
weather forecasters is that ''the audience loves a whipping boy,'' especially
during tough times. An anchor can't be blamed for bad news, but a rained-out
picnic is always the weather forecaster's fault.

But particularly in tough times, Mr. Thompson believes, it's up to the weather
forecaster to end the broadcast with a smile: ''After the anchors tell you about
the rapes and the pipe bombs, the weather guy reminds you there will always be a
tomorrow - and by the way it will be partly sunny and 83 degrees.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Among TV weathermen who indulge in theatrics are Willard Scott
of NBC's ''Today'' show (in costume, at right) (NBC); Al Roker of WNBC (top
left, in a hair salon) (WNBC-TV), and Mark Thompson (at left in photograph), who
begins a stint at KTTV in Los Angeles next month and is seen here with Will
Clark of the San Francisco Giants during a salute marking his departure from
KRON. (KRON-TV) (pg. 25); Mark McEwen of CBS moonlights as a stand-up comic.
(CBS) (pg. 25)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              106 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 29, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

'Night, La Guardia

BYLINE: By Patrick Cooke; Patrick Cooke is a contributing editor at In Health
Magazine in Sausalito, Calif.

SECTION: Section 5; Page 37, Column 1; Travel Desk

LENGTH: 1117 words


All the world loves the tale of a marooned traveler, but alas, those adventures
aren't as picturesque as they used to be. Today, any ordinary vacationer may
become stranded in a place like Palau or a Portuguese coastal village, with
little money, knowing no one, forced to pass the night in a rental car. Lost
traveler's checks, a wrong turn, a travel agent's blunder. Sure, a shipwreck has
more panache, but these modern tales in which no kindly native offers help, no
hotel clerk smiles understandingly, are as forbidding in their own way as
''Robinson Crusoe.'' ''What a shocking ordeal,'' the castaway will later tell
you. ''I might have been killed!''

There is not much romance in spending the night at La Guardia Airport, as I
discovered a few years ago. It is probably not very dangerous or exotic but La
Guardia is a terrible, lonely atoll upon which to be set.

I had been wandering the seaside towns along the Mediterranean for several
weeks, yawning through the hot afternoons, eating and dozing. Now, on the day I
was to return to the States, the long high-speed drive to Malpensa airport in
Milan, through the mountains and tunnels of Emilia-Romagna, then the heat of
flat Lombardy seemed an effortless way to leave the country. The flight home was
one of those end-of-summer kind that lumbers west stuffed with Americans
dreading Labor Day.

Customs was slow and overly curious at Kennedy, and the sunburned passengers
impatient. The humidity in New York was beyond belief. The home stretch of the
long day's journey would be a quick shuttle to La Guardia, then a short commuter
hop to Washington.

But it was very late. By the time we reached La Guardia, after 11, passengers
were five deep at the ticket counter bleating tearfully at a lone woman whose
hair hung over her eyes. The final flights out for the evening were departing
and the airport had the panicked feeling of the fall of Saigon. ''Boston? The
last one is in eight minutes,'' the woman was screaming. ''You've got a chance
if you run like hell. Is that your dog?''

When my turn came we both knew I had missed the last flight. No more flights
until morning. ''I'm sorry,'' she said. ''Good night.''

Marooned! And so begins my diary. 11:30 P.M.: This does not look good. I've now
called everyone I know in New York. With the nighttime temperature around 90
degrees, everyone must have escaped out of town.

Inventory. Money: I have what appears to be 150,000 lire but I lost my chance to
change money at Kennedy. The only credit card I brought expired in Italy. Food:
complimentary airline peanuts, two packs.

A fellow exile lugging skis (where had he been?) has decided to make a try for
the train. He looks resigned to failure as he drifts away in a cab. He'll
probably spend the night in Penn Station. Things could be worse. 12:50 A.M.:
There are only a few of us left now, perhaps 20 castaways, exiles of the
airways. We're left behind, our noses pressed against the big windows of a
carpeted waiting area overlooking the the runway and a few big planes nestled in
their gates, asleep for the night.

Among us are an elderly Spanish couple, a flock of young German tourists, a pair
of honeymooners, an Air Force corporal with a headlock on an enormous duffel
bag, and a man in a blue blazer whose only gear is a set of golf clubs. Nothing
for us to do but wait to go out on the morning tide. 2:30 A.M.: La Guardia is
nearly empty now. The place seems as big as a continent. Antarctica perhaps: the
air-conditioning is running at full strength and has caught the refugees off
guard. The only relief is a walk out into the steamy night.

The female half of the newlywed couple is not taking this well. She has set off
to find someone she can protest to about the frost conditions, and about the
canned music, which is so loud her husband has to shout ''There is nothing,
absolutely nothing, we can do . . . Sweetheart.''

Eat one pack of peanuts. Must be more conservative. 3:30 A.M.: The Germans have
gone to sleep. They seem used to this sort of thing. A half hour ago they
unfurled their bedrolls and are now fast asleep, huddled together like garden
flowers. Americans seem more reluctant to lie down on the floor of a public
place. Maybe we're afraid to appear orphaned. Most of us have given up on the
plastic seats that seem deliberately designed to discourage lying down. Secretly
we are all hoping that security will come and rouse the sleeping Germans. 4
A.M.: The night ratchets on. Go outside to warm up again. I've never been this
fatigued in my life. Italy seems 100 years in the past. Out at the curb a woman
stands between two suitcases, swaying at the ankles, her arm raised as if
hailing a cab. Can't tell if her eyes are open or closed. No cars of any type
can be seen in either direction. Go back inside. 4:30 A.M.: The Air Force
corporal has been staring out the window at the empty airliners. Ask him if he
knows how to fly. ''Sort of,'' he says, but he looks unbalanced. Offer him a
peanut. The carpet cleaners come through with loud shampoo machines, covering
the floor with wet disinfectant and flustering the slumbering Germans. Ho, ho,
ho. But the Germans unpack ground cloths and once again look quite comfortable.
5:30 A.M.: Only a few left on our feet now, walking quirky patterns like
patients on a ward. Stagger again down to the other end of the terminal, seeing
no one until coming to a far off boarding area. There, the man with the golf
clubs stands hunched over his putter, practicing on the long red carpet.

Peanuts gone now. 5:45 A.M.: Maintenance man advises trying to sleep in a phone
booth, very popular among the stranded, he insists. ''Close the door, sit on the
floor and put your face on the seat.'' Find it difficult to believe I am having
this conversation, but it's worth a try. Note: This method of last resort is
undignified and repulsive, and the light springs on when you shut the door, but
it works. 6:30 A.M.: Someone is shoving at the phone booth door. There are
people everywhere. A well-dressed businesswoman trying to get in to make a call
suddenly looks down appalled at my appearance and hurries away. But O Beauteous
Light! O La Guardia! Shops are open and bustling. Now the noise of thundering
jets and tickets being torn along the dotted line.

Sadly, I recognize none of my comrades from the previous night; all of them -
even the well-rested Germans - have been swept away into the rushing crowd. And
soon, I too am rescued aloft and devouring an airline breakfast. My seat
companion - attempting to ignore me - is the same well-dressed businesswoman
''What a shocking ordeal,'' I say through a mouthful of omelet. ''I might have
been killed!''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              107 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 29, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

BEST SELLERS: July 29, 1990

SECTION: Section 7; Page 30, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1473 words




$

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Fiction

 1      1   7    THE BURDEN OF PROOF, by Scott Turow.
                 (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $22.95.) An attorney
                 tries to unravel the mystery of his wife's death
                 while defending his wheeler-dealer brother-in-law.

 2      2   6    MESSAGE FROM NAM, by Danielle Steel.
                 (Delacorte, $21.95.) A woman journalist's coming
                 of age in the years between the assassination of
                 John F. Kennedy and the fall of Saigon.

 3      3   4    COYOTE WAITS, by Tony Hillerman.
                 (HarperCollins, $19.95.) The murder of a Navajo
                 tribal policeman involves an ancient artifact.

 4      4   12   THE STAND, by Stephen King. (Doubleday,
                 $24.95.) Doomsday brings horrors to America; the
                 uncut version of a novel first published in 1978.

 5      5   15   SEPTEMBER, by Rosamunde Pilcher. (Dunne/St.
                 Martin's, $22.95.) Guests from many parts of the
                 world at a get-together in a small Scottish town.

 6      6   23   OH, THE PLACES YOU'LL GO! by Dr. Seuss.
                 (Random House, $12.95.) The problems of finding
                 your way through life; in verse and pictures.

 7      7   12   DRAGON, by Clive Cussler. (Simon & Schuster,
                 $21.95.) In 1993, Dirk Pitt moves fast to save
                 America from a Japanese extremist.

 8 *    9   20   THE BOURNE ULTIMATUM, by Robert Ludlum.
                 (Random House, $21.95.) Jason Bourne plans to
                 infiltrate the ruthless Medusa Brigade.

 9      8   12   AN INCONVENIENT WOMAN, by Dominick
                 Dunne. (Crown, $19.95.) Manners, morals and
                 murder in Los Angeles's high society.

10     10   3    MOUNTAIN LAUREL, by Jude Deveraux.
                 (Pocket, $18.95.) An Army officer's assignment, on
                 the eve of the Civil War, to escort a singer during
                 her tour of the Colorado gold fields.

11     11   6    SULLIVAN'S STING, by Lawrence Sanders.
                 (Putnam, $19.95.) The ordeals of a female cop
                 assigned to track down a Florida con man.

12            1             STARDUST, by Robert B. Parker. (Putnam,
                 $18.95.) A host of problems besets the private eye
                 Spenser when he's hired to protect a glamorous
                 television star.

13 *   12   11   THE GOLDEN ORANGE, by Joseph Wambaugh.
                 (Perigord/Morrow, $19.95.) Murder and chicanery
                 amid Orange County's yachts and mansions.

14     15   15   SKINNY LEGS AND ALL, by Tom Robbins.
                 (Bantam, $19.95.) The horror and humor of the
                 upcoming apocalypse.

15            1  KILLING MISTER WATSON, by Peter
                 Matthiessen. (Random House, $21.95.) How the
                 enigmatic career of a turn-of-the-century Florida
                 plantation owner evolved into an enduring legend.

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Nonfiction

 1      1   16   MEN AT WORK, by George F. Will. (Macmillan,
                 $19.95.) The political pundit and baseball buff
                 describes the craft of the game as practiced by
                 three players and a manager.

 2      2   9    DAVE BARRY TURNS 40, by Dave Barry. (Crown,
                 $16.95.) Reflections on the crises of middle age by
                 the syndicated humorist.

 3      4   27   MEGATRENDS 2000, by John Naisbitt and
                 Patricia Aburdene. (Morrow, $21.95.)
                 Prognostications for the next decade.

 4      3   8    FATHER, SON & CO., by Thomas J. Watson Jr. and
                 Peter Petre. (Bantam, $22.95.) The autobiography
                 of the man who succeeded his father as head of
                 I.B.M.

 5      5   27   BARBARIANS AT THE GATE, by Bryan
                 Burrough and John Helyar. (HarperCollins,
                 $22.95.) The 1988 battle for control of RJR Nabisco.

 6      6   8    DON'T SHOOT, IT'S ONLY ME, by Bob Hope with
                 Melville Shavelson. (Putnam, $19.95.) The
                 comedian reminisces about more than 50 years in
                 show business.

 7      8   45   IT WAS ON FIRE WHEN I LAY DOWN ON IT, by
                 Robert Fulghum. (Villard, $17.95.) A new collection
                 of inspirational essays.

 8      9   3    BEHIND THE MASK, by Dave Pallone with Alan
                 Steinberg. (Viking, $18.95.) The memoirs of the
                 controversial former National League umpire.

 9 *    7   4    CAPTAIN SIR RICHARD FRANCIS BURTON, by
                 Edward Rice. (Scribners, $35.) The strange and
                 remarkable career of the 19th-century British
                 explorer.

10     10   38   LIAR'S POKER, by Michael Lewis. (Norton,
                 $19.95.) Wall Street's tumultuous 1980's, as
                 witnessed by a young bond trader.

11     15   6    MY LIFE IN THREE ACTS, by Helen Hayes with
                 Katherine Hatch. (Wolff/Harcourt Brace
                 Jovanovich, $19.95.) The actress's memoirs.

12 *   11   90   ALL I REALLY NEED TO KNOW I LEARNED IN
                 KINDERGARTEN, by Robert Fulghum. (Villard,
                 $17.95.) Inspirational essays.

13     14   2    DISTURBING THE PEACE, by Vaclav Havel.
                 (Knopf, $19.95.) Reminiscences and reflections of
                 the playwright who became President of
                 Czechoslovakia in December.

14     12   6    PERIL AND PROMISE, by John Chancellor.
                 (HarperCollins, $17.95.) Observations about
                 contemporary America by a television newscaster.

15           24  HEAD FIRST, by Norman Cousins. (Dutton,
                 $19.95.) How the brain affects the body's endocrine
                 and immune systems.

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous

 1      1   76   WEALTH WITHOUT RISK, by Charles J. Givens.
                 (Simon & Schuster, $19.95.) A Florida
                 entrepreneur's financial advice.

 2      2   33   THE GREAT WALDO SEARCH, by Martin
                 Handford. (Little, Brown, $10.95.) A book of
                 illustrations in which the game is to find a
                 ubiquitous chap named Waldo.

 3      3   3    LIFE 101, by John-Roger and Peter McWilliams.
                 (Prelude Press, $18.95.) Advice about coping with
                 the human condition.

 4      5   2    HOMECOMING, by John Bradshaw. (Bantam,
                 $18.95.) How to find the child you once were that
                 lives within you and use it to deal with today's
                 problems.

 5          185  WEBSTER'S NINTH NEW COLLEGIATE
                 DICTIONARY. (Merriam-Webster, $16.95.) A
                 standard reference work, revised and updated.


These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,000
bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 28,000 other
retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets. The figures are
statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United
States.

 *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to
reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from
those of the book above.

And Bear in Mind
(Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)

THE LAST STATION: A Novel of Tolstoy's Last Year, by Jay Parini. (Holt, $22.95.)
Mr. Parini conjures up a familiar cast, according more respect than usual to the
hopes, fears, torments and motives of the all-too-human people who drove the old
man to distraction.

SEXUAL PERSONAE: Art and Decadence From Nefertiti to Emily Dickinson, by Camille
Paglia. (Yale University, $35.) A critical study of sexuality in Western art
that is also a scorched-earth attack on the underlying assumptions of liberalism
and feminism.

VILLAGE: As It Happened Through a Fifteen Year Period, by Robert McAlmon.
(University of New Mexico, paper, $14.95.) This short but sustained epic of
small-town American life by a once substantial member of the Lost Generation,
published in Paris in 1924, is still startlingly fresh in its first American
appearance.

LYDIA AND MAYNARD: The Letters of Lydia Lopokova and John Maynard Keynes, edited
by Polly Hill and Richard Keynes. (Scribners, $24.95.) Out of the tangled
thickets of Bloomsbury come these tender and dazzling love letters between the
commanding economist and the Ballets Russes dancer.

SECRET ANNIVERSARIES, by Scott Spencer. (Knopf, $19.95.) A convincing
Bildungsroman whose heroine's soul is formed, in public and private, by
historical events from the 30's to the 60's.

BOHIN MANOR, by Tadeusz Konwicki. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $19.95.) This
beautiful, grave novel connects the 19th and 20th centuries, the historic point
of view and the personal voice.

A HISTORY OF SOUTH AFRICA, by Leonard Thompson. (Yale University, $29.95.) An
admirably objective one-volume history of that rich but unfortunate land that
offers some grounds to hope that compromise and reconciliation may indeed
prevail.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: LIST

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              108 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 29, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Goodbye to All That

BYLINE: By LEON V. SIGAL; Leon V. Sigal is a member of the editorial board of
The New York Times.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 24, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1129 words



THE END OF THE COLD WAR
European Unity, Socialism, and the Shift in Global Power.
By Bogdan Denitch.
123 pp. Minneapolis:
University of Minnesota Press.
Cloth, $25. Paper, $10.95.

THE COLD WAR IS OVER
By William G. Hyland.
222 pp. New York: Times Books. $18.95.

SOVIET UNION 2000
Reform or Revolution?
By Walter Laqueur.
With John Erickson, Paul A. Goble,
Edward Luttwak, Gur Ofer and Arthur Waldron.
201 pp. New York:
St. Martin's Press. $19.95.

Mikhail S. Gorbachev did not stand idly by and watch the Soviet empire in
Eastern Europe disintegrate. He intervened to push the process along. He stayed
the hand of Soviet military and K.G.B. forces in Eastern Europe, and in so doing
paralyzed their indigenous allies. And he prodded Communist Party leaders in the
Eastern-bloc countries to cede power to reform-minded colleagues and share it
with non-Communists.

Perhaps he hoped that local Communists could reform themselves in time to hold
on to power, but he was not prepared to prop them up militarily if they could
not. Let Poland be Poland, he decided, knowing that to do otherwise would
frustrate reform in the Soviet Union.

Today, Mr. Gorbachev's Russian Reformation rumbles on. The transformations of
1989 have brought hope for many, foreboding for a few and daunting questions for
everyone. What caused those upheavals? What will they lead to? And how should
the United States respond? These three books, each in its own unsatisfying way,
look backward for answers. The authors interpret the past so differently that
it's hard to imagine they all lived through the same events. Walter Laqueur and
company in ''Soviet Union 2000'' and William G. Hyland in ''The Cold War Is
Over'' are exponents of an American anti-Communist orthodoxy. Bogdan Denitch in
''The End of the Cold War'' espouses a European socialist orthodoxy.

In the American orthodoxy, Soviet Communism's implacable hostility to the West
and its ideals is the enduring continuity. Mr. Gorbachev's five-year rule is the
discontinuity, a temporary aberration born of economic necessity and renewed
pressure from the West that has forced Moscow to pull back for what Mr. Hyland
calls a ''breather.'' But, in fact, the Russian Reformation has gone far beyond
that.

In socialist orthodoxy, the continuity is the growing convergence of democratic
socialism and Christian democracy along Swedish lines. The discontinuity was the
Communist seizure of power in the Soviet Union, and the later imposition of
Soviet hegemony in Eastern Europe, matched by United States hegemony in Western
Europe. Now democratic socialism, not capitalism, will triumph across Europe.
Mr. Denitch, a professor of political sociology at the Graduate Center of the
City University of New York, was unusually prescient in anticipating the
collapse of Communism in Europe, but as he himself concedes, the Poles and other
Middle Europeans are showing surprisingly ''visceral'' hostility to economic
arrangements that bear the name ''socialist.''

The sharpest disagreement comes over whether it took two to make the cold war.
The American orthodoxy offers a simple, one-sided version of cold war history:
Hitler destroyed the old order in Europe, allowing Stalin to impose dominion on
the East. The United States was merely reactive, often not in a tough enough
way. A gradual thaw began in 1962, but there were few opportunities for real
accommodation until Mr. Gorbachev's arrival.

Socialist orthodoxy sees a much more complex, two-sided clash, with a
potentially democratic socialist Europe caught in the middle. A militant United
States, in this view, passed up opportunities to compromise with an increasingly
defensive Communism.

The American orthodoxy would be on stronger ground in the argument had the
United States tried accommodation and been rebuffed. It did not, a point on
which Mr. Hyland and Mr. Denitch concur. But that suggests the cold war was much
more two-sided than Mr. Hyland cares to acknowledge.

So was its end. What Mr. Hyland, the editor of Foreign Affairs, dismissively
calls the ''Vietnam syndrome'' was the increased public resistance to cold war
interventionism that began in the late 1960's. If ever there was a place where
direct military involvement was a sure thing, Nicaragua in 1981 was it. But the
tortured extraconstitutional ways that Ronald Reagan went about it were a clear
sign of the spent power of anti-Communism, despite his cold war rhetoric and
military buildup. And Leonid Brezhnev's reluctance to send the Red Army into
Poland in 1980 sent a similar message about the waning power of Communism.

What is to be done in the Soviet Union now? Mr. Laqueur, the chairman of the
International Research Council of the Center for Strategic and International
Studies, and the other authors of ''Soviet Union 2000'' at least raise some key
questions.

Reform has historically been imposed from the top down. Can democratic politics
and competitive markets, which must be nurtured from the bottom up, ever take
root? Especially if the populace associates them with disorder and privilege?
Radical reformers in the Soviet Union blame Mr. Gorbachev for braking the pace
of reform, but can he or any other leader impose radical reform on an
increasingly fractious country?

Mr. Gorbachev himself sows division among potential opponents to keep them from
coalescing against him. That secures him in power within the Kremlin. But can he
extend his power beyond its walls? Not through a Communist Party now splintering
over his policies. Not through a statist bureaucracy that he is beginning to
dismantle. Not through leaders in the republics, who allied with him against
Moscow's ministries but are now turning against him. Not through a K.G.B.
divided between the forces of modernization and the forces of order. Maybe not
even through the reform coalition, increasingly riven by disputes between
moderates and radicals.

The Communist ideology that rationalized power and privilege for three
generations has collapsed. What norms can take its place to provide the Soviet
presidency and new governing institutions with legitimacy? Surely not
nationalism, which pits republic against republic and neighbor against neighbor.
Probably not democracy, whose supporters are confined largely to the urban
intelligentsia, and whose practitioners are hard to find even there. Perhaps the
rule of law, but it remains to be seen whether the rulers, let alone the people,
will abide by its strictures.

With the historian's conceit that the past is forever prologue, the authors of
these three books paper over radical discontinuity by looking for enduring
continuity. But the Soviet future could well resemble no known past - in the
Soviet Union or elsewhere.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              109 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 30, 1990, Monday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1356 words



International    A2-7



Calls for economic changes in China are being made openly by a growing number of
Chinese officials who argue that without further liberalization China's march
toward development may reverse.    Page A1



The Foreign Minister of Vietnam, Nguyen Co Thach, said in an interview that he
was optimistic about a settlement of the Cambodian conflict after a shift in
American policy.    A3



How to treat Vietnamese refugees who continue to turn up on foreign shores
remained unresolved after three days of talks between the United States and its
Southeast Asian allies.    A3



Rigid discipline in Japanese schools, often considered a part of the nation's
ability to turn out high caliber students, is being re-examined after the death
of a girl who was tardy.    A5



Eastern Europe's unwanted refugees are the gypsies. Like other migrants,
hundreds of wandering bands are moving to seek new opportunites in the West and
to escape a surge of anti-gypsy feelings in the East.    A1



A private contractor in Moscow? The city's new insurgent leaders have bypassed
the state's sluggish road workers and hired an aggressive entrepreneur to repave
Moscow's potholed Ring Road.    A6



Asked to vote again, Hungarians stay away in droves    A6



The South African Communist Party re-launched itself as an open political
movement, 40 years after it was outlawed by the white minority government.    A2



An initiative to stabilize North Africa has been organized by Spain, France,
Italy and Portugal. The nations hope that political and economic development
could spare them a new wave of Muslim immigrants.    A6



A covert radio operation in Israel operated by the Foreign Ministry and a
Jerusalem studio has for the last four years used journalists to disseminate
information around the world under Government guidance.    A1



The Prime Minister of Trinidad offered to resign and call early elections if
Muslim rebels free him and other hostages, a report said. At least 27 people
have reportedly died in the coup attempt.    A7



New Yorkers await word from Trinidad and Tobago    A7



Istanbul Journal: For Turkish Jews, the scars fade    A4



National    A8-12



The proposal to limit deductions of state and local income taxes has been
attacked by the nation's governors as an attempt by the Bush Administration to
put the burden of closing the budget gap on states.    A1



Governors approve committee to monitor education goals    A11



Job bias at the top of corporations has never really been touched by the
Government. But Labor Secretary Elizabeth Dole acknowledged a ''glass ceiling''
of subtle discrimination exists and announced plans to fight it.    A1



News analysis: In a scandal, should executives be liable?    D1



Urban League leader says equality is vital to economic success

    A10



The General Accounting Office, bouyed by its investigations of the savings and
loan debacle, the cost of cleaning up nuclear waste and the explosion on the
battleship Iowa, has reached a zenith of its power.    A12



Washington Talk: Acerbic words from a usually silent bench    A8



In Mount McKinley's shadow, a road opens and a fight begins    A9



A father's fight to find bone marrow to save his leukemia-stricken son has
ignited a court battle over whether people should be compelled to help others.
He wants to force the boy's young half-siblings to be donors.    A8



Oregon's plan to ration health care based on a list that gives priority to
preventive measures to stretch

Medicaid funds could be delayed as long as a year.    A8



Iran-contra prosecutors are doubtful that they can comply with an order to prove
their case against Oliver North was not influenced by his testimony to Congress.
As a result, they are considering appealing the order.    A11



An organizer of the secret network supplying the Nicaraguan rebels says he was
told that Vice President George Bush was informed of the illegal operation in
1986.    A10



A former banker for Manuel Noriega was convicted along with five other people in
a scheme to launder $32 million in profits for cocaine traffickers in Colombia.
    A12



Discount trend's ripple effect on top maker of mower engines    D1



Regional    B1-6



The latest influx of immigrants to settle in New York City has, as have waves of
immigrants before them, reshaped the city. But with an economic downturn
looming, some wonder if the city can absorb more.    A1



Mourners may have returned fire at the men who shot at them during a funeral for
a member of a Chinatown gang. The police said the shooting in a New Jersey
cemetery was part of an escalating gang feud.    B1



Mortgage foreclosures are soaring in the region as property owners are
overwhelmed by real-estate debt. Coming just months after the giddy boom years
of the 1980's, the increase has stunned officials.    B1



The McCarren Park swimming pool, built by Robert Moses in the Greenpoint section
of Brooklyn in 1936, is the focus of a neighborhood debate over whether to
restore it to its original state or modernize it.    B1



Connecticut's low-budget candidate for governor, William J. Cibes Jr., had only
$44 in his campaign chest two weeks ago but has still shown a lot of bravado in
his campaign for the Democratic nomination.    B1



A farm in New York City's suburbs is struggling to survive. The farm, founded in
Westtown in 1785, is one of the oldest farms in the country still run by the
same family and is among the declining number in Orange County.    B2



Ralph Nader's experiment with low-power television in Buffalo

    B2



Pow-wow in Queens recalls New York City's Indian past    B3



Daily News criticizes Cuomo for naming panel in labor talks    B3



Business Digest    D1



SportsMonday



Baseball: Gooden in fine form as Mets top Cards    C1



Steinbrenner's foundering empire    C1



Suspension of Steinbrenner is called likely    C1



Backing for a strong commissioner    C4



Yankees sweep Indians    C4



Falcons and Sanders trade words    C4



Red Sox set mark for doubles

    C4



Garrelts just misses no-hitter    C5



Column: Berkow on golf racial issue    C3



Features: Sports World Specials    C2



Question Box    C7



Football: Raiders seek an identity    C1



New role for Jets' Lageman    C7



Goodwill Games: Soviet female gymnasts excel again    C2



Twin swimmers in harmony    C2



Golf: Daniel takes L.P.G.A. title    C3



Outdoors: Kingly sport of salmon fishing    C10



Tennis: U.S. wins Federation Cup    C5



Track and Field: Lewis takes 100 at New York Games    C3



Arts/Entertainment



Modern-dance troupe in China    C11



Music: Seattle ''War and Peace''    C11



Chamber music in Vermont    C11



Mostly Mozart Festival    C13



Horizons: how music is made    C13



The Blue Nile, a group    C13



Dance: New ''Spartacus'' casts    C14



Word and Image: ''On Writing''    C16



The savings and loan crisis    C16



Obituaries    B8



Bruno Kreisky, former Chancellor of Austria

Editorials/Letters/Op-Ed



Editorials    A14



Raise taxes, or punish cities?

How not to honor Malcolm X

Nicholas Wade: Big science

Letters    A14



Tom Wicker: The wrong medicine    A15



Christopher Whalen: Mexico - America's next Iran?    A15



Miles Hoffman: One Germany, one Carolina    A15



Robin Warshaw: The rape was a lie, the verdict abusive    A15


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              110 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 30, 1990, Monday, Late Edition - Final

U.S. and Asian Allies Deadlock Over Boat People

BYLINE: By CLIFFORD KRAUSS, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 857 words

DATELINE: JAKARTA, Indonesia, July 29


Three days of talks between the United States and its Southeast Asian allies
have failed to break a deadlock on how to treat thousands of Vietnamese refugees
who continue to arrive on foreign shores every year.

The impasse over whether nations have the right to forcibly repatriate selected
refugees back to Vietnam threatens to tear apart international agreements under
which Hong Kong and nations like Malaysia, Indonesia, Thailand and the
Philippines admit Vietnamese who flee their country, despite risk of becoming
victims to pirates or stormy seas.

The Southeast Asian nations want to begin to clear out the 125,000 Vietnamese
who inhabit squalid camps in their countries, and prevent more people from
leaving Vietnam. But the United States, which finances much of the refugee
relief and grants a large number of Vietnamese permanent refuge, has opposed
involuntary return of refugees, even among those classified as economic
migrants.

Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d presented the six foreign ministers of the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations, or Asean, what was described as a
modified American position on Vietnamese ''boat people'' under which refugees
would be encouraged though not required to return to their homeland.

Counseling Is Suggested

Mr. Baker suggested that while the United States could not support involuntary
repatriation, it would not oppose returning ''those who do not object'' after
screening and counseling. He also said the United States was committed to
resettling or returning all asylum-seekers by late 1992.

But today, at the close of the Asean meeting, officials who say their countries
have the sovereign right to accept or not accept refugees sternly dismissed Mr.
Baker's position as a thinly veiled restatement of the old American position
against forced repatriation.

In private meetings, the Asian foreign ministers told Mr. Baker that if
Washington did not move closer to their position, they might eventually be
forced to scrap the Comprehensive Plan of Action on Indo-Chinese refugees, under
which several Asian countries and Hong Kong offer Vietnamese asylum with the
financial support of Western industrialized nations. The agreement, they say,
guarantees resettlement for poltiical refugees, not economic migrants.

''The gap between Asean and the United States remains quite big,'' said Datuk A.
Kamil Jaafar, Secretary General of the Malaysian Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
''The Baker position does not represent a movement forward.''

Baker Plan Called Unworkable

Helen Barber, the acting director of the Southeast Asia Bureau of the Philippine
Ministry of Foreign Affairs, said the Baker position ''is not workable,''
because it does not distinguish between political refugees and migrants who
leave Vietnam to escape poverty.

Mrs. Barber added that the Comprehensive Plan of Action ''is in danger; it can
fall apart if there is no movement by the United States.''

The principle of first asylum has suffered a severe setback over the last 15
months as Malaysia pushed off an estimated 8,700 boat people trying to land on
its shores. Scores of those refugees have been robbed, raped or killed by
pirates after they were refused entrance.

The discord between the United States and the Asian nations was highlighted
three weeks ago when a 28-nation conference on boat people in Geneva was
postponed because participants saw no hope for bridging the gap on forced
repatriation.

Such discord prompted Thorvald Stoltenberg, the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees, to shuttle around Europe, Asia and the United States to try to
come up with a compromise arrangement before the Asean meeting to save the
principle of first asylum.

The outlines of Mr. Stoltenberg's proposal were endorsed by Mr. Baker before the
Asean meeting.

Southeast Asian diplomats said they find the Stoltenberg proposal vague, and
they indicated that they hoped the United States would further modify its
position on the refugees.

Accept Refugees, U.S. Urged

Raul Manglapus, the Philippines Foreign Minister, said the United States should
simply accept all the Vietnamese refugees.

''The United States,'' he said, ''has all the land in the world to absorb
them.''

Other Asian diplomats privately expressed hope that the United States would
improve relations with Vietnam. An end to the economic embargo of Hanoi, they
suggested, would improve the Vietnamese economy and dampen the desire of many to
leave.

Mr. Baker's attendance at the Asean meeting was very much a mission to soothe
tensions on the refugee issue and explain recent shifts in Cambodian policy. He
privately told the foreign ministers that the Administration was in part obliged
to respond to Congressional pressures when it dropped diplomatic support for the
Cambodian guerrilla coalition, but that President Bush continued to share their
desire to limit Vietnamese power in the region.

The foreign ministers told Mr. Baker that they would like him to consult with
them more on Indochina policy in the future, but they resisted expressing harsh
public criticism of American policy on Cambodia.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d, second from right, with
Southeast Asian foreign ministers at a conference in Jakarta. From left were
Raul Manglapus of the Philippines, Ali Alatas of Indonesia, Mike K. Moore of New
Zealand, Mr. Baker and Gareth Evans of Australia. (Associated Press)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              111 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 30, 1990, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Hanoi Aide, Praising U.S., Sees Hope of Cambodia Pact

BYLINE: By STEVEN ERLANGER, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 974 words

DATELINE: HO CHI MINH CITY, Vietnam, July 29


Reacting to the American policy shift on Cambodia 11 days ago, Foreign Minister
Nguyen Co Thach of Vietnam said today that he was optimistic about a settlement
of the Cambodian conflict. He said Hanoi agreed with Washington that the main
issue now was how to get to ''free, fair and democratic elections under
international supervision.''

The comments by Mr. Thach in an interview here marked a considerable change in
tone and emphasis for the Foreign Minister.

For years, negotiations on Cambodia have been bogged down over what Mr. Thach
now calls ''the petty, transitory details'' - how power should be shared by the
four rival Cambodian factions before elections. Still, Mr. Thach was not
specific today about what type of transitory phase Hanoi would accept.

On July 18, Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d announced that Washington was
withdrawing its diplomatic support at the United Nations for a Cambodian
opposition coalition including the Communist Khmer Rouge. Mr. Baker said the
United States would open talks on Cambodia with Vietnam, which backs the
Cambodian Government in Phnom Penh. The talks are scheduled to begin Aug. 6 in
New York Moves on the Chess Board Mr. Thach said the timing of the American move
surprised him, adding: ''But sometimes when one pawn moves, it changes the whole
chess board. So now, on the Cambodian problem, others will move also.''

It made the game more complicated, he said. ''but if you are a good player, you
take your chance.''

Asked if he was a good player, and if he would take his chance, he shrugged,
smiled and said: ''Yes. Why not?''

Mr. Thach went out of his way not to gloat over what some in Southeast Asia
regard as a major American concession to Hanoi, calling the United States
decision ''very wise'' and saying, ''If we are too ambitious, we kill the goose
to get the golden egg.''

Mr. Thach, a jovial and skillful negotiator, said, ''Now I am thinking how to
cooperate with America and facilitate this issue of Cambodia, and how to
cooperate and have fair, free and democratic elections under international
supervision.''

Importance of Elections Stressed

''The decisive point is general elections,'' he said. ''Everything else is petty
details. All will be solved by general elections.''

Hanoi installed the present Cambodian Government in 1979 after it invaded
Cambodia and ousted the Khmer Rouge, under whose rule more than a million
Cambodians died. The guerrilla coalition seeking to oust the Vietnamese-backed
Government is dominated by the Khmer Rouge, and includes two non-Communist
factions. The coalition is nominally led by Prince Norodom Sihanouk, head of one
of the non-Communist forces.

As recently as two months ago, a promising opening between Vietnam and China,
the principal backer of the Khmer Rouge, turned sour over the shape and
responsibility of an interim Cambodian authority to run or represent the
country.

The way in which power is shared is widely expected to influence the fairness
and outcome of the elections.

Asked if Vietnam was prepared to see the Cambodian Prime Minister, Hun Sen, lose
elections, Mr. Thach laughed and said, ''If you play a game, you must work for
the best and be prepared for the worst.''

Vietnam, he stressed, had two main interests now in Cambodia: a neutral,
indepedent and nonaligned country that posed no threat to its neighbors, and a
rapid move to supervised elections to resolve the Cambodian conflict and end the
external supplies of arms to the combatants.

Asked if that meant Vietnam would urge Phnom Penh to compromise on the formation
of an interim authority, or supreme national council, and allow a major role for
the United Nations, Mr. Thach hedged.

Cambodian 'Sensitivity' Noted

''The Cambodians must decide for themselves,'' he said. ''They are the key.
Outsiders can advise, but cannot dictate to them.''

With a slight smile, he added, ''You know how sensitive the Cambodians are about
their sovereignty.''

Pressed for Vietnam's position on a council and the United Nations role, he
said: ''I don't say yes, and I don't say no. In these matters I will support any
agreement among the Cambodian parties. I should only have a say on the external
aspects.''

In these responses, too, Mr. Thach seemed eager to say nothing that would bias
or forestall the coming talks with the United States.

Hanoi and Phnom Penh have always objected to a major United Nations role in a
settlement, for instance, saying the organization was biased so long as the
opposition coalition held Cambodia's seat. So for Mr. Thach, the American shift
about the seat is enormously helpful, even if Washington was recoiling from the
Khmer Rouge rather than trying to bolster Mr. Hun Sen.

Hun Sen's Position Undercut

The effect, however, apparently is what matters, particularly when Mr. Hun Sen's
position had been undercut by governmental corruption, low morale and his
failure to deliver peace.

Mr. Thach's position in the Vietnamese leadership is thought to have been
strengthened as well. He insisted that Vietnam had to withdraw its troops from
Cambodia last year to receive Western aid, investment and technology that had
largely been blocked by an American-led embargo.

But Mr. Baker's announcement, with its implicit promise of more rapid
normalization, was the first tangible dividend for Mr. Thach's policy.

As for the Khmer Rouge, Mr. Thach said, ''I don't think anyone wants the
genocidal regime reinstalled.''

He played down reports of Khmer Rouge military successes, saying the Cambodian
Government held all main towns, cities and highways. He compared the Khmer Rouge
to ''a skin disease, uncomfortable, but not cancer.'' Still, he said, ''the
economic situation in Cambodia is not so good,'' with rising inflation, lack of
confidence and reduced aid from other countries.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              112 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 30, 1990, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Mourners Returned Fire, Police Say

BYLINE: By DONATELLA LORCH

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1232 words


Mourners at a gang member's funeral apparently shot back at the two or three
men, believed to be from rival groups, who opened fire at graveside in what
law-enforcement officials say is an escalating Chinatown feud.

Investigators said yesterday that Saturday's shootout, which left five mourners
wounded in a New Jersey cemetery, highlighted the growing animosity between
Asian gangs in New York City, in particular between Born to Kill, a powerful
Vietnamese gang, and its rivals.

The funeral was for 21-year-old Vinh Vu, whom the police described as the No. 2
man of Born to Kill. He was shot Thursday morning in a drive-by shooting at
Canal Street and Broadway.

Now, law-enforcement officials say they are worried that Born to Kill members
will come to New York from Houston, Boston, Los Angeles and other cities to
retaliate.

Expecting Trouble

''If a B.T.K. gets shot, you expect trouble,'' said Nancy Ryan, chief of the
Manhattan District Attorney's gang squad. ''People are definitely afraid of them
because they are wild and uncontrollable.''

The police said yesterday that they had found signs that mourners, most of them
Born to Kill members, had returned the gunmen's fire. Tombstones in the Rosedale
Memorial Park Cemetery in Linden, N.J., where Mr. Vu was buried, were pocked by
bullets on both sides. A pistol, all its rounds fired, was found near where the
more than 100 panicked mourners ran and crawled to escape the hail of bullets.

''No one is victim-less here,'' Captain Richard Gerbounka of the Linden police
said. He added that they had confiscated $23,240 in cash from the purse of a
mourner.

Law-enforcement officials said Born to Kill is a name used by an extremely
mobile group of young Vietnamese immigrants, many of whom are descended from
Chinese who lived in Vietnam and some of whom are Amerasians.

The gang adopted its name from the phrase American soldiers wore on their
helmets during the Vietnam War. Most of the gang's members grew up in a culture
of guns and drugs in Vietnam, law-enforcement officials said. In the United
States, they have tended to be more violent than other gangs.

Members of Born to Kill have challenged the authority of established gangs and
have terrorized Chinatown residents, law-enforcement officials said.

''What distinguishes them from the others is that they grew up in the extremely
chaotic society of Vietnam, where they were always expecting to be beaten,''
said Ms. Ryan.

Captain Gerbounka said, ''What we're told by the New York Police Department is
that this gang has become quite a pain to the Chinese community and from what we
understand several Chinese gangs are very annoyed with what the B.T.K. is
doing.''

No Gang Specified

The police did not say which rival gang or gangs might have been involved in
Saturday's shooting. Police gang specialists and members of the Jade Squad, a
task force in the Manhattan District Attorney's office that tracks
Asian-American gangs, are helping the Linden police. But Captain Gerbounka said
the investigation was proceeding very slowly and no arrests had been made.

Captain Gerbounka gave the following account of the cemetery shooting:

Two or possibly three men, carrying flowers, opened fire on a crowd of about 125
mourners about 2:30 P.M. Saturday at the cemetery at Willow Glades near Routes 1
and 9.

Most of the mourners were members of Born to Kill, young Vietnamese men and
women in black pants and jackets over white shirts. They had arrived in a
procession of 19 cars and many were carrying cellular telephones and beepers as
they gathered around Mr. Vu's coffin, which was draped in a red and black flag
with ''Canal Boys'' on it. It had just been laid in the grave.

The gunmen used a shotgun and a 9-millimeter automatic handgun, spraying an area
25 feet wide. In a panic, the mourners fled, some jumping into open graves.

No Calls to Hospital

A 20-year-old man was seriously injured, shot four times in the chest and legs.
He was listed in stable condition yesterday at University Hospital in Newark.

Two other people were admitted to Elizabeth General Hospital with gunshot wounds
and were listed in fair condition. None of the names had been released because
neither of the hospitals had been contacted by family members, who must be told
before information is made public. Only members of the press had called,
hospital spokesmen said.

Several other mourners were injured, none seriously, in the scramble to escape.

Captain Gerbounka said about 30 mourners disappeared before the police could
question them. But several of the 99 who had been questioned were cooperating.

Police officers arriving at the scene were initially confused by the description
given of the gunmen, who were dressed exactly like the milling crowd of
mourners.

Two-Day Funeral

The police said Mr. Vu was the No. 2 man in Born to Kill. His funeral had been a
two-day affair, with gang members walking through the streets of Chinatown in
lower Manhattan mourning his death with signs bearing the gang's name, residents
said.

Shopkeepers interviewed yesterday said that they often paid extortion money to
Born to Kill, but that they were not afraid of them. But community leaders said
Chinatown was terrified of the ruthless character of this new gang.

''We are all worried,'' said Yvonne Louie, active in a Chinatown council that
discusses crime problems with the police. ''We are scared, Something has to be
done.''

Born to Kill sprang up in 1986, after its members had been expelled from
traditional Chinese gangs like the Flying Dragons and the Ghost Shadows, Ms.
Ryan said. The Chinese gangs, who hired them as hitmen, quickly kicked them out
because of their lack of discipline and their refusal to listen to authority.
Detectives described Born to Kill's members as extremely mobile and with no
strong leadership.

'You Settle It Anywhere'

Saturday's shooting is an example of the new era of lawlessness they have
introduced to the gang underworld, the authorities said.

''It used to be that whatever score you had, you took care of in the Chinatown
area,'' said a detective who works closely with New York gangs and who asked not
to be identified. ''Now you settle it anywhere, even in a cemetery.''

Mr. Vu operated a group known as the Canal Street Boys, one of several that make
up Born to Kill. The Canal Street Boys' territory stretched from Broadway to
Lafayette Street, law-enforcement officials said. They have been involved in
extortion, robberies, assaults and murders, killing members of other gangs and
bystanders, Ms. Ryan said.

Four members of Born to Kill were arrested in Queens on July 23. They were
wanted for murder and robbery in Texas, the police said.

The day before Mr. Vu was buried, store owners along Canal Street said gang
members came to ask for money for the funeral. The owner of the Wah Wing Sang
Funeral Home on Mulberry Street, Martha Leong Wick, said the service was paid
for by men who did not identify themselves.

On Friday night, the friends of Mr. Vu gathered for a Buddhist service at Ms.
Wick's funeral home. They chanted. A monk read from the scriptures.

''For the last 20 years, I've been burying these boys,'' Ms. Wick said. ''I've
never had any of them shot at a cemetery. It's hard to believe. All of these
boys looked so dignified and well-behaved. They looked like angels.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: The graveside of Vinh Vu, a member of Born to Kill, a Vietnamese
gang. Investigators say mourners apparently shot back at their attackers during
Mr. Vu's burial Saturday in Linden, N.J. (Chester Higgins Jr./The New York
Times) (pg. B6)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              113 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 30, 1990, Monday, Late Edition - Final

After Heady 1980's, Homeowners Face a Hangover of Foreclosure

BYLINE: By ROBERT HANLEY, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 2; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1202 words

DATELINE: HACKENSACK, N.J., July 26


Mortgage foreclosures are soaring in the New York metropolitan region as growing
numbers of property owners are overwhelmed by crushing real-estate debt.

Just months after the giddy boom years of the 1980's, with their rising home
values, generous bank lending policies and firm optimism about the regional
economy, banks have started declaring defaults on thousands of delinquent
mortgages and forcing owners to scramble for new financing or face property
losses.

Officials in the region say they are stunned by the depth and suddenness of the
increase in foreclosures.

Worst Market in 50 Years

In many cases, officials attribute it to declining real-estate values, people
including well-paid professionals carrying too much debt and the slumping
construction industry.

''There's no precedence for the numbers were getting now,'' said Myron C.
Weinstein, chief of the foreclosure office of New Jersey Superior Court. ''We're
getting 1,400 new filings a month and I don't think anybody knows the upside
anymore. No one really knows the cause of the magnitude of the jump, except that
this is the worst real-estate market in 50 years.''

''I'm seeing the most dramatic surge in the last 25 years,'' said Roger Sirlin,
a Westchester County lawyer who represents mortgage lenders in southern New
York. ''The foreclosures are bridging the entire socioeconomic spectrum. Right
now, I'm foreclosing on doctors, lawyers, architects, dentists, stock brokers
and real-estate people. I'm foreclosing on loans as high as $1.6 million. The
average is around $200,000.'' In Connecticut in the last two fiscal years, bank
foreclosure filings have almost tripled, to 9,248 for the year ending on June
30, from 3,482 for the year ending on June 30, 1988, said Larry Moore, a
spokesman for the Connecticut Judicial Department.

Across New Jersey, similar filings rose to 11,816 in 1989, from 8,182 in 1988,
Mr. Weinstein said. As of June, there were 8,478 filings, an increase of nearly
50 percent over the same six-month period last year, he said.

New York State's court system does not keep statewide figures. But county
officials report sharp increases. Between January and June, judges in
Westchester issued 166 judgments of foreclosure, the last step before sale of a
property at auction. For all of 1989, there were 112 such judgments. Suffolk
County has had 655 similar judgments through June, well ahead of the pace that
produced 853 in 1989. In 1988, Suffolk had 439 judgments. In Rockland County,
banks filed 251 foreclosures between January and June. There were 193 for the
first six months of 1989.

In all three states, foreclosures for single-family homes have increased since
1988 while decreasing nationally, said Thomas Holloway, senior economist at the
Mortgage Bankers Association of America in Washington.

Regional court officials say their figures represent all commercial and
residential properties. They include hundreds of single-family houses in the
cities and suburbs; an unfinished town house project, Knickerbocker Village, in
Old Tappan, N.J., that was sold at a sheriff's auction for $100; condominiums in
North Salem, N.Y., Monmouth Beach, N.J., and near Atlantic City; a shopping
center in Aberdeen, N.J., and a nursing home in Spring Lake Heights.

Beneath the figures are stories of deep debt and personal hardship and, for
some, despair and tragedy. Last month in New York, a Vietnam veteran whose
foreclosed home is up for auction on Aug. 3 committed suicide. #3 Months Behind
on the Mortgage The man, a self-employed house framer, built his home three
years ago and was unable to make his $3,000-a-month mortgage payments when his
$200,000-a-year business soured, said his widow, who spoke on the condition of
anonymity. She attributed his suicide to his war experience and his mounting
debt.

She said she is three months behind on the mortgage payment and on an
$800-a-month loan for two trucks. The banks refused to restructure the debt, she
said.

''The banks didn't want any partial payment,'' she said. ''They wanted the whole
thing.''

A banker in his mid-50's in Westchester County said he lost his condominium when
he became overwhelemed by debt, particularly college loans for his five
children. At one point, their education costs were $38,000 a year, against his
annual salary of $47,500. Garnishees have cut his net weekly income from $583 to
$192 and he is 10 months behind in his $1,202 mortgage payment. ''It all came
down too heavy on me,'' he said. ''I just ran out of money. I've always made
good on every penny of my debt and I'll pay this off if they just give me a
chance.''

Banks 'Feeling the Pressure'

In Monmouth County, N.J., where 113 foreclosed properties have been sold at
sheriff's auction between January and July 23 - as opposed to 120 for all of
1989 - a young woman returned to her foreclosed home in Hazlet after giving
birth only to find that a bank that had bought her house at auction had begun
eviction proceedings. A judge eventually blocked the eviction.

Experts closest to the spurt in foreclosures offer several explanations.

''In Connecticut several banks have experienced losses and Federal regulators
are looking at loan portfolios,'' said Judge Aaron Ment, Chief Court
Administrator for the state. ''My sense is the banks are feeling the pressure:
Federal regulatory pressure and shareholder pressure and management pressure.''

Experts also say a decline in property values after their dizzying appreciation
of the mid-1980's has left some owners, particularly those who bought at peak
prices, watching their property values slide toward - or even below - their
mortgage amount. In those cases, some willingly abandon their properties.

Too Much Debt, Too Little Value

''That was the real story in Texas and Oklahoma; real property lost value and
people walked away,'' said George Sternlieb, founding director of the Center for
Urban Policy Research at Rutgers University. ''We're just seeing the beginning
of this and no one has a handle on how long it will last.''

Another reason cited is that property owners are overextended.

Mr. Sirlin, the bankers' lawyer in Westchester County, said nearly all his
foreclosures are on adjustable-rate mortgages issued in 1987 and 1988 that
carried first-year interest rates of 7 percent and subsequent annual increases
of two percentage points, with a maximum of 14.9 percent.

Banks, he said, were eager to lend in the late '80's and, because of a lack of
Federal requirements, assessed a borrowers ability to repay only on the initial
7 percent rate.

''People can't afford the second interest bump and they're falling behind two or
three months' payments,'' he said. ''That's the typical scenario.''

Banking authorities say all three elements are at work now.

''Banks are scrutinizing portfolios more closely because of pressure from
regulators,'' said E. Robert Levy, executive director of the New Jersey Mortgage
Bankers Association. ''I would emphasize that financial institutions and
mortgage companies do not desire to foreclose. They make every effort to work
things out. Foreclosure is expensive, time consuming and requires a lot of
reserves to be set up.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              114 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 31, 1990, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Cambodian Ordeal Began in U.S. Policy

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 410 words


To the Editor:

Your July 19 front-page article on the change in United States policy on
Cambodia was accompanied by a chronology of the Cambodian ordeal that takes us
back to 1975. Apparently included to provide some historical context, this
outline of developments in Cambodia strikes me as a distressing and potentially
dangerous exercise in historical revisionism.

Cambodia has been bleeding much longer than 15 years, and in that earlier period
much of its suffering was caused by the United States. From the second half of
the 1960's Prince Norodom Sihanouk's relatively stable and neutralist Government
was undermined by the escalating spillover into Cambodia of United States
military intervention in neighboring Vietnam. In 1969 the Nixon Administration
began its so-called secret war against Cambodia, subjecting the countryside to
massive B-52 bombing, which resulted in heavy civilian loss of life and
large-scale population displacement.

In March 1970 the United States Government endorsed (some say orchestrated) the
overthrow of Prince Sihanouk by the more accommodating Lon Nol, an action
followed a few weeks later by a large-scale and highly destructive incursion
into Cambodia by United States forces. The bombing campaign continued for years
after popular protest in the United States compelled President Nixon to withdraw
United States ground forces.

It was in large measure the destabilization, devastation and displacement
wrought by United States intervention before 1975 that created the conditions in
which the Khmer Rouge could grow from a containable nuisance into a powerful
political and military force, and ultimately gain control of Cambodia. By
starting your chronology only in 1975, as if nothing relevant to Cambodia's
plight had happened before then, you are in effect rewriting history so as to
exonerate the United States of its heavy responsibility for Cambodia's
continuing ordeal.

This revisionism is ironic, given your valuable role back then in exposing the
official deception that for long kept the truth about the secret war in Cambodia
from the American people. It is also dangerous: collective amnesia about our
country's share of responsibility for Indochina's suffering over the last
four-and-a-half decades only increases the likelihood of other such disastrous
interventions in the future.

ZACHARY LOCKMAN
Associate Professor of History
Harvard University
  Cambridge, Mass., July 19, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              115 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 1, 1990, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Evolution in Europe;
Vietnamese in Bulgaria: Bitter Times

BYLINE: By CHUCK SUDETIC, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 8, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 962 words

DATELINE: SOFIA, Bulgaria, July 31


Through the barred ground-floor windows of shabby workers' dormitories in a
quarter of Bulgaria's capital known as Little Saigon, Vietnamese men sell scarce
convenience store staples like Coca-Cola, instant coffee and cigarettes along
with Canadian whisky and other hard liquor.

Vans and taxis arrive regularly with loads of merchandise. Up the dusty
cobblestone street stand Vietnamese money-changers clutching wads of cash and
announcing their exchange rates.

Once a symbol of the Communist world's solidarity and confidence, Eastern
Europe's Vietnamese guest workers now illustrate the consquences of the Soviet
bloc's economic collapse. Living on the margins of the societies where they they
came to work and further abandoned in the political and economic upheavals of
the last year, the Vietnamese have resorted to illicit and semilegal practices
to make their livelihoods, ''It's hard now,'' said a man from Hanoi who refused
to give his name. ''We get just a little money, and there is nothing in the
state shops to buy.''

Gang Fights Reported

Complaining that the only jobs they can get pay below subsistence wages and
frustrated because they cannot earn enough officially to buy goods to send home,
the Vietnamese have become major players in Bulgaria's black market. In recent
months, Bulgarian newspapers have reported gang fights in which the Vietnamese
were pitted against Bulgarians, gypsies and each other.

''I hate them because they are really people doing dirty things to us,'' said
Evgeny Stoynev, a 24-year-old student campaigning for ''social democracy'' in a
tent city in the heart of Sofia. ''They kill people.'' The man from Hanoi said:
''Bulgarians don't like Vietnamese. They think that we're stealing their
bread.''

Another Vietnamese man sitting at a cafe said: ''They swear at us. They accuse
us of not wanting to work or of just wanting to steal things to sell them. They
don't know our problems.'' Vietnamese workers, now about 25,000 strong in
Bulgaria, came to this country of nine million people in the late 1970's as part
of a program to help Hanoi pay for Bulgarian imports and industrial plants built
by Bulgaria in Vietnam. Income from the program also reportedly goes to repay
lingering debts from the Vietnam War.

Many Vietnamese also travel to work in Czechoslovakia and East Germany, where
they are experiencing a fate similar to that of their compatriots in Bulgaria.

Most of Bulgaria's Vietnamese, a part of whose official wages goes to pay
Vietnam's obligations, were contracted to work for several years in large
industrial plants and on construction projects like Sofia's subway.

'A Rather Romantic Time'

''It was a time of high rates of growth and we had a lack of manpower in a
number of sectors,'' Prime Minister Andrei Lukanov said. ''It was a way of
overcoming a shortage of workers and to train Vietnamese workers in a way that
was useful for us and the Vietnamese economy.''

''This was a rather romantic time,'' Mr. Lukanov added. ''There was a lot of
enthusiasm on both sides.''

The enthusiasm faded with the economic decline of the 1980's. Now some
construction sites are silent, and the workers are being used elsewhere or laid
off.

Vietnamese account for half of the arrests in Sofia for illegal money changing
and have been involved in nine murders here in the last six months, according to
police figures provided by a source who asked not to be identified. Sofia, like
most other East European cities, is used to a minuscule murder rate.

Vietnamese get $20 to $30 a month for the same work that a Bulgarian gets $30 to
$40 to do, the man from Hanoi said before explaining how his countrymen
subsidize their incomes.

Some have taken to prostitution, he said. Others have opened small clothing
workrooms and begun producing denim pants and skirts and printed T-shirts; still
others moonlight by remodeling apartments.

''The Vietnamese buy medicines in large quantities and transport them back to
Vietnam,'' said Dincho Ivanov, a Sofia police spokesman. ''Bulgaria buys a lot
of these pharmaceuticals in the West for hard currency and sells them here at
subsidized prices.''

These medicines are generally unavailable in Vietnam and fetch high prices
there, said Jean Solomon, a Bulgarian journalist who has written on the
Vietnamese here.

''These things are done by those who are obliged to earn a lot more on the side
to live,'' said Mien, a 35-year-old Vietnamese man, who later acknowledged that
virtually all Bulgaria's Vietnamese fit into this category. ''The guilty ones
are the Government of Bulgaria and Vietnam who signed this contract.''

Workers to Go Home

''This problem has a very simple answer that will come at the end of 1992,'' Mr.
Ivanov said, referring to a recent agreement in which Sofia and Hanoi decided
not to engage new workers and to send home all those whose contracts expire. The
last Vietnamese workers are expected to leave within two years.

But some will undoubtedly remain. A few Vietnamese have married Bulgarian women
who do not want to live in Vietnam, Mien said. And Bulgarians reported that many
Vietnamese black marketeers want to stay in Bulgaria because their living
conditions are better than they are at home.

Police sources estimate that about 3,000 Vietnamese live illegally in the
capital alone, with about another 3,000 in various places around the country.
But Mien said, ''There are many Vietnamese who want to break their contract and
go home, but it is impossible.''

''Psychologically, it is terrible to live here as aliens in a land where the
other people don't like us,'' he added. ''Day by day it gets harder to live
here. I'm just looking at my calendar and thinking about those two years left
until I can go home.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              116 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 2, 1990, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1344 words



International    A3-9



Iraqi troops crossed Kuwait's border and penetrated deeply into the country and
into Kuwait City, senior Administration officials said. Early reports were that
casualties were extensive.    Page A1



Rival Palestinian guerrillas clashed with rockets and heavy machine guns in
their largest camp in Lebanon, and the police said 10 people were killed and 50
wounded.    A5



Two Soviet leaders agreed on a plan that could signal a break in their political
stalemate. President Gorbachev has joined with his main rival, Boris N. Yeltsin,
in creating a joint commission to produce a program of economic change.    A1



The director of a Bulgarian company long presumed in the West to have supplied
weapons to terrorist organizations said he is willing to share with Western
governments information on arms that might have ended up in terrorist hands.
A6



Bulgarian opposition leader to become president    A6



An election in a unified Germany will be held on Dec. 2. The Governments of East
and West Germany and their main political parties reached basic agreement on the
election.    A6

The violent siege in Trinidad ended as Muslim gunmen and their religious leader
laid down their weapons and filed into police custody after releasing their 46
hostages.    A1



A sudden trip by the Afghan leader, Najibullah, to Moscow has attracted close
scrutiny in Kabul and Pakistan. The visit came on the eve of talks on
Afghanistan between Secretary of State Baker and Soviet Foreign Minister
Shevardnadze.    A3



The President of South Africa, F. W. de Klerk, met with Nelson Mandela for three
hours. They indicated later that they had overcome a crisis and would resume
negotiations on the country's future next Monday.    A3



Mozambique will allow opposition parties    A9



Curionopolis Journal: Amazon is being poisoned    A4



National    A10-18



A campaign finance bill was passed by the Senate. The comprehensive package
would ban political action committees from Federal campaigns, infuse some public
money into Congressional campaigns and offer discounts for TV advertising.    A1



A new view of military strategy has been drafted by Pentagon planners,
envisioning a Soviet withdrawl from Eastern Europe and a two-year lag before
Moscow could mount a major invasion.    A1



Budget office releases funds to restore benefits hearings    A14



Bush and Congress plan uninterrupted budget talks    A15



Housing bill passed with help for AIDS sufferers    A16



Sharp rise in AIDS infection is reported in Third World    A18

Patients with chronic hepatitis B have been cured by researchers for the first
time. The devastating and often progressively debilitating liver disease
afflicts more than a million Americans and is the ninth leading cause of death
worldwide.    A1

The American Legion will file a suit against the Government for failing to
complete a study of the health of thousands of Vietnam War veterans exposed to
the defoliant Agent Orange.    A16

An oil spill near Galveston, Tex., has been described as major by Coast Guard
officials. But they are uncertain what has become of much of the 500,000 gallons
of oil that were spilled when a tanker collided with two barges in the Houston
Ship Channel.    A10

Six sailors drown as freighter sinks.    A18

Final arguments in the Barry trial began, with the prosecution asserting that
the mayor was ''a general who joined the enemy'' in the war on drugs and the
defense countering that the Government had used ''mustard gas'' tactics.    A10



Man who shot wife as a mercy killing is granted clemency    A11



The disputed Mapplethorpe exhibit opened in Boston without serious protest after
a highly unusual broadcast of the show's most sexually explicit pictures by the
local affiliate of the Public Broadcasting Service.    A10



Head of United Negro College Fund to retire soon    A18



Judge rejects Los Angeles County's voting plan    A11



Monterey Journal: A dispute over a tree runs deep    A10



Regional    B1-4



A black teen-ager had his hands up when he was fatally shot in the back by a
Teaneck police officer, new medical evidence apparently shows. The New Jersey
Attorney General has ordered a new investigation into the case.    A1



A defendant in the jogger trial repeatedly and emphatically denied that he had
had any part in the rape and near-fatal beating of a woman in Central Park.
B1



Testimony shows both sides of defense lawyer's gamble    B3



Group of blacks sees hiring bias by Morgenthau    B3



More police officers should be hired in New York, the City Council told Mayor
Dinkins. The Council proposed paying for more officers by freezing hiring in
other city agencies. The Mayor rebuffed the plan and offered his own.    B1

City will begin boot-camp jail at Rikers Island    B2


  A fuel emergency was declared for an Avianca Airlines flight headed to Kennedy
Airport Tuesday night. Air traffic controllers took the unusual step because of
confusion over how much fuel the plane had left, a Federal aviation official
said.    B1



The Talk of Saratoga Springs, N.Y.: In August, people come to Saratoga for more
than the horses, or the waters (mineral). They come to soak up the romance of
the track.    B1



Staten Island ferry: Still a bargain at twice the price    B3



New York City issues rules on contracts    B4



Ex-Koch deputy favored as head of Port Authority    B3



Business Digest    D1



The Home Section



Children's affinity for electronics    C1



A legal leg for designers    C1



One man's obsession with past creates wave of TV nostalgia    C1



Close to Home    C2



Outdoors is indoors as garden decor moves to the parlor    C6



Parent & Child    C8



Childbirth: a guide that can enlighten    C9



Nationwide reunion celebration for blacks    C11



A skinny loft gains space and style    C12



Tilting at lawn mowers: life on a hill    C13



Arts/Entertainment



Metropolitan Opera appoints a general director    C15



Music: Mozart humor is serious business    C15



City Opera opens season    C15



Dance: Roc in Lichen at Serious Fun    C19



Word and Image: Saving the Queen's privacy    C20



Essays on the senses    C20



Health Page    B5



Personal Health

The quiet comeback of electroshock therapy

Pet owners go to the doctor less

Sports



Baseball: Steinbrenner a no-show at Stadium    B7



Mets top Expos in 12    B7



Milestone a relief for Ryan    B8



Stewart of A's wins 1-0 duel    B8



News analysis: Steinbrenner could face more troubles    B9



Yankees lose to Tigers    B9



Column: Berkow on Steinbrenner    B7



Football: Jets have feisty newcomer in Zawatson    B9



Golf: Augusta, Baltusrol may admit first blacks    B7



Racial controversy brings huge financial stakes    B11



Racing: Good start for Saratoga    B18



Obituaries    B6



Phil David Fine, a lawyer

Ed Emshwiller, film maker

Editorials/Letters/Op-Ed



Editorials    A20



America's neck, new noose

Civil rights: the House's turn

Missing words, election chaos

Topics: An ordinary immortal

Letters    A20



A. M. Rosenthal: A plea for help    A21



Tom Wicker: The guns of America    A21



Jim Leach: Who robbed the thrifts? Congress    A21



Veronica Bassil: Postbabies    A21


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              117 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 2, 1990, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

American Legion to Sue U.S. Over Agent Orange

BYLINE: By KEITH SCHNEIDER, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 984 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


The American Legion, the largest veterans' group in the country, said today that
it was bringing suit against the Government for failing to complete a study of
the health of thousands of Vietnam War veterans exposed to the defoliant Agent
Orange.

The suit, to be filed in Federal District Court here on Thursday, is the first
that the American Legion has brought against the Government since its founding
in 1919. It asserts that two Federal health agencies and the Department of
Veterans Affairs violated a 1979 law by halting a comprehensive study of Vietnam
veterans who may have been exposed to Agent Orange.

A similar suit is also scheduled to be filed on Thursday by Vietnam Veterans of
America, an 11-year-old group representing 40,000 veterans. It is likely the
court will combine the suits.

Agent Orange, a toxic defoliant widely sprayed on the jungles of South Vietnam
to eliminate enemy cover, has trace amounts of dioxin, which has been shown to
cause cancer and birth defects in laboratory animals.

'A Weapon of War'

''The primary thing we want is for the Government to do a study,'' said John
Hanson, a spokesman for the American Legion. ''We consider any diseases caused
by Agent Orange the same as getting wounded. It's an injury of war. Agent Orange
was a weapon of war.''

Spokesmen for the Veterans Affairs Department and the Federal Centers for
Disease Control, which was conducting the study, said they would have no comment
on the suit.

The suit is the latest step in a complex scientific and political battle over
the effects of Agent Orange on veterans' health. The fight, which began in 1978,
has involved at various times the Pentagon, Government health agencies, the
Environmental Protection Agency, Congress and veterans' organizations.

Although veterans groups have long suspected that there was a link between the
use of the chemical during the war and the incidence of rare cancers, scientists
have not found a conclusive connection.

An $180 Million Settlement

Even so, seven manufacturers of Agent Orange agreed in 1984 to pay $180 million
to veterans who were exposed to the chemical, but did so without acknowledging
that it caused any injuries. By pressing the court action, the American Legion
hopes to establish a link between Agent Orange and veterans' illnesses and
collect compensation for them from the Government.

With three million members, including 800,000 who are Vietnam veterans, the
American Legion is capable of amassing considerable political influence to gain
benefits. Until now, the group has focused its campaigns for health benefits on
lobbying Congress and in administrative hearings at the Department of Veterans
Affairs, formerly the Veterans Administation.

The court action on Agent Orange is an important new turn for the American
Legion in its 40-year campaign to win compensation for veterans harmed by
exposure to toxic substances.

Legion Led Benefit Fights

Although the American Legion is most often associated with its small-town
meeting halls and flag-waving members at the head of Memorial Day and
Independence Day parades, the group's leaders have also been at the forefront of
some of the most contentious public health disputes and have helped win
compensation for the impaired health of shipbuilders exposed to asbestos and of
veterans exposed to radiation during atomic testing.

The asbestos and radiation efforts were concluded only after years of work in
Congress and the administrative courts of the Veterans Affairs Department.

The Government study on Agent Orange was being conducted by by the Federal
Centers for Disease Control as a result of Congressional action in December 1979
ordering a health study of Vietnam veterans exposed to Agent Orange. It began in
1982 under the management of Dr. Vernon N. Houk, an Assistant Surgeon General
and director of the Center for Environmental Health and Injury Control.

The most crucial aspect of the study was to determine how many veterans had been
exposed to Agent Orange. Dr. Houk was also directed to study the incidence of
rare cancers among Vietnam veterans.

In 1987, the C.D.C. canceled the study of veterans exposed to Agent Orange after
five years of research and $43 million in expenditures. Dr. Houk told members of
Congress that it was scientifically impossible to conduct the study because of
large gaps in the military records for areas sprayed with Agent Orange and in
troop movements.

Pentagon officials and the National Academy of Sciencies disagreed with Dr.
Houk's conclusion.

Politics Cited in Controversy

But in another report, the Congressional Office of Technology Assessment, which
has the responsibility for overseeing C.D.C. studies on Agent Orange, concluded
last month that ''it is not possible to design a large-scale epidemiological
study to look for effects of Agent Orange in ground troops who served in
Vietnam.''

Representative Ted Weiss, a Manhattan Democrat who is chairman of the House
Government Operations Subcommittee that has been studying the effects of dioxin
on health, has contended that the study failed because of a political decision
by the Reagan Administration. In a report to be released next week, Mr. Weiss
says the Administration feared that if a conclusive link was established between
exposure to the defoliant and illnesses the Government would be liable for
hundreds of millions of dollars in compensation claims.

The C.D.C. today declined through a spokesman to respond to Mr. Weiss's
allegation. Dr. Houk, said Mr. Fallis, also has declined to respond to questions
about the Agent Orange study.

Along with Dr. Houk, the American Legion suit names as defendants Dr. Louis W.
Sullivan, the Secretary of Health and Human Services, Dr. Edward J. Derwinski,
the Secretary of Veterans Affairs, and Dr. William L. Roper, the director of the
Centers for Disease Control in Atlanta.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              118 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 2, 1990, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Who Robbed the S.&L.'s? Congress.

BYLINE: By Jim Leach; Jim Leach, Republican of Iowa, is a member of the House
Banking Committee.

SECTION: Section A; Page 21, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 788 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


The most captivating news story in my home state last year concerned an
attempted robbery of tragicomic proportions.

At the end of the basketball season, a star forward on the Iowa State University
team walked into the campus Burger King, without a mask, carrying a rifle. He
asked the high school sophomore at the counter to hand over the money in the
cash register. The team's picture featuring this strapping athlete was on the
wall. The teen-ager recognized him with a ''Hi, Sam.'' He looked up and
responded, ''It's not me!''

The savings and loan scandal is another kind of robbery, the biggest bank heist
in history - one that goes beyond the bank vaults to pick the pocket of every
American. And the picture of another pin-striped team is on the wall: It is the
biannual official photograph of Congress.

The savings and loan debacle symbolizes the breakdown in discipline in
legislative bodies, especially at the committee level, where interest groups
target their attention and dollars. Committees are designed to be delegated
centers of legislative expertise. Too often they have become advocacy rather
than oversight oriented, failing to provide stop signals for the inevitable
train wrecks.

In modern politics, legislative reputations are generally made by extremists,
those who push the biggest programs or tax cuts, or who advocate the greatest
new powers for Government or the private sector.

With savings and loans, the committees of jurisdiction in Congress failed to
rein in the powers that regulators had allowed the thrifts - to over-leverage
capital, buy junk bonds and make speculative investments. They chose instead to
encourage the continuation of patently imprudent practices.

During the 1980's, the two costliest code words in the legislative lexicon
became ''direct investments.'' Thrifts were released from their social contract
to make home loans -the historical quid pro quo for receipt of Federal deposit
insurance - and given license to speculate in commercial real estate and
leveraged buyouts. Instead of following the Wall Street precept that ''first
loss is best loss,'' gullible legislators bought the claim of Charles Keating
and other industry insiders that inflation-ravaged thrifts could beat insolvency
by gambling with other people's money.

From a Sun Belt perspective the gamble worked: The wealth of the Midwest and
Northeast was transferred on a one-shot basis to the Southwest and West. While
graft was rampant, not all of the deposits were frittered away. A localized
infrastructure of homes and modern offices was built that will stand for a
generation as a government-induced incentive for migration to those states with
the most lax regulation.

This criminal transfer of wealth from one region to another, from middle-class
taxpayers to lubricious high rollers, occurred because legislative bodies
abandoned the national interest and represented regional and industry concerns.
Once an innumerate Congress ceased to require prudent capital ratios and
sanctioned phony accounting and capricious powers, the Government's gold could
be stolen without breaking into Fort Knox.

Ironically, it was the alleged defenders of the little guy in American politics
who led the charge to transform an industry created under Franklin Roosevelt to
serve small savers and average homeowners into a privileged preserve for the
moneyed elite.

The only honor that can be salvaged from this fiscal Vietnam - the chance to
hold the ''ins'' accountable for privatizing profit and socializing loss - must
be a demand for campaign reform, for fair rules, for competitive opportunity in
American political as well as economic life. The $20 a month that the average
American family must pay Uncle Sam for the next 30 years amounts to a
Congressional Watergate, depriving Congress, particularly its majority party, of
the moral authority to defend the political status quo.

In Chinese history there is a theory of revolution based upon a ''mandate of
heaven.'' A government may be overthrown when a catastrophe - a drought, flood
or earthquake - signals the necessity. The question of the 1990's is whether the
American people are concluding that the conflicts of interests that cost real
people real money are of such earthquake proportions that the mandate of
governance ought to be removed from the Democratic political establishment,
which has controlled Congress and the majority of state legislatures during the
past half-century.

The challenge to Republicans is to stake out the position as the party of
reform. The future belongs to the political party that puts the S.& L. crooks in
jail and removes America's legislative bodies from the control of moneyed
influence peddlers.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              119 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  August 3, 1990, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Evolution in Europe;
Soviet Smokers Vow Strikes As Cigarettes, Too, Disappear

BYLINE: By CELESTINE BOHLEN, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1166 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW, Aug. 2


It happens like clockwork, all over the city. A truck pulls up to a boarded-up
kiosk, unloads its wares, the sale window opens and within minutes smokers
appear out of nowhere to take places in line, hopeful that for this day, anyway,
their addiction can be fed.

Along with other ills, the Soviet Union is now in the throes of a nicotine fit,
brought on by a painful and puzzling withdrawal of cigarettes from a nation of
heavy smokers.

In many parts of the country, the cigarette shortage - caused by a series of
typical economic lapses - has galvanized the patient, line-suffering Soviet
consumer into action.

In the city of Perm last week, a demonstration that began in front of an empty
tobacco shop spilled into downtown streets, ending in a rally outside City Hall,
where 2,000 people chanted and waved banners, badgering the Communist Party for
cigarettes. ''Hey, you up there, your people have nothing to smoke as well as
nothing to eat,'' one banner read. ''Party, have you got a smoke?'' asked
another.

Aircraft Workers Threaten Strike

In Kuibyshev, smokers at an aircraft plant threatened a strike over the
cigarette shortage and protesters mounted a daily vigil at a local tobacco plant
that had been shut for repairs.

Warning strikes have also been reported in Ulyanovsk and Ufa, while in Voronezh
and Orel, angry smokers have smashed the windows of tobacco kiosks. This month,
at the height of the harvest in the Krasnador region, combine operators brought
their machines to a stop with a nonnegotiable demand: ''No tobacco, no work.''

Such public vehemence has been absent during other shortages: when cheese,
onions, lemons or sausages disappear from the stores, Soviet shoppers simply
shift their queues from one empty counter to another.

Even during the peak of the Government's campaign against alcohol, when
state-bottled vodka was impossible to find, people hid their discontent and
looked for moonshine. The nearest the country came to an angry consumer backlash
until now was last summer's protests by miners over the shortage of soap.

Complex Pattern of Reasons

This shortage has strained the credulity of even the most resigned of Soviet
shoppers. Its origins, as recounted in a recent article in the Communist Party
newspaper Pravda, lie in a classic Soviet economic foul-up, starting with a
failure to anticipate demand, a lack of coordination between the industry's
sectors and problems with outdated, virtually unusable equipment.

According to Pravda, the problem starts with the tobacco crop itself. Because of
a lack of proper equipment, tobacco production in one critical region has
dropped by more than half in recent years as workers increasingly refuse to work
in tobacco fields.

Next in the link was a failure to provide for this year's demand for 445 billion
cigarettes - a figure that rose with the resurgence in alcohol consumption as
the anti-alcohol campaign relaxed. (''A curious fact,'' noted Pravda. ''The more
people drink, the more they smoke.'') Instead, this year's plan called for only
407 billion cigarettes, and according to Pravda, even that goal has not been met
because of the closing of six cigarette plant for repairs.

The chief problem, Pravda explained, has been the industry's reliance on foreign
equipment. Because of a shortage of hard currency, this has fallen into
disrepair and has not been replaced, despite repeated appeals.

Similar problems have plagued the production of acetate filters, most of them
made in Armenia, where production of everything has fallen sharply as a result
of ethnic tension and political instability. Filter ouptut is also afflicted by
outdated machinery and in addition, has suffered from a shortage of chemical
supplies, some of which have been halted after an originating factory was shut
down because of hazardous environmental conditions.

Imports Are Curtailed

And finally, imports of cigarettes, which account for 15 percent of the market,
have been reduced because of the changing terms of trade among Communist
countries. Vietnam, for instance, is insisting on hard currency for its
cigarettes, while Cuba has cut down exports due to a shortage of cardboard,
which, Pravda noted, ''is, by the way, supplied by us.''

Meanwhile, the Bulgarian tobacco industry has fallen on hard times, too.

Soviet officials, pressed at every turn about the cigarette crisis, are
promising relief in another month's time. More imports are expected from India
and Albania, and after machinery repairs are completed, domestic production,
they say, will get back on line.

In the meantime, Soviet smokers, who are among the world's most hooked, are
making do. According to a report in the weekly trade journal Kommersant,
desperate factory managers in Kuibyshev have obtained their own supply of
cigarettes to keep their workers happy, while enterprising smokers are trading
bottles of vodka for packages of cheap tobacco.

The truly frantic were trying their own blend of tea and dried moss, according
to a report in one newspaper. So far, no paper or health agency has reported a
mass movement to quit.

Cigarettes Join Black Market

The cigarette shortage, now into its second month, has produced its own black
market. At Moscow's Ryzhsky Market, where shoppers and speculators deal in such
rare commodities as Dior makeup, Syrian T-shirts, denim skirts and childrens'
sneakers, the hottest items now are Soviet cigarettes -Cosmos, Yava, even the
lowly papirosi, a peculiar Russian cigarette with hollow cardboard tubes.

The militia officers patrolling the surly scene at the Ryzhsky Market amble by
as women, some of them dressed in gypsy bangles and bright colored skirts,
surreptiously pull packs from their sleeves, shawls, bags and baskets. The
bolder ones advertise their wares by nonchalantly shuffling packs in their
hands.

Once scorned by Moscow's profiteers, Soviet cigarettes have been made precious
by their scarcity, selling for as much as 2, even 3 rubles a pack. These prices
are exorbitant compared to the official prices, which range from 30 to 80 kopeks
a pack depending on type and quality, but they still trail well behind the
reigning Marlboro, which at the going rate, costs 25 rubles a pack - roughly
equivalent to the value of a dollar on Moscow's ever-more-volatile black market.

But for the average smoker, earning a salary of 240 rubles a month, this kind of
business is out of the question. Instead, they depend on their local kiosks,
anticipting deliveries as best they can, or search more circuitous channels.

Any cigarette would do for Yuri Glazov, a plumber, who smoked a papirosa as he
waited in line at a kiosk on Peace Avenue. ''We are not that particular,'' he
said, speaking for his fellow smokers.

Mr. Glazov dismissed with contempt the official explanations for the cigarette
shortage. ''If you believe our press, all the factories are under repair at one
time,'' he scoffed. ''I think it was intentional, probably sabotage.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: A tobacco shortage in the Soviet Union has left long lines
outside tobacco shops like this one in Moscow, which had not yet opened for the
day. (Associated Press ) (pg. A4)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              120 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  August 3, 1990, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Frank G. O'Neill, War Prosecutor, 83

SECTION: Section B; Page 8, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 145 words


Frank G. O'Neill, a lawyer who served as chief prosecutor of Japanese war
criminals in the Philippines after World War II, died Monday at Milton Hospital
in Massachusetts. He was 83 years old and lived in Milton.

A spokesman for the family said the cause of death was pneumonia.

Mr. O'Neill was also head of the economic law branch of occupation forces in
Japan under Gen. Douglas MacArthur and helped to rebuild Japanese industry. In
1952 he published an English-language summary of Korean law for the United
Nations, and from 1956 to 1972 he served as a United States diplomatic corps as
an adviser to Brazil, Libya, Nepal and South Vietnam.

A graduate of Boston University Law School, he also received a degree in public
administration from the Maxwell School at Syracuse University.

He is survived by his wife, Regena; and a son, Frank, of Hyde Park, Mass.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              121 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  August 3, 1990, Friday, Late Edition - Final

TV Weekend;
A Selection Ranging From Grim to Glamorous

BYLINE: By WALTER GOODMAN

SECTION: Section C; Page 26, Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 815 words


This weekend brings a pop superstar, a song stylist and ''Beauty and the
Beast,'' as well as Northern Ireland, Coney Island and Cambodia.

The places are the main subjects of Sunday's edition of the Channel 13 series
''Independent Focus,'' at 11 P.M. This two-hour showcase for independent
producers includes eight items of various lengths, the shortest being a
two-minute visual account of a nine-month pregnancy.

The anthology leads off with ''Samsara,'' a 27-minute report from Cambodia, told
mainly in what seems to be an actress's rendering of the feelings of a woman who
has returned to her country after the murderous years of rule by the Pol Pot
Khmer Rouge regime. She recalls: ''In Pol Pot time, love was forbidden.'' Back
in her homeland, she finds desolation: ''Our men are dead or gone to war.'' The
pictures confirm that Cambodia has become ''a nation of widows.''

The striving for poetic effect occasionally becomes labored, but some of the
images, on screen and in the words, remain. Speaking of the present situation of
the country, which has become a battleground between Vietnam and the Khmer
Rouge, the narrator says, ''We are caught between the tiger and the crocodile.''

The other main item, ''Counterterror,'' is an account of some of the killings in
Northern Ireland from the viewpoint of supporters of the Irish Republican Army.
They accuse the British forces of practicing a ''shoot to kill'' policy against
suspected I.R.A. fighters. Most of the testimony comes from relatives and
friends of three young men who were killed in 1985 in the town of Strabane.
There is no pretense of even-handedness here; the bombings and murders by I.R.A.
members are scarcely mentioned. But ''Counterterror'' does capture the anger and
grief on one side of a bitter conflict.

The evening's third item, ''Sodom by the Sea,'' is a 17-minute mishmash about
immigrants discovering America through Coney Island in Brooklyn that tells
little fresh about either the newcomers or the place. Filling out the bill are
several experimental pieces in which some independent producers show what they
are capable of.

'Evening at Pops'

Tonight on ''Evening at Pops,'' at 9 on Channel 13, the tenor-saxophone player
Stan Getz gives out with such standards as Harold Arlen's ''My Shining Hour.''
He joins Melissa Manchester, who sometimes seems to be trying to make up with
stylistic affectations for so-so vocal gifts, in Duke Ellington's
''Sophisticated Lady.'' The Boston Pops Orchestra, under John Williams, provides
its usual undemanding fare, including some movie music, which for some reason is
considered especially appropriate in hot weather, maybe because it reminds
people of air-conditioned theaters.

'Beauty and the Beast'

''Beauty and the Beast,'' a sitcom with pretensions, which attracted a loyal but
commercially insufficient audience during its regular run, reappears tomorrow at
9 P.M. on CBS. This is a repeat of the final episode, in which Father, the
leader of the below-ground folk, is almost murdered. As the assailant is hunted
down, Ron Perlman, as the beast with the beautiful soul, indulges in virtuous
vaporings, and the usual moody atmosphere prevails.

'Blond Ambition'

And then there is Madonna's ''Blond Ambition World Tour 90.'' Scheduled to be
taped in an outdoor arena in Nice, France, a few hours before being shown on
Sunday at 9 P.M. on cable-television's Home Box Office, this is the final
performance of the two-hour package that the mistress of shock-pop has been
bringing to admirers around the globe.

The full performance was not available for preview, but promotional excerpts
catch the elaborate staging. There is no shortage of sound or action; the
choreography is of the hop-skip-bend sort, with everybody running in place.
Despite the little microphone that seems to be growing from the star's teeth,
the lyrics are not easy to make out, but fans no doubt already know the words to
such hits as ''Hanky Panky'' and ''Vogue.'' At moments, the combination of
music, speed and Madonna's costumes may give the impression that you are
watching a music-video commercial for bras and corsets.

Independent Focus
''Samsara,'' by Ellen Bruno; ''Counterterror: Northern Ireland,'' by Chris
Bratton and Annie Goldson; ''Sodom by the Sea,'' by Harriet Hirshorn and Mary
Patierno; ''Baby Booming,'' by Mary Cybulski and John Tintori; ''If With Those
Eyes and Ears,'' by J. Leighton Pierce; ''Just Hold Still: Excerpts,'' by Jem
Cole; ''In the Month of Crickets,'' by Lewis Klahr; ''Geologic Time,'' by Skip
Battaglia. At 11 P.M. on Channel 13.

Madonna - Live!
Blond Ambition World
Tour 90
A two-hour concert special; Jai Winding, musical director; Vince Patterson,
choreographer; Christopher Ciccone, artistic director; Jean-Paul Gaultier,
costume designer; Freddy DeMann, executive producer. At 9 P.M. on HBO.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: The final performance of Madonna's ''Blond Ambition World Tour
90'' will be shown on Sunday at 9 P.M. on HBO. (Nancie Hemminger)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              122 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 4, 1990, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Americans Went to Nicaragua to Ease U.S.-Inflicted Suffering

SECTION: Section 1; Page 22, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 287 words


To the Editor:

Re your July 21 report that the United States friends of Nicaragua's Sandinistas
are suffering from a case of dashed ideals: I would like to go on record as one
of those volunteers who worked in Nicaragua ''for a pittance'' (actually, it was
for nothing). As a fully trained family practitioner, I could have stayed in the
United States and pulled down $80,000 a year. Why did I do it? Not out of any
need to find utopia, as you put it.

As a United States citizen and a physician, I felt compelled to undo, or at
least ameliorate, the suffering inflicted by my Government on the people of
Nicaragua. No institution of our society, the news media included, was exposing
the lies and depredations of President Ronald Reagan and his band of
soon-to-be-convicted felons, and someone had to do it.

As you point out, some 250,000 United States citizens traveled to the country
Mr. Reagan called a ''totalitarian dungeon'' to see for themselves. Most of
those were not, as you imply, malcontents seeking a ''countermodel to the
inequality and meaninglessness that they felt prevailed in their own society,''
but citizens after the truth, who wanted to stop a cruel war waged in their
name. Not since the Vietnam War have so many citizens flatly refused to believe
Washington's propaganda. Never before have a quarter of a million Americans
visited a country against which their Government was making war.

During my year in Nicaragua, I saw the Sandinistas up close, away from Managua
and the cameras. Some of them were admirable, some despicable. But none were as
mendacious or as bloodthirsty as Ronald Reagan, Elliott Abrams or Oliver North.

ANTONIO J. DAJER, M.D.
  Mexico, N.Y., July 23, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              123 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  August 5, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

ANTIQUES;
Bronze Treasures From Indonesia

BYLINE: By RITA REIF

SECTION: Section 2; Page 30, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 997 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


Indonesia's robust bronze tribal artifacts made before the 8th century help to
explain the earthiness seen in later objects of the Hindu-Buddhist period, which
dominates the exhibition ''The Sculpture of Indonesia,'' at the National Gallery
of Art here. At the entrance to the show, organized by the museum to cover
artifacts from the fifth to 15th centuries, is a selection of these ancient
bronzes: a haunting figure of a man, an elephant-shaped vessel, a flask and a
ceremonial ax, works virtually unknown until now in the West.

The exhibition suggests that these bronze burial or ritual objects are sources
for the bold simplicity, exuberance or sensuality that continued to characterize
Indonesian art after 730, when the Indian religions began infiltrating Java,
Sumatra and other islands. They are also among the most surprising selections in
this exhibition of 135 objects, many of which are masterpieces never before
shown outside Indonesia.

The show, which opened here last month, is the first exhibition of early
Indonesian art assembed in the United States from international sources. It will
remain through Nov. 4 before traveling to New York, Houston and San Francisco.
It is part of the 18-month Festival of Indonesia, a nationwide celebration of
the archipelago's culture.

In a telephone interview from his office at the Museum of Fine Arts in Boston,
Jan Fontein, the show's curator, said that with the exception of works judged
too fragile to travel or impossible to remove from their sites, virtually ''all
the best Indonesian pieces are there, something I never thought would be
possible.''

A lifelong student of Indonesian art, Mr. Fontein is the former director of the
Boston museum, where he is now a curator for research in the Department of
Asiatic Art. ''In all my years of doing exhibitions, I have never worked with
another country that showed such a willingness to lend their best pieces,'' said
Mr. Fontein, who spent two years in Indonesia organizing the show. About 70
percent of the objects are from Indonesian sources; the rest were lent by
museums and private collectors in the United States, Britain, France, West
Germany and the Netherlands.

The most arresting of the show's bronzes is the expressive study of a lean man,
about 10 inches tall, made before the year 500 - it is reminiscent of ancient
dagger handles unearthed in Vietnam. Depicted in an aggressive stance, his
pipelike arms akimbo and feet apart, he wears a cloth wrapped around his head, a
necklace of large beads, bangles on his wrists and knee-length pants. He is
every inch a warrior.

''We do know where but not how these bronzes were used,'' Mr. Fontein said.
''Their archeological context was unclear.''

Equally puzzling is a flask about three feet tall - an awesome scale for such an
object - embellished with bronze ropelike handles at the sides and base, its
surface covered with bands of boldly drawn spirals and triangles, some filled
with depictions of a bird. The outsized proportions and the absence of Buddhist
imagery indicate the vessel may have been made for ceremonial use before the
year 500.

Mr. Fontein compared two elephant-shaped objects - cheerful beasts that would
have been at home in a Ringling Brothers circus. He said the vessel of a
marching elephant made for ceremonial use about the year 500 depicts ''the beast
in nature,'' except for its tail, which is bent back to form the handle. The
other elephant, a ceremonial lamp from the 14th or 15th century with a bearded
passenger on its back, is shown trumpeting, its trunk and body fancifully
decorated with crescents and flowers. ''It's a very elegant piece'' Mr. Fontein
said. ''People tend to see Indonesian art as an extension of Indian art because
of its Hindu-Buddhist components,'' Mr. Fontein said. ''Before any Hindu priest
or Buddhist pilgrim came to Indonesia there were very interesting or extremely
sophisticated casters of bronze at work there.

''The human quality is something I feel coming through so strongly throughout
Indonesian art,'' he added. Stone and bronze sculptures of the Hindu and
Buddhist gods and goddesses, which vary in the exhibition from works two inches
tall to those six feet or more in height, were made to appear more human than
the Indian versions of these deities.

There are Buddhas meditating while standing or seated in the lotus position. A
pot-bellied Ganesa relaxes on his throne. And a remarkable corps of goddesses is
equipped with bow and arrow, an incense burner, a flute or a harp. These 22
figures from the 10th century, each about two inches tall, form a Buddhist
mandala discovered in 1976 by a farmer when his hoe struck the earthenware jar
in which they were buried.

The bronze goddesses, some of the tribal works and the most dazzling of the gold
works are unknown to most museumgoers in Indonesia, because they are still being
studied by Indonesian archeologists, Mr. Fontein said.

The gold works include the remnants of a ninth-century status symbol of the
Javanese court - the finial of a parasol. This exquisitely made object is
enlivened with abstract and floral images cut into the surface or detailed in
bold relief. More elaborate crafting appears in later gold artifacts that were
probably made for royal use: a ceremonial sword handle, a crescent-shaped finial
of a headdress, a clasp, a necklace, and a gold plaque on which an elegant
prince is depicted riding on the back of a snarling, pot-bellied demon.

The exhibition, sponsored by the Mobil Corporation and supported with an
indemnity from the Federal Council on the Arts and the Humanities, is scheduled
to appear at the Museum of Fine Arts, Houston, from Dec. 9 to March 17, 1991;
the Metropolitan Museum of Art, from April 21 to Aug. 18, 1991, and the Asian
Art Museum, San Francisco, from Sept. 28 to Jan. 5, 1992. A catalogue prepared
by Mr. Fontein is published in paperback by the National Gallery of Art ($29.95)
and in cloth by Harry N. Abrams ($65).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: A bronze figure from West Java, about 10 inches tall (National
Gallery of Art)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              124 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  August 5, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Why Rabbit Had to Go

BYLINE: By JOHN UPDIKE; John Updike's novel ''Rabbit at Rest'' will be published
in October.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 1, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 2513 words


''Rabbit AT Rest'' will be the fourth and last of my so-called Rabbit books.
Each of them occurs in the ninth year of a decade and was written, more or less,
in the ninth year of the decade.

The first one, ''Rabbit, Run,'' was written in 1959 with no thought of there
being a sequel. It was composed by a youngish man, 27 I believe I was, who had
received a Guggenheim grant by promising to write a novel - hence, having
accepted the grant, I felt obliged to write the book. I had published one
previous, quite short novel, ''The Poorhouse Fair.'' My sense of myself was of a
sort of sprinter. My name, if known, was known by way of contributions to The
New Yorker magazine. My original concept had been to write two novellas, to be
bound into one volume, which would contrast two approaches to the game of life:
one would be the rabbit approach, a kind of dodgy approach - spontaneous,
unreflective, frightened, hence my character's name, Angstrom - and the second
was to be the horse method of coping with life, to get into harness and pull
your load until you drop. And this was eventually ''The Centaur.'' But I began
the rabbit book first.

It was subtitled, in my conception of it, ''A Movie''; I imagined the opening
scene as something that would happen behind credits, and I saw the present tense
of the book as corresponding to the present tense in which we experience the
cinema. There is no real past in the movies; things happen, one after the other,
right there in front of us. The present tense, in the late 50's, was not at all
a common device in American fiction. The only instance that I had encountered
was in a novel by Joyce Cary, the British writer, called ''Mister Johnson,''
about an African civil servant. I don't know if it's remembered or forgotten,
but it's a wonderful book, one of the best novels about Africa - certainly one
of the best books written by a white man about Africa that there is. I have been
told since that Damon Runyon wrote in the present tense, but for me Joyce Cary
opened the door.

I discovered as I began to write how delicious the present tense is. Instead of
writing ''she said and he said'' it's ''he says and she says,'' and not ''he
jumped'' at some past moment, but ''he jumps,'' right now in front of you.
Action takes on a wholly different, flickering quality; thought and feeling and
event are brought much closer together.

And so the present tense proved to be a happy one and I wrote on and on in a
little room in the corner of East Street and County Road in Ipswich, Mass., a
town I'd moved to in an attempt to get away from the charms and distractions of
New York City. I was there provisionally, seeing if I could be a freelance
writer. I had had a job in New York, I had done my New York thing, I could tell
Uptown from Downtown, I had undergone the Manhattan initiation rites that
writers should undergo, and was up in New England experimentally, out on a limb
as it were. I sat in that little room, the old sewing room, looking out at a
very complex telephone pole, and the excitement of writing a novel was so great
for me that my feet, in scuffing, wore two bare spots on the floor, which might
still be there.

Anyway, I completed the book; it was indeed a full-length book, too full-length
to include with the horse novel, which I then made into another separate book.
And that of course is the way we accumulate a shelf of books, every idea
subdivides and becomes two and then four, and in that manner you can have
written 37 books and not have had very many ideas.

''Rabbit, Run'' was published, with mild sales, fair reviews. People asked me
about the ending; they found it ambiguous. What really happened? The hero is
last seen running. I thought that Rabbit's immersion in the blind act of running
was a sufficient ending for the novel; it didn't occur to me we needed to know
more about this man.

But the decade passed, a decade that brought me good news and bad, and that
brought the country a lot of news. The 60's were an exceedingly newsworthy
decade, from John F. Kennedy's assassination on. A lot of things happened,
things that were more or less distressing to Americans older than 30.

I had written a book called ''Couples,'' which had sold enough to make me feel
entitled to write a long poem, all about myself, under the false impression that
that would be interesting to people. But I made the useful discovery that in
fact an author is interesting only as a storyteller, only as the conduit whereby
certain imaginary events get onto the page. And so my long poem about myself,
called ''Midpoint,'' fell quietly into the void - more quietly than a stone down
a well, which at least does make a sort of little plip.

It was then my notion to complete a kind of Pennsylvania tetralogy. I'd written
a book that took place in the future, ''The Poorhouse Fair,'' one that took
place in the immediate present, ''Rabbit, Run,'' one that took place in the
remembered past, ''The Centaur,'' and I wanted to write a historical novel about
James Buchanan, Pennsylvania's only President - a fascinating man, at least to
me. I did so much research I began to dream about him. One day I woke up and
told my wife, ''James Buchanan is my best friend.''

Well, it was one thing to fall in love with James Buchanan but another to try to
write a historical novel. I found that I couldn't bring myself to do all the
fakery necessary in writing a historical novel. Never having lived in a log
cabin, I found myself inhibited about describing one; never having participated
in a Washington 19th-century political parley, I found myself at a loss to
imagine exactly what went on. Even things like buggies and spittoons loomed as
mysterious. So I found myself balked in the attempt to write the Buchanan novel
and I finally made it into a play, putting upon the director and the set
designer all these difficult particulars that eluded me.

By now it was high time for me to write a novel. I had made a deal with myself
at the beginning of this freelance career I've spoken of: I would give my
publishers, to make up for the losses they'd suffered on the intervening books,
a novel every other book, with collections of something or other in between. So
the rhythm would go, presumably, loss, small gain, loss, small gain. It was
novel time, and Buchanan hadn't worked out as a hero.

And there was all this distress around me - Vietnam distress, race riots,
marches, agitation of all sorts. Suddenly it seemed to me that Rabbit Angstrom
of Pennsylvania, about whose future some people had expressed curiosity, might
be the vehicle in which to package some of the American unease that was raging
all around us. And so I wrote ''Rabbit Redux.'' It felt good to be back in the
present tense and good to try to locate in this small section of southeastern
Pennsylvania echoes and ramifications of the national and international
disturbances that were so preoccupying in the late 60's.

Having composed, then, one sequel, and having had the sequel fairly well
received, obliged me, it seemed, to write another; one sequel leads to another.
A motive of the artistic life, after all, is the completion of sets. That
childhood instinct we have to make collections, to tidy up and round out,
affects adult enterprises as well.

But in the meantime, I had a whole decade to live, on my own track. People would
ask me, ''What's Harry doing?'' as though he was a real person, but I had no
idea what he was doing. For one thing, I lived in Massachusetts and he was
living in Pennsylvania. I didn't even know he'd become a car dealer.

When the time came, when 1979 came - each novel, by the way, was written in a
different house, as it turned out, at a different address - I was in a different
town, I had a different wife, a different sense of myself. I was full of beans,
really, looking back on it from my present relatively beanless condition. I was
in my mid-40's, just a kid. The town we lived in, I should say, was away from
the sea and in size and social atmosphere reminded me of the town in
Pennsylvania, Shillington, that I had grown up in. The house was even the same
shape - long and narrow, with a deep backyard. From the room I wrote in, I saw
rows of yellow school buses. I was at home in America, all right.

I needed a hook, into 1979. I mean, what can you say? Although the first novel
had had a few overheard news items in it, it wasn't really in a conscious way
about the 50's. It just was a product of the 50's; it was a helplessly 50's kind
of book written by a sort of helplessly 50's guy. The 60's were much more
self-conscious, much more conscious of themselves as a decade. The 70's seemed
somewhat amorphous.

But we happened to be in Pennsylvania, staying with some friends of my wife's,
and it was June, and there was some anxiety about our getting away because there
were terrible gas lines all over the state. And my host was so hostly, or else
so keen on our departure, that he rose very early in the morning and got in my
car and went and waited in a gas line to get me gas to get out of there. So the
gas crunch became my hook: running out of gas, which is the first phrase in
''Rabbit Is Rich.'' The general sense of exhaustion, inflation, Jimmy Carter's
fainting during one of his trots - all that seemed to add up to a national
picture.

The paradox was that although the theme was running out of gas, I was feeling
pretty good. And so the book is kind of an upbeat book in spite of itself. It's
really a cheerful book, very full, it seems to me insofar as I can be a critic,
of itself and its material. I really had to cut it short at the end - it was
threatening to go on forever. Tennyson said what he wanted was a novel that
would go on forever, but it's not what I want. So I moved briskly to the arrival
of Angstrom's granddaughter in his arms; the book is really about his becoming a
grandfather, written years before I myself became one. He is rich in a number of
ways, and discovers of course that to be rich is just another way of being poor,
that your needs expand with your income and the world eventually takes away what
it gives.

But it's a big, basically bouncy book that won prizes. Why some books win prizes
and others don't is a mystery. In part it was that by this time, I'd been around
so long, and was obviously working so hard, that people felt sorry for me and
futhermore hoped that if Rabbit and I received a prize we would go away and put
an end to this particular episode in American letters. But no, I've felt obliged
to produce a fourth!

Again, I groped for the hook. It was quite easy to have a blank mind about the
80's; there was a distinct fuzziness about it. It was Ronald Reagan's decade and
very cool, in the McLuhanesque sense, and all I really knew was that my hero
would be 10 years older and probably feeling no better than I did, and maybe
even a little worse - since he had peaked earlier than I did. I saw him in
Florida. I thought a new state might perk up Rabbit readers. The Updikes - a
branch of them, my father's brother and sister - went down to Florida in the
1920's when their own father, my grandfather, became ill with tuberculosis, and
so Florida has some personal relevancy for me - a warm spot in my heart, you
might say. Also, my mother for almost as long as I knew her had been trying to
write a novel about the discoverer of Florida, Ponce de Leon. So I made some
trips, in 1988 I think it must have been, to gather background.

I couldn't wait to begin the book; the opening of it occurs late in 1988, after
the Presidential election and just after the crash of Pan Am Flight 103 in
Lockerbie. In writing, I several times had to stop to let real time catch up
with my fictional time. The private events are the main thing, of course, but
you don't want some public event, atomic war or a giant earthquake, to cancel
the world and make everything anachronistic. A few months after I began, in
April of 1989, my mother was hospitalized, and from then on I had to keep making
trips to Pennsylvania to check on things. I had a hard time keeping momentum,
and noticed in rereading, even on the last set of proofs, some repetitions and
inconsistencies.

You might say it's a depressed book about a depressed man, written by a
depressed man. Deciding to wind up the series was a kind of death for me. Even
though I left Pennsylvania in the early 50's, as long as my parents were alive I
had a living link with the state. My father died in 1972 but my mother lived on,
and so I had continuing reasons to visit Rabbit's territory, to refresh my sense
of it and check up on changes. But as she became older I saw that my link would
end someday, and end with it my grip on Rabbit's world. My mother died in
October, 10 days after I finished the first draft; her dying became interwoven
with my own sense of aging and my hero's even more severe sense of aging.

Yet all those visits, to her in the hospital and out of it - I hadn't had such a
strong dose of my native turf since leaving it for college. My fictional city of
Brewer is, I guess it's no secret to say, based on Reading, in Berks County. And
though I was raised in a suburb of Reading, I had never lived there, and putting
Rabbit into Brewer in ''Rabbit, Run'' was actually an act of fantasy, something
like the country of Kush in ''The Coup,'' and I got the geography all scrambled
up, and it's all rather vague and, as it seemed to me at the time, enchanted. In
''Rabbit at Rest'' it's less vague - the area at last, in my taking leave of it,
began to make sense.

Another reason for winding up: I felt that if I was going to make a kind of
meganovel out of the series, and bring all the threads to a gathering, four
novels was about the limit. We've all heard of tetralogies, but after that
there's no word for it. And with sequels, there is an accumulation of loose
threads, of characters you invented and used, so that the elements increase
geometrically, and beyond four would become very messy. Even so, each Rabbit
book has been longer than the preceding, and this is the longest.

The action ends in October; I used Hurricane Hugo to round out the climax, but
of course the events that now seem important about 1989 - the collapse of
Communism in Eastern Europe - occurred quite late in the year. But Rabbit feels
them coming - at one point he asks himself, ''If there's no Cold War, what's the
point of being an American?'' His sense of being useless, of being pushed to one
side by his wife and son, has this political dimension, then. Like me, he has
lived his adult life in the context of the cold war. He was in the Army, ready
to go to Korea, hawkish on Vietnam, proud of the moon shot, and in some sense
always justified, at the back of his mind, by a concept of freedom, of America,
that took sharpness from contrast with Communism. If that contrast is gone, then
that's another reason to put him, regretfully, to rest in 1990.

This essay is adapted from remarks made before the American Booksellers
Association convention in Las Vegas in June.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              125 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  August 5, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

A SPECIAL REPORT: HOT POTATOES;
Flash Points

BYLINE: By Lisa W. Foderaro

SECTION: Section 4A; Page 23, Column 1; Education Life Supplement

LENGTH: 2193 words


TEACHERS are jugglers, balancing competing interests, and, sometimes, competing
ideologies, to deliver to their students enough accurate information to help
them make reasoned judgments.

It isn't easy, particularly when formerly taboo - and still sensitive - subjects
like AIDS and religion are added to the curriculum. It is a performance in which
parents, students and educators all have a stake.

This report offers an overview, followed by an examination of some of the most
troubling subjects.


AMERICAN public schools are facing a new responsibility that brings with it an
unenviable task: teaching formerly taboo subjects.

The resulting proliferation of classes on sexuality and AIDS, religion, drug
abuse, racial tolerance and the Vietnam War, among others, has transformed many
school districts into ideological combat zones.

''We are such a diverse society that it's extremely difficult for schools to
come up with a curriculum that doesn't ring somebody's bell,'' said Tyll van
Geel, a professor of education law at the University of Rochester Graduate
School of Education and Human Development and author of ''The Courts and
American Education Law.'' ''You have some people saying to the public schools,
'Teach it my way,' while others are saying, 'No, teach it my way.' ''

Still others say don't teach it at all, arguing either that schools should mind
their own basic-education business - a business that needs considerable shoring
up right now - or that tolerance, sex education and the like should begin at
home, not end in the classroom.

''The public schools are abandoning certain moral absolutes that have been
taught in this country for generations,'' said Rebecca Hagelin, the spokeswoman
for Concerned Women for America, a 700,000-member nonprofit organization that
says it seeks to protect the traditional family unit. ''They are putting across
a world view that the child is the center of his own life and that it's up to
that child to determine right from wrong. The authority of the parents is being
usurped.''

Others counter that since many parents will not or cannot exercise that
authority, schools must take on these issue-oriented topics if the country is to
deal effectively with some of the new social imperatives like AIDS, crack
addiction and multiculturalism.

''These subjects are of vital importance to the nation,'' said Edward Jenkinson,
a professor of English education at Indiana University and author of ''The
Schoolbook Protest Movement.'' ''Exposing students to as many ideas as possible
will give them the necessary knowledge and tools to make society's decisions in
the future.''

But even proponents of teaching once-forbidden subjects worry that with a ''fat
curriculum'' grown downright obese, teachers are being overburdened and students
shortchanged.

''Every day, a principal opens his mail and there are three more requests to
teach something else,'' said Herbert Greenhut, who recently retired from Robert
F. Wagner Junior High School in Manhattan after 39 years as a history teacher.
''Schools are being asked to incorporate all these things at the same time they
are looking to improve the basics, such as reading and writing and math.''

Such divisions, among parents and educators alike, run deep. They have helped
give rise to a number of organizations and new impetus to several extant groups
all along the political compass, from the conservative Concerned Women for
America, Eagle Forum and Citizens for Excellence in Education, to the National
Parent-Teachers Association and People for the American Way, a nonprofit
self-described ''constitutional liberties'' organization.

Most Personal Aspects of Mind and Body

AIDS, sex, drugs, tolerance and religion are delicate ground for many parents to
tread, because the issues touch on the most personal aspects of one's mind and
body. They are also subjects in which the line between description and
prescription is easily blurred. Often it is teachers who are asked to keep the
line well defined, and both students and themselves toeing it.

''There is a wobbly feeling that here I am on the front line,'' said Jean
Hunter, a teacher specialist for family-life education in Alexandria, Va. ''You
wonder: If I make a mistake, and a parent gets angry, will my principal back
me?''

Given the tremendous diversity of opinion that educators need to consider, it is
no surprise that devising a curriculum for these subjects can feel a little like
moving through a mine field.

Take the single issue of whether to include lessons about contraception in
sex-education classes. At one end of the spectrum is Dennis Ingberg, a father of
two in New York City and a clothing salesman who worries about his children
growing up in an age of AIDS. He and his wife, Debbie, who operates her own
balloon business, favor candor in the classroom.

''Kids have to be aware of how to prevent AIDS, and they already know about
condoms from the street, so it's not going to hurt for them to get the facts in
school,'' said Mr. Ingberg, who is 36. ''Better they learn about contraception
from a teacher than by accident. To be honest, I feel uneasy talking about sex
with my children, and I believe a knowledgeable third party can do a little
better.''

At the other end is Anita Parsons of Montrose, Colo., a member of a conservative
branch of the Lutheran church and the mother of four boys. Uncomfortable with
many components of the local curriculum, she and her husband, Gary, an airport
maintenance worker, pulled their children out of the public-school system to
educate them at home.

''Teaching about contraception achieves the exact opposite - kids get the idea
about sex in the first place and then don't use the contraception properly,''
said Mrs. Parsons, a 42-year-old former public grade- school teacher. ''From a
religious point of view, I think it's nuts. Until you're married, you shouldn't
do it, period.''

Then there are parents like Barbara and Ariel Adams of Columbia, Md., a
registered nurse and public-school math teacher, respectively, who have kept
their children in the public schools but are working for change.

Chief among their concerns is the distribution of blue ''teen-health cards'' by
the county health department to high school sex-education classes. The cards
list local clinics where students can go for free, confidential services
concerning birth control and venereal disease. The cards point out that parental
permission is not required for these services.

''A lot of parents are very concerned,'' said Mrs. Adams, the mother of five
children, who recently joined scores of other parents to challenge a proposed
statewide comprehensive health curriculum that would begin sex education as
early as kindergarten. ''It's basically saying, 'Hey kids, this is how you can
sidestep your parents.' ''

Aware of the heightened sensitivities on all sides, and of their own precarious
position, school administrators and teachers are reaching out to parents. For
example, Jim Percoco, a teacher of social studies at West Springfield High
School in Virginia, weaves religion unsparingly into his American history class.
''I tell parents right up front,'' he said, ''that I'm not attempting to
indoctrinate your children, but that to understand our history you have to talk
about the impact of religion on the colonization process, on the abolition
movement, on America's westward expansion and on the civil rights movement. If
you put your approach in context, then they shouldn't have a problem, whether
they be liberal, conservative, fundamentalist or Jewish.''

In New York City, where parent education is part of the sex-education mandate,
scores of parents have already been trained to present workshops on teen-age
pregnancy and self-esteem to other parents in their districts. ''The purpose of
our workshops is to make parents comfortable with the issues so that they can
discuss them with their children,'' said Adrienne Adinolfi, who serves as a
parent liaison to the New York City Board of Education for its family-living
curriculum. ''The parent is the primary sex educator, and we don't want to take
away that privilege.''

Even the teaching of tolerance, which on its surface seems unassailable, can
rankle some. Carol Green, an English teacher in Florida's Dade County school
district, led her sophomore class last year in a new program, ''Inhabiting Other
Lives,'' financed in part by the Rockefeller Foundation and designed to reduce
prejudice. ''Many of the students are taught to hate at home,'' she said. ''In
the beginning, some parents asked me why their children had to do this. The
feeling was that you're safe and secure among your own.''

The Statistics Are Not Known

There are no known national statistics to indicate how widespread the teaching
of formerly taboo subjects is, or how often teachers and boards of education
have been challenged regarding a particular curriculum. But in 1988, 18 states
required sex education and 31 required AIDS education, while sex education was
encouraged by 23 other states and AIDS education by 16 others, according to the
Alan Guttmacher Institute in New York City, a nonprofit reproductive-health
research center.

In its annual survey ''Attacks on the Freedom to Learn,'' People for the
American Way documented challenges to public education, including those to
curriculum, in 42 states during the 1988-89 school year. In Fresno, Calif., for
example, members of a group called Save American Values and Education objected
to a proposed resource book for teachers, ''Peace and Nuclear Age Education
Curriculum,'' arguing that it promoted pacificism and ignored the role of the
military. In North Bend, Ore., parents and other community members demanded the
cancellation of a high school assembly because one of the speakers, a person
with AIDS, would probably discuss homosexuality.

'They Don't Even Want Abortion Mentioned'

''For every incident that is reported to a group like the American Library
Association or People for the American Way, I think that at least 50 go
unreported,'' said Professor Jenkinson at Indiana University.

Such challenges appear to be common. ''We see a lot of local controversy around
sex education, and in many cases, it's healthy controversy as the communities
try to work through the many issues involved,'' said Donna Hulsizer, the issues
director for People for the American Way. ''But the most problematic
controversies are when parent groups pressure school districts into not teaching
certain subjects at all. They don't even want abortion, homosexuality or
contraception mentioned.''

The National Parent-Teachers Association has described these kinds of selective
curriculum cuts as a form of minority rule. ''There's a fine line between the
involvement of parents in the decision-making of the curriculum and the right of
parents to rip components from the curriculum,'' said the association's director
of governmental relations, Arnold F. Fege. ''When some in the community are
trying to lop off part of the health curriculum or English curriculum, those
parents in essence deny the majority of the community from having their children
learn that information.''

Professor van Geel of the University of Rochester noted: ''School boards haven't
necessarily dropped whole courses because of the pressures, but they've backed
off or fine-tuned a course to take the edge off.''

Surveys indicate that the majority of American adults want not only sex
education taught in public school, but a panoply of hitherto sensitive topics as
well. According to a 1987 Gallup poll in which 1,571 adults were interviewed in
their homes, 84 percent said that AIDS should be a part of sex education, 83
percent said they favored instruction on birth control, 60 percent said abortion
should be discussed and 56 percent supported teaching about homosexuality. The
poll had a margin of sampling error of plus or minus 3 percent.

In a written survey of 316 public high school English and social-studies
teachers in Florida and 772 teachers in California, conducted this spring by
People for the American Way, 29 percent in Florida and 20 percent in California
said they had practiced self-censorship for fear of complaints or retribution.
On another subject, 26 percent in Florida and 25 percent in California said they
had been pressured to avoid a subject or idea because it was deemed
inappropriate for class. The top nine subjects on the sensitivity scale, in no
particular order, were homosexuality, sex education, evolution, AIDS, religion,
abortion, mythology, civil rights and witchcraft, the same teachers reported.

Some teachers also say that the classes most rife with controversy can also be
the most rewarding. ''I can't tell you what a powerful experience we had with
this,'' said Mrs. Green of her race-relations class, explaining that she could
practically see her pupils awaken.

''I learned that you can't stereotype people by how they look and what they
wear,'' said Jeffrey Sprouse, age 15 and one of Mrs. Green's students. ''We're
all basically the same - not culture-wise, but sense-wise.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: August 6, 1990, Monday, Late Edition - Final

CORRECTION:

A headline on Saturday about an unsuccessful attempt in the Senate to overturn a
virtual ban on abortions at overseas military hospitals gave an incorrect vote
tally in some copies.

Proponents of the effort to overturn the ban needed a three-fifths majority to
overcome a procedural obstacle, but failed by two votes to get it. The vote was
58 to 41.

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              126 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  August 5, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

A Stand-Up Genius

BYLINE: By ALFRED CORN; Alfred Corn is the author of ''The West Door,'' a
collection of poems, and ''The Metamorphoses of Metaphor: Essays in Poetry and
Fiction.''

SECTION: Section 7; Page 14, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 818 words



BOONE
By Brooks Hansen and Nick Davis.
394 pp. New York:
Summit Books. $19.95.

Offering belated editorial advice to talented young writers who have just
published their first novel is pointless, in a way, but there may be others out
there now who could still be turned aside from perilous narrative methods.

Brooks Hansen and Nick Davis have tried to tell the story of their hero, Eton
Arthur Boone, in the form of an oral history, a method we've seen in recent
biographies of figures as disparate as Wallace Stevens and Edie Sedgwick.
''Boone'' is composed mostly of taped memoirs of surviving relatives and friends
of the dead artist in question. There are also transcripts of some of Boone's
stage routines (he's a painter, stand-up comic, actor, director and writer);
there are a few of his letters, some excerpts from a novel of his, reviews of
his work and suchlike ephemera. We aren't ever given direct access to Boone's
consciousness or to the consciousness of any of his friends, though, and that
strikes me as too great a handicap for any novel to overcome. It's impossible to
know whether the interviewees are concealing things or whether they believe
they're telling the truth.

Mr. Hansen and Mr. Davis have taken care to include witnesses of many kinds, so
that the speech textures transcribed cover a broad spectrum. We hear
reminiscences from Boone's father and his mother's sister about the childhood
years in Southern California in the 1950's and early 60's, where his mother, an
artist, dies of cancer; about his trip to London and first ventures on the
British stage, in 1967, from theatrical friends and acquaintances there; about
his American debut from a Vassar professor who becomes his fan; and of his
various triumphs on and off stage and screen (he makes a movie about Beethoven
and writes an avant-garde play), his romantic involvements and finally his
premature death at the age of 27 in a motorcycle accident in 1975 -all this
recounted by other witnesses of differing degrees of intimacy. Yet most of the
testimonials are taken from people more or less Boone's age and from his own
social group; the result is a rather large dose of transcribed yupspeak, with
''pathetic'' the favored adjective for negative happenings and ''Pretty neat,
hunh?'' a typical positive response. Other wearing verbal tics are ''just,''
''sort of'' and the yuppie ''this,'' as in ''I think he just saw this sort of
endless possibility.'' The authors capture to a T the way their contemporaries
speak, but that very accuracy is a disadvantage for the novel's readability.

The book jacket tells me the authors were born in 1965, another obstacle for
them because they have to portray personal styles and events they can know only
secondhand. Boone's age group is roughly mine, and I found myself pausing over
and again not only at verbal expressions but also at overall attitudes and
stances, saying to myself, no, that isn't quite the way we saw it back then,
that would have come later on. Even the premise - that this is the biography of
a genius who begins as a stand-up comic - is hard to swallow. It's true that the
80's saw a renaissance in the art of the stand-up comedian, but that was
precisely because it hadn't been the rule for a couple of decades. In the 60's
and 70's we remembered Lenny Bruce, but he had no real successor, nor was going
to hear comics at downtown clubs a typical pastime.

To tell the story of someone young and hip in the 60's who boozes but doesn't
take LSD, who never demonstrates against American involvement in Vietnam, who
never goes to a rock concert and whose routines have no special political edge
undermines credibility. Eton Boone is a genius, we're repeatedly told, so
perhaps he was exceptional in every way. But then why is that genius so wanly
established in these pages? Excerpts quoted here from Boone's novel, ''Ruth,''
also written in the first person (as the interviews, of course, can't help
being), show him as less skilled than Mr. Hansen and Mr. Davis. One might be
persuaded to take on faith the deuce coup triumph of writing and directing the
Beethoven film, but the transcripts of his comedy routines left me scratching my
head. ''You had to be there,'' his friends would no doubt say. Actually, we
could let the genius question ride if Boone registered more as a flesh-and-blood
character rather than a statue to crown with laurels.

Still, ''Boone'' is written with energy and warmth, and it's clear that the
authors have brought a lot of formal daring and inventiveness to the plodding
old conventional novel. I wonder if they won't lower the hurdles a bit for their
next novel, so that their talent at its actual level could come into play. I
hope so. Even as it is, as we wander the beach this summer at Amagansett or the
Vineyard, none of us should be surprised to see quite a number of heads buried
in ''Boone.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              127 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  August 6, 1990, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Vietnam's Allies Faltering in Cambodia

BYLINE: By STEVEN ERLANGER, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1256 words

DATELINE: PHNOM PENH, Cambodia, Aug. 5


The new American policy on Cambodia has been warmly welcomed here, but it does
not alter a domestic situation that, 11 months after the withdrawal of most
Vietnamese troops, is slowly deteriorating.

Direct contact by Washington with Phnom Penh as well as Hanoi is a logical
extension of the policy, announced on July 18 by Secretary of State James A.
Baker 3d. The policy withdraws diplomatic support at the United Nations for an
opposition coalition that included Khmer Rouge guerrillas.

In the first formal talks on Cambodia between the United States and Vietnam,
scheduled to begin on Monday in New York, the Vietnamese will press for an
expansion of the discussions to include a representative of the Phnom Penh
Government of Prime Minister Hun Sen, senior East European diplomats say. The
Government is supported by Vietnam, which invaded Cambodia in 1979 and withdrew
its troops last September. The talks are aimed at setting up a council to
conduct elections for a new Cambodian government, ending the civil war involving
the Hun Sen Government and the three factions, including the Khmer Rouge,
opposed to it.

At home, Mr. Hun Sen's Government is coping with a weakening economy, an
inflation rate of some 200 percent a year, cuts in aid from Communist countries,
political infighting and an increase in the Khmer Rouge's guerrilla war in the
countryside, which has produced up to 130,000 displaced people in at least seven
provinces.

A Year of New Challenges

Diplomats and relief workers say that Phnom Penh faces unprecedented challenges
in the next year, and it is actively seeking both Western aid and recognition to
restore confidence and replace declining Soviet-bloc support.

But at the same time, these challenges have caused the Government to tighten up
internally, diplomats say, with an evident chastening of Mr. Hun Sen, who is
also Foreign Minister, by older, senior party leaders more skeptical of the
West, closer to Vietnam and more concerned about their own positions in a
post-settlement government.

The most prominent of them is Chea Sim, 58 years old, who is president of the
National Assembly and controls the Interior Ministry, which he used to head in
the early 1980's. A former Buddhist monk, he is considered by diplomats to be a
populist, nationalist and traditionalist, and he does not grant interviews to
the Western press.

But these assorted developments do not yet represent a crisis, and no credible
analyst or official here sees any imminent political or military collapse.

A Rickety Economy

The main concern, they say, is the economy, which the Khmer Rouge is trying to
disrupt. Economic collapse could lead to the kind of panic that would quickly
undermine an army that is still holding its own. The Khmer Rouge ruled the
country from 1975 to 1978 and carried out a brutal reorganization of society
that killed more than one million people.

While the level of popular concern in Phnom Penh and district capitals like
Kompong Speu and Kompong Chhnang has increased, especially given inflation and
the presence of refugees, life goes on as before.

Indeed, many urban Cambodians are making a great deal of money on free markets,
and the amount of Thai and Singaporean goods for sale, from beer and clothing to
medicine, spare parts and motorbikes, has been increasing dramatically over the
last year.

One of the main problems for the Government, with so few trained specialists and
a weak and widely abused taxation system, is to obtain even a modest share of
the foreign exchange surging through the urban economy.

Coping With Inflation

The Cambodian currency, the riel, has gone from 190 to the dollar a year ago to
485 to the dollar now, and the price of rice has more than doubled in six
months. While already low Government salaries went up 50 percent in January,
inflation has made a mockery of the increase, and the number of commodities like
rice, gasoline, clothing and cigarettes given to state employees for resale has
been cut to only rice and gas.

As a result, state workers are more frequently absent to work second jobs or run
private businesses, or are more corrupt. The result is a gradual lessening of
the grip and impact of the national administration, which in the longer term,
along with economic difficulties, can only help the Khmer Rouge.

''Frankly speaking, we don't know how to deal with the economic situation,''
Cham Prasith, a deputy prime minister in charge of the economy, said last week.
''We will have to face more and more difficulties. Our survival depends on the
West.''

While the Khmer Rouge have been pushing out from their redoubts to hit soft
targets closer to population centers, they avoid large scale battles.

Khmer Rouge Tactics

After failing to take Battambang and Sisophon, important provincial capitals in
the northwest near their sanctuaries in Thailand, the Khmer Rouge have
reinfiltrated their forces in the mountainous, heavily forested areas of
provinces closer to Phnom Penh, like Kompong Speu, Kompong Cham, Kompong Chhnang
and Kompong Thom.

Since the spring, they have intensified the well-known tactics of guerrilla war,
designed to disrupt the economy and agriculture, destroy roads, bridges and
trains, and undermine people's confidence in the local and national
administration.

It thus remains a war of hit-and-run tactics, booby traps and mines. But since
early June, in particular since the isolation of the Khmer Rouge at talks in
Tokyo, the guerrillas have stepped up their activity in most provinces, moving
farther from their traditional redoubts to attack closer to major district towns
and cities.

This has caused the Government to pull back the more remote military district
headquarters in Kompong Speu, Kompong Chhnang, Kompong Thom and Battambang
provinces. With the headquarters have come thousands of civilians - some fleeing
the fighting, others moved by the Government to try to deny the Khmer Rouge
food, money and recruits.

People's Needs Are Unmet

These civilians, now in roadside shacks and huts, need food, medicine, clothing
and farming utensils, which the Government and aid agencies here cannot supply
in full.

But when Government troops mount campaigns even in these regions, the Khmer
Rouge fall back or cross provincial borders, only to emerge again when the
troops themselves return to headquarters.

Khmer Rouge commanders have said the increased fighting is to insure that they
are not left out of any diplomatic solution and to pressure the Government to
make more concessions.

For the moment, senior diplomats here believe the Khmer Rouge is incapable
militarily of doing much more.

More Civilian Targets Hit

But since June, the Khmer Rouge seem to be hitting more civilian targets,
including attacks in July on two trains in Kampot and Kompong Chhnang, in which
more than 100 civilians were killed and others robbed and forced to carry
ammunition and food.

The guerrillas are also seeding more rice fields with mines, burning more
villages and seizing more cattle and rice.

''These tactics would seem to undermine their incremental efforts to rebuild any
political credibility,'' a senior diplomat said. ''The evidence is still thin,
but there may be a shift of tactics. Still, as they move farther from
traditional strongholds, they are in areas where they have almost no political
support.''

The current situation could go on for a long time, the diplomat said, barring a
chain reaction of economic, psychological and military collapse.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Eleven months after the withdrawal of the bulk of Vietnamese
troops from Cambodia, the Khmer Rouge have steadily stepped up guerrilla warfare
in the countryside. A Khmer Rouge family, above, after living for a decade in
jungles near the Thai border, moved in June to territory seized by guerrillas.
(Associated Press)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              128 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  August 6, 1990, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Khmer Rouge Poised to Gain From U.S. Policy

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 479 words


To the Editor:

Since 1979, the United States has ostensibly pursued two policy goals toward
Cambodia. First, to punish Vietnam for invading Pol Pot's Cambodia and
installing the current Government in Phnom Penh; second, to prevent a Khmer
Rouge return to power.

The United States has achieved the first at the expense of the second. It has
given diplomatic recognition to the Khmer Rouge-dominated coalition at the
United Nations, and covert lethal and overt nonlethal aid to that coalition and
has imposed a devastating economic embargo on Cambodia.

This shameful policy of aiding the architects of yesterday's genocide continued
until July 18, when Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d recognized after 10
months the Vietnamese troop withdrawal and announced that the United States
would discuss with Vietnam how to stop the Khmer Rouge. But this long-overdue
move could be too late.

The reason is that the Khmer Rouge have long prepared for it. Interviews with
high-level defectors that one of us, Roger Normand, recently conducted in
Cambodian refugee camps show that since 1988, Pol Pot's strategy has been to
infiltrate thousands of cadres into villages throughout Cambodia. Through
propaganda and outright terror, they plan to control any elections. The danger
of their success is growing.

Meanwhile, Khieu Samphan, the Khmer Rouge negotiator, has been carrying out Pol
Pot's instructions to use his veto power over the peace negotiations, and
''delay elections'' until Khmer cadres get a tight political and military grip
on the countryside. Khieu Samphan will not agree to elections unless and until
Pol Pot feels the country is ''ready.''

Yet according to Representative Stephen J. Solarz, the Administration continues
to believe that elections in the context of ''a comprehensive settlement
involving all factions is the best way - and probably the only way - of
preventing the Khmer Rouge from returning to power'' (Op-Ed, July 26).

Such a settlement would play directly into Pol Pot's hands by granting his
followers the two things they desperately need: more time and an internationally
sanctioned mechanism by which to return to power.

Instead, the United States should encourage a new Cambodian coalition that
excludes the Khmer Rouge by working with Vietnam to foster power sharing, and
also condition further aid to the non-Communists on splitting from the Khmer
Rouge.

While the hard core of the Khmer Rouge would continue to fight, they would do so
from outside the Government. Faced by a unified, pluralistic Cambodia, a
weakened Khmer Rouge could never again return their countrymen and women to the
killing fields.

BEN KIERNAN
ROGER NORMAND
  New Haven, July 27, 1990

The writers are, respectively, associate professor of Southeast Asian history at
Yale University and field work editor of The Harvard Human Rights Journal.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              129 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  August 6, 1990, Monday, Late Edition - Final

ON YOUR OWN;
Triathletes Discover Variety of Rewards

BYLINE: By MARC BLOOM

SECTION: Section C; Page 9, Column 5; Sports Desk

LENGTH: 1027 words


THE path to running a triathlon is paved with tales of renewal and reward as
recreational athletes discover the value of cross training and pursue peak
performance in a wider spectrum of sports.

The route is one that Peggy Lucey once feared but now thrives on as she prepares
for the 10th annual New York City Triathlon at Coney Island on Sunday. More than
400 competitors are expected for the one-mile ocean swim, 18-mile bike ride and
10-kilometer run.

Lucey, a 43-year-old Manhattan nurse midwife, reluctantly entered her first
event in 1988.

''I was terrified of the open water,'' she said. ''I'd never swam in the ocean.
I only learned how to swim when I was 38.

''Finally, I talked myself into it. I thought, 'You're an athlete. You can do
it.' I did it, and the swim was great.''

Lucey went on to complete the event in about two and a half hours, a major
triumph for her. Only three years earlier, when she was running marathons, Lucey
had had orthoscopic surgery on an arthritic knee. A doctor told her to take up
swimming and cycling but to give up running, which aggravated her knee
condition.

After nine months of abstaining from running, she began to ''sneak in some
runs.'' Lucey found she could perform well (and not damage her knees) on three
short runs a week. Her cycling and swimming, along with some running in a pool,
increased her fitness level.

While triple-sport training may appear to be daunting, triathletes tend to find
the variety stimulating.

''It's so much easier than training for a marathon,'' she said. ''Now I feel
like I'm not beating up my body. I'm running faster than when I was younger,
have more energy and enjoy it so much more.''

Last year, Lucey improved her time in the New York City triathlon by 20 minutes,
placing second in her age group. On Sunday, she will be aiming for a victory.

The event's overall favorite is Jim Cutrone, 27, who lives in the Sheepshead Bay
section of Brooklyn, not far from the race course. Cutrone, a teacher and coach,
is a two-time winner who has competed in the event in each of its nine years.

He trains 15 hours a week and believes bike strength is most important to a
triathlete's performance. Cutrone cycles 200 miles a week while swimming 4 miles
and running 30.

Lucey bikes about 100 miles a week, riding with friends and enjoying the
scenery. She prefers to run alone, using that time to think, solve problems and
clear her head.

While the Ironman event in Hawaii helped the triathlon to be recognized as a
major sport a decade ago, it also created the impression that every triathlon is
an exercise in exhaustion.

''Most triathlons are not grueling at all,'' said Bill Noel, co-director of the
New York City event and a veteran of more than 100 triathlons.''Beginners should
never lose sight of their main objective, which is to have a good time.''

Aspiring triathletes should bear in mind these tricks of the trade:

* Training Mix: Runners should feel confident that reduced mileage can only
enhance their running. ''If you cut running by 25 to 50 percent and add biking
and swimming, your running performance will be maintained or even improved,''
said Mark Allen, 1989 Ironman champion and record holder. One popular training
formula calls for running three times your racing distance a week. If, for
example, a triathlon has a 10-kilometer run (6.2 miles), then your total running
need not exceed about 20 miles a week.

* Group Support: In swimming and cycling, training partners and group workouts
provide valuable information and emotional support. Lucey is a member of Team
Redline, a club that does 6 A.M. swim workouts at the Columbia University pool.

* Swim Progress: Swimming is a ''feel'' sport, Cutrone said. ''You can't swim
well if you don't feel comfortable in the water. It's better to swim a little
bit three or four times a week than to swim a lot once a week.''

* Open-Water Swimming: Bilateral breathing, taking breaths on both right and
left sides, helps your sense of direction in choppy waters. Wet suits that can
be used during biking and running provide security and buoyancy. Always swim
with goggles.

* Buying a Bike: Go to a biking specialty shop, invest at least $500 in a decent
model plus clothing and accessories. Make sure your fit is precise. For the
triathlon, road bikes are better than mountain bikes, which are not designed for
speed.

* Riding a Bike: While runners train against traffic, cyclists ride with traffic
for safety purposes. Always wear a helmet. Novice cyclists should rely on low
gears, spinning at least 80 pedal revolutions a minute. Pushing high gears can
inhibit progress and cause knee injury.

* Your First Triathlon: Consider your first few triathlons more as long workouts
than competitions, Cutrone advised. Relax, enjoy the sense of adventure, the
thrill of group cycling, and pick up tips from the veterans.

The New York City Triathlon is ideal for spectator viewing. The event begins at
7 A.M., starting with a swim at the 36th Street Beach and ends at the Parachute
Jump.

The bike leg travels up and down Ocean Parkway and includes a loop of Prospect
Park. The run is along the boardwalk and through sections of Brighton Beach and
Sheepshead Bay, finishing in Steeplechase Park at West 16th Street.

There will be $6,000 in prize money and the sponsor, Sillerman Companies, a New
York-based broadcast ownership company, hopes to raise $250,000 in event
proceeds and corporate contributions for the Outward Bound Program for Vietnam
veterans.

A Sample Training Program for Novice Triathletes

The following weekly schedule offers an introduction to cross-training, and also
serves as preparation for triathlon competition at short distances, such as a
half-mile swim, 15-mile bike race and 5-kilometer run.

MONDAY: Swim 30 minutes; weight training optional.

TUESDAY: Run 40 minutes.

WEDNESDAY: Bike 60 minutes.

THURSDAY: Run 20 minutes (faster pace); swim 30 minutes.

FRIDAY: Rest.

SATURDAY: Bike 2 hours.

SUNDAY: Run 1 hour.

WEEKLY TOTALS: Swim: 1 hour (2 workouts). Run: 2 hours (3 workouts). Bike: 3
hours (2 workouts).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              130 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 7, 1990, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Plan to Burn Dioxin Stirs Fear in Arkansas

BYLINE: By MICHAEL deCOURCY HINDS, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1615 words

DATELINE: JACKSONVILLE, Ark.


Unless a small, determined band of residents have their way, this city of 29,000
people is about to become the site of the nation's largest incineration of
dioxin.

Starting in mid-August, a state contractor plans to burn 28,500 barrels of toxic
waste at an abandoned pesticide plant in the middle of a residential
neighborhood where subdivisions run to the edge of the chain-link fence. The
burning will go on 24 hours a day, seven days a week, for 7 to 10 months, until
all the barrels are gone.

Health Effects in Dispute

Most of the barrels are full of chemicals like DDT, aldrin and dieldrin, wastes
from more than three decades' production of pesticides and herbicides. About
2,800 contain dioxin, whose effects on human health are debated but whose
toxicity is widely acknowledged: The town of Times Beach, Mo., was evacuated and
abandoned after it was discovered that dioxin in waste oil had been sprayed on
the streets.

Opponents, saying Jacksonville's pesticide industry is responsible for a rash of
cancers, stillbirths and miscarriages among residents, fear that the burning
could release deadly chemicals and sow still more illness. But state and Federal
health officials say they have found no evidence of illness that could be linked
to the toxic waste. And the Environmental Protection Agency says the incinerator
will reach such high temperatures - 2,200 degrees Fahrenheit - that it will
destroy all but infinitesimal traces of the chemicals.

Nevertheless, what happens here will have an effect on how hundreds of other
cities and towns deal with their highly toxic waste sites. ''There is a rush to
burn all over the country now,'' said Hugh B. Kaufman, assistant to the director
of the Hazardous Site Control Division at the United States Environmental
Protection Agency. ''If the Jacksonville burn occurs, it's going to give more
impetus to burning toxic waste on sites in populated areas, which is going to
save the responsible parties a lot of money.''

'Go Get 'Em'

The last pesticide manufacturer in Jacksonville, the Vertac Chemical
Corporation, stopped production in the early 1980's and closed for good in 1987.
But on humid days here, the smell of pesticide still lingers in the air. The
opponents of the incinerator, a few dozen fiercely committed residents who have
the backing of Greenpeace and other national environmental groups, say the
cancers, stillbirths and other health problems that have ravaged their families
can be traced directly to the toxins produced and stored by Vertac and its
predecessors, including the defoliant Agent Orange.

''Just before my mother died at 55 with a rare liver cancer, she said to me,
'How come everybody around this town dies early?' '' said Patty Frase, who
herself had four miscarriages before moving away. ''She told me, 'Go get 'em.'
And I am.''

Although incineration of toxic waste still stirs considerable scientific debate,
the temporary incinerator in Jacksonville is one of the first in a wave of such
projects. In the last two years alone, the Government has authorized the use of
60 temporary incinerators at toxic waste sites, said Paul Nadeau, acting
director of E.P.A.'s Hazardous Site Control Division. These temporary
incinerators, like the one in Jacksonville, are designed to be removed after the
waste has been burned. Only a few of the 60 incinerators have been built so far.

The agency permits the use of these incinerators at the nation's 1,219 worst
hazardous waste sites catalogued on the Superfund National Priorities List.
About 400 municipalities are on the list; Jacksonville alone has three Superfund
sites - the chemical plant and two city-owned landfills.

Aside from the temporary incinerators, waste disposal companies have proposed
building permanent toxic waste incinerators in 25 cities, including Kansas City,
Mo.; Memphis; Houston; Las Vegas, Nev.; Linden, N.J., and Model City, north of
Niagara Falls, N.Y. These commercial incinerators would burn 750,000 tons of
toxic waste a year, about double the capacity of existing commercial
incinerators that burn toxic waste.

But Mr. Kaufman of the E.P.A.'s Hazardous Site Control Division, a frequent
internal critic of the agency, said that if the Jacksonville plan was stopped,
it would send a signal to the rest of the country ''that this is an unacceptable
way of handling the problem.''

Opponents of the Jacksonville incinerator say the drums of waste should be
stored in concrete bunkers while new disposal technologies are developed. They
plan to file lawsuits to stop the incinerator as soon as it starts burning toxic
waste. They demand an environmental impact study of the incinerator's effect on
the community, buy-outs of several hundred homes that border the plant and other
toxic waste sites in Jacksonville, and a comprehensive health survey of people
living near the sites.

E.P.A. Insists It's Safe

The E.P.A. replies that incineration is safe and is the only legal way of
disposing of dioxin. ''We are satisfied we have the technology to do the job,''
said Carl E. Edlund, chief of agency's Superfund Program for the Southern
region. ''The E.P.A. has had ongoing investigations into incineration technology
since the 70's. We have a high degree of confidence in it.''

But Mr. Kaufman said the agency's public pronouncements on incineration did not
reflect the its internal concerns. Citing an April 1985 report by an E.P.A.
scientific advisory board that was highly critical of incinerator safety
regulations, Mr. Kaufman said there was no technology available, then or now, to
keep constant track of the emissions from an incinerator's stack. Instead,
incinerator performance is projected, based on initial test burns and the
incinerator's general operating conditions.

As a result, incinerators may be just converting one hazardous substance into
another, the panel said. ''By E.P.A.'s own admission,'' Mr. Kaufman said, ''its
regulations on incinerators are lacking and don't do the job of protecting the
environment and public health.''

Dioxin has been burned at two other sites in the United States, Gulfport, Miss.,
and Denny Farms, Mo., without apparent incident. But the quantities were small,
and opponents say they give no indication of the scale of the incineration
planned for Jacksonville.

The Dioxin Puzzle

The chemical is itself a mystery. In laboratory animals it causes cancer, birth
defects and developmental defects, and it reduces immunity to a variety of
diseases.

But there has been no documentation of these effects on people, even though
dioxin has long been a focus of scientific and environmental inquiry - at the
center, for example, of the long-running dispute over the possible effects of
Agent Orange, the defoliant used in Vietnam. The only ailment dioxin is known to
cause in humans is chloracne, a skin disease. The largest dioxin release in
history, in an accident at a chemical plant in Seveso, Italy, in 1976, resulted
in no deaths or permanent injuries.

Dr. Vernon N. Houk, an assistant surgeon general and director of the Center for
Environmental Health and Injury Control at the Federal Centers for Disease
Control, says a growing body of information indicates that people are not as
susceptible to dioxin as animals.

Outrage Over an Article

Jacksonville is a highly transient community, dominated by the Little Rock Air
Force Base, which contributes a third of the city's 29,000 population and most
of the economic base.

In April, when Family Circle magazine named Jacksonville as one of 17 cities and
towns that might be ''at risk from contamination,'' local leaders were outraged.
''The editors of Family Circle have been in the kitchen too long,'' Garrick
Feldman, editor of The Sunday Leader, wrote in a front-page column, and the City
Council passed a resolution of censure. The magazine responded in August with an
article that focused on Jacksonville, titled ''Toxic Nightmare on Main Street.''

Officials here still support the incineration plan. ''People all over the state
want a health study every time they find a dump or chemical plant in their
neighborhood,'' said Dr. Thomas C. McChesney, a Jacksonville veterinarian who is
the state's chief epidemiologist. He said none of public health statistics for
Jacksonville were unusual. ''You can do the study for political reasons, but not
for scientific reasons.''

Mayor Tommy Swaim said, ''I haven't asked for a health study, but I would not
oppose one.''

But the opponents say their own medical histories are reason enough for a health
study. ''I've been to too many hospitals, I've been to too many funerals and
I've seen too much to think there isn't mass murder going on here,'' said
Mozelle Bergschneider of People Against a Chemically Contaminated Environment,
the local anti-incinerator group.

The opponents say they have a hard time getting officials to take any of their
concerns seriously. Ms. Frase, the former Jacksonville resident who is a
co-founder of the Environmental Congress of Arkansas, said she had ''begged and
pleaded with the city to put up fences and warning signs'' at contaminated sites
in public areas of Jacksonville; the signs she puts up, she added, are routinely
removed. For example, dioxin has been found in the fish and sediment of Lake
Dupree, a pond next to a baseball diamond in the city's Dupree Park. A sign near
the lake says, ''Unauthorized persons keep out,'' and another has a no-fishing
symbol.

Asked why the city does not put up fences or use more descriptive warnings,
Mayor Swaim replied: ''If you put fences up, people would just climb over them.
But if it makes people happy, I would put up a no-swimming sign.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Map of Arkansas showing locations of Jacksonville and Little Rock) (pg.
A1); photos: More than 28,000 barrels of toxic waste are being stored in
Jacksonville, Ark., and there are plans to burn it. Among those trying to
prevent the incineration are Mozelle Bergschneider of People Against Chemically
Contaminated Environment, left, and Patty Frase of the Environmental Congress of
Arkansas. They are shown at Dupree Park, where dioxin has been found in Lake
Dupree.; Barrels of waste being stored at an abandoned factory in Jacksonville,
Ark. Some residents feel the waste should be stored in concrete bunkers until a
technology safer than incineration is developed. (Photographs by David Hodge for
The New York Times) (pg. B5)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              131 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 7, 1990, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1319 words



International    A2-11



The United Nations Security Council registered its outrage at Iraq's invasion of
Kuwait by ordering a far-reaching trade and financial boycott on both countries.

    Page A1



A naval blockade of Iraq is being considered by American and British officials.
They said that to insure enforcement of the economic sanctions on Iraq they
would be prepared to organize such a blockade.    A1



U.S. acts to raise Mideast strength    A8



Reporter's Notebook: A dervish Bush whirls even faster    A8



Iraq drastically cut the flow of oil through twin pipelines that cross southern
Turkey and normally carry more than half its total oil exports. The country
apparently is already feeling the effects of an American-orchestrated boycott.
    A1



After years of discreet trade-offs, U.S. tests the Saudis    A10



Oil prices rose sharply again and financial markets around the world tumbled as
the international embargo against oil from Iraq and Kuwait appeared to be taking
hold.    A1



Cutting budget gap now discounted    A10



Hundreds of Westerners in Kuwait, including at least 28 American citizens, were
rounded up by Iraqi soldiers. It was not known what Iraq planned to do with
them.    A9



National elections in the Germanys may be moved up because of the East German
Prime Minister's realization that reunification will cost far more than expected
and that monetary union has not slowed East Germany's economic decline.    A6



Serb minority bucks Croatian rule    A7



Pakistan's Government collapsed. Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto, the first woman
to head a modern Islamic state, was dismissed by the President, who accused her
administration of corruption, nepotism and other illegal acts.    A1



Indian soldiers seize 12 leaders of Kashmir's separatists    A11



U.S. and Vietnam hold talks on Cambodia    A3



A Liberian rebel leader seized about a dozen foreigners, including an American,
as hostages from a hotel outside Monrovia, the State Department said. The
hostages, all men, were said to be unharmed.    A3



Slaying of two Jews stirs violence in Jerusalem    A5



Mauthausen Journal: Gypsies visit a death camp    A4



National    A12-17, A20, B5



A large incineration of dioxin will soon be held in Jacksonville, Ark., unless a
small, determined band of residents have their way. A state contractor plans to
burn 28,500 barrels of toxic waste, including dioxin, at an abandoned pesticide
plant.    A1



Midland Journal: Residents of the West Texas town who make their living directly
or indirectly from oil say they are not nearly as happy about Iraq's invasion of
Kuwait as they assume the rest of the country assumes they are.    A12



The Lieutenant Governor of Georgia, Zell Miller, is the heavy favorite in the
runoff for the Democratic gubernatorial nomination. In recent polls, he has held
a lead of up to 20 percentage points over the former Mayor of Atlanta, Andrew
Young.    A12



A stance favoring abortion rights by the American Bar Association should be
abandoned, lawyers at the association's annual meeting said. They called upon
the group's policymaking body to return to neutrality on the issue.    A12

Advocates for people with AIDS are expressing concern that the public is growing
weary of hearing about the disease and that a sense of alarm has given way to a
resigned acceptance, making it harder to raise badly needed private funds.
A16



Large amounts of housing money have been pledged by Congress this year to
strengthen current programs and to create new ones. The bills follow a decade in
which Federal housing programs stagnated.    A14



Approval for some bank mergers has been withheld by Federal regulators in recent
months until the companies agreed to improve service to poor neighborhoods.
D1



States raised taxes by $7.6 billion in 1990, study finds    A20



Jury in Barry trial deliberates all day; reaches no verdict    A17



Audit is ordered of church funds

    A17



To young Milwaukee drivers, cruising ban is un-American    A20



Bodyguard guilty in drug killing    B5



Regional    B1-5



More than 1,000 new police officers are to be hired by next spring to increase
neighborhood foot patrols in New York City, Mayor Dinkins said. He said the city
would pay for the move by cutting other services.    A1



An infant was shot in the head in Manhattan when a bullet tore through an
apartment wall as he lay sleeping in bed with his grandmother, the police said.
He was in stable condition.    B1



Only three weapons were turned in -all by one person - on the first day of an
amnesty program for people with illegal guns in New York City.    B3



Six felonies in eight hours linked to one gunman    B3



Man fatally shot in argument over a pay phone    B3



A mother is removed from jogger trial    B4



A Westchester County Court judge dismissed a murder indictment against Carolyn
Warmus, a 26-year-old teacher accused of killing her lover's wife, saying the
district attorney's office had manipulated the grand jury.    B1



The East Tremont neighborhood of the Bronx seems to be on the mend. By the
hundreds, people have begun moving into buildings being reconstructed under New
York City's 10-year, $5.1 billion plan to create new and affordable housing.
B1



People accused of drunken driving are not entitled to jury trials, the New
Jersey Supreme Court ruled, even though those convicted for the third time can
be jailed for six months, fined $1,000 and lose their licenses for 10 years.
B1



The tax revolt in New Jersey, up to now a citizens' protest with no recourse in
this non-election year, is reverberating in both the Legislature and the
Governor's office, and Democrats now fear it could carry into next year's
legislative elections.    B2



Riverside Church picks unionist as No. 2 minister    B4



Coast Guard blames new carelessness for spills    B5



Business Digest    D1



Science Times



Drug trials are moving abroad as cost rises in the U. S.    C1



Using physics and computers to create aquatic thrills    C1



Violent outbursts now being attributed to brain damage    C1



Swedish tree rings put global warming in perspective    C4



Magellan nears Venus in trip to map the planet's surface    C10



Arts/Entertainment



High technology and the movies    C13



Smithsonian faces uncertain future    C14



Theater: ''Los Rayos Gamma''    C11



Music: ''Ariadne'' in Santa Fe    C13



Word and Image: Two van Gogh books    C16



Obituaries    B6



O. B. Hardison Jr., author and head of Folger Library

Harold E. Beste, electronics researcher and engineer

Fashion Page    B7



Clothes that can pack up and go

Sports



Baseball: Mets let Cardinals take another    B9



Palmer and Morgan inducted into Hall of Fame    B10



Column: Rhoden on Cool Papa Bell    B9

Football: Jets list two new starters    B9



Editorials/Letters/Op-Ed



Editorials    A18



Strategy for the gulf crisis

Embargo and economic fallout

Fighting crime, and fear

Letters    A18



William Safire: Now or later?    A19

Gary Hart: Ill equipped for the crises of the 90's    A19



Hal Lux: Today's fast track - bankruptcy    A19



Stuart M. Butler: No truce in the war on poverty    A19


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              132 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 7, 1990, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

U.S. and Vietnam Hold Talks on Cambodia

BYLINE: By ERIC PACE

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 519 words


The first formal talks on Cambodia between the United States and Vietnam were
held yesterday in New York, and both sides called them useful, although they
were evidently inconclusive.

The three-hour meeting of three American and four Vietnamese diplomats was held
at the Vietnamese mission to the United Nations on Waterside Plaza near 25th
Street. A portrait of Ho Chi Minh hung on one wall.

The talks are aimed at setting up a council to conduct elections for a new
Cambodian government, ending the civil war in which three guerrilla factions,
including the Khmer Rouge, are fighting to overthrow the current Hanoi-backed
Government.

The senior Vietnamese participant, Trinh Xuan Lang, his country's delegate to
the United Nations, said at a news conference later that ''the meeting was
conducted in a businesslike and constructive atmosphere.''

''Better understanding has been achieved on the discussed issues,'' he added.

Second Meeting Planned

The senior American, Kenneth M. Quinn, the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State
for East Asian and Pacific Affairs, declined to give an evaluation of the
session. But the State Department issued a statement afterward that said the
meeting ''provides the basis for continued discussions of a settlement of the
Cambodian conflict.''

''The two sides agreed to hold a second meeting in the near future at a date to
be agreed upon,'' the statement said.

A State Department official said, ''It's the first bilateral meeting that we
have held with them specifically to discuss ways to bring about a solution to
the Cambodian situation.'' Both countries took part in the 20-nation Paris
conference on Cambodia in 1989.

Mr. Lang said, ''The main objective of the discussions was to contribute to a
comprehensive solution leading to the formation of a peaceful, independent,
neutral and nonaligned Cambodia within a neutral Southeast Asia.''

''In the talks,'' he went on, the two sides ''presented their views relating to
issues concerning such a solution -especially, for example, the question of
self-determination of the Cambodian people through general elections; the
restoration of peace; the prevention of the Khmer Rouge to return to power; the
role of the United Nations, and international guarantees and neutrality of
Cambodia.''

The Khmer Rouge took power in 1975 and carried out a brutal reorganization of
society that killed more than one million people. It was overthrown in January
1979 by a Vietnamese invasion. Vietnam withdrew most of its troops almost a year
ago, and the guerrilla coalition has been gaining ground.

Also raised at the meeting was the perennial issue of the more than 2,000
Americans, virtually all of them military personnel, who the United States says
have been missing in Vietnam and elsewhere in Indochina since the Vietnam War.

The State Department said the meeting ''was not a discussion of normalization of
relations with Vietnam, except that we reiterated our policy on this issue.''

The United States does not recognize any Vietnamese Government and it has no
diplomatic or consular relations with Vietnam.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              133 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 7, 1990, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Man Fatally Shot in Dispute Over Phone in a Subway Station

BYLINE: By ANDREW L. YARROW

SECTION: Section B; Page 3, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 554 words


A 27-year-old man was killed in a Brooklyn subway station, apparently after an
argument over the use of a pay telephone, the police said yesterday.

The victim, John Myers, was shot about 10:15 Sunday night as he was making a
phone call a few yards from a token booth at the Classon Avenue station of the G
line in the Bedford-Stuyvesant section.

Sgt. Craig Griffin of the 79th Precinct said Mr. Myers asked a man who was using
the phone in the station if he could make a call. The man refused to get off the
phone, and they argued. Shortly after the man ended his call, Sergeant Griffin
said, Mr. Myers began using the phone, and the other man pulled a weapon,
described by witnesses as a sawed-off shotgun or rifle, and fired once, hitting
Mr. Myers in the back of the head. Mr. Myers died at the scene.

No arrests have been made. A few witnesses have been questioned, but there are
no suspects, Sergeant Griffin said. #60 Killings a Year It was the second
killing at a pay telephone in New York City in a week. On July 30, a 33-year-old
advertising executive, John Reisenbach, was shot as he made a business call at
Jane and Greenwich Streets in the West Village because his apartment phone was
disabled. A homeless man was charged with murder and attempted robbery.

A token clerk at the Brooklyn station, who refused to give his name, said crews
had cleaned the station before he came on duty yesterday morning. But the
receiver had been ripped off the telephone, and the cord was dangling with wires
exposed.

The police say shootings sometimes happen at pay phones because they are often
used by drug dealers.

''It's not uncommon at all to have a shooting at a pay phone, or with a
shotgun,'' Sergeant Griffin said, ''but it's not too frequent this happens at a
pay phone in a subway station with a shotgun.'' About 60 murders a year occur in
the precinct, he said.

'He'd Just Had a Daughter'

Neighborhood residents said that Mr. Myers was well known and well liked on the
block, and that he had not been involved with drugs or been in trouble with the
police. They said he was a frequent churchgoer and had recently become a father.
They said he lived in St. Albans, Queens, but spent most of his time with his
girlfriend on the top floor of a four-story, gray-brick building at 356
Lafayette Avenue, a half-block from the station.

''He was working for Con Edison until he had a car accident about four months
ago, when he injured his neck,'' said Alex Azzani, a clerk at the Maples Deli
and Grocery, on the block. ''He lived with his girlfriend a few doors down.''

''He was friendly, and he'd just had a daughter,'' said Louise Bryant, who lives
in the building.

''He minded his own business,'' said another neighborhood resident.

Many residents expressed horror at the killing, but said that violence was
endemic in the area, and almost all refused to give their names. One woman who
worked in the area said her son had been murdered last year, and a man said that
his nephew had been stabbed to death earlier this year and that he himself had
recently been held up and beaten with a pistol.

''This area is Vietnam in disguise,'' he said. ''You got to be very careful if
you use a pay phone around here. For narcotics dealers, the phone is their
lifeline. Here, you can get shot for anything.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              134 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 8, 1990, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Don't Pin Housing Drop on Savings and Loans;
Less Than World War II

SECTION: Section A; Page 20, Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 196 words


To the Editor:

Representative Charles Schumer in ''The S.& L. Horror Show: Act II'' (Op-Ed,
July 24), states, ''We are in a crisis that will cost more than all of World War
II.'' He is incorrect.

The savings and loan bailout will cost taxpayers more than $500 billion in 30
years, according to the Government Accounting Office, about $2,025 for each
American. If we could pay it off now, the G.A.O. projects the cost at around
$200 billion.

According to the National Data Book, Statistical Abstract of the United States,
1990, if the United States were to pay off World War II now, it would cost about
$502 billion in 1990 dollars ($457 billion in 1988 dollars multiplied by 1.1).
In 30 years, when the first wave of Resolution Funding Corporation bonds used to
finance the bailout come due, the cost of World War II will exceed $1 trillion.

Representative Schumer should have drawn a parallel to the Vietnam War, which
cost us $190 billion (not to mention lives, making this comparison absurd), less
than the $200 bil-lion present value of the bailout costs.

ELIZABETH MACDONALD
  Brooklyn, July 24, 1990

The writer is a staff reporter for Money magazine.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              135 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 8, 1990, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Soviets to Open Exchanges For Free Trading in Rubles

BYLINE: By BILL KELLER, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section D; Page 1, Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 422 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW, Aug. 7


The Soviet Union said today that it would open domestic money exchanges next
year to allow businesses to trade Soviet rubles freely for foreign currencies.

A report in the Government newspaper Izvestia said the move would be an
important step toward transforming the beleaguered ruble into a convertible
currency, which most economists say is essential if the Soviet Union is to have
a free market.

The report said all legally registered enterprises and organizations would be
able to buy and sell rubles when the exchanges opened in January. But that does
not mean individuals can use the exchanges, the report said. The Government is
to open exchanges in Moscow, the capitals of the 15 Soviet republics and other
cities, according to a Government policy statement adopted on Saturday but
disclosed today.

The strict Government controls on the ruble have been a critical barrier to
economic growth.

Soviet business enterprises, operating with greater economic freedom, have
amassed huge stockpiles of rubles but are prohibited from exchanging them for
dollars or other world currencies, which they could use to buy foreign
technology.

Foreign companies, in turn, are often discouraged from organizing ventures in
the Soviet Union because they have no way to convert their ruble profits back
into more useful currencies.

The report did not make clear how much of the Soviet Union's foreign currency
reserves would be made available for exchanges.

Last year, the Soviet Bank for Foreign Economic Relations, or Vneshekonom Bank,
began holding periodic auctions of foreign currency, but only a limited number
of Soviet companies have been allowed to participate. Joint ventures with
foreign concerns are excluded.

The ruble has two official exchange rates. Foreign businesses buy their rubles
at a trading rate of 0.58 to the dollar, while tourists get a rate of 5.8 to the
dollar.

At the limited-currency auctions, Soviet enterprises have paid up to 20 rubles
to the dollar.

Gorbachev Pledge

President Mikhail S. Gorbachev has committed his Government to making the ruble
a convertible currency, but has not set a timetable.

Economists fear that if strict Government controls are lifted too quickly, the
ruble - with few domestic goods to back it up - would shrivel in value, and the
country's foreign currency reserves would be drained.

The loss of faith in the ruble has led Soviet consumers to invest in tangible
assets, from gold and appliances to purebred dogs and snake venom, to protect
their savings.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              136 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 9, 1990, Thursday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

CONFRONTATION IN THE GULF: U.S. MAY SEND SAUDIS A FORCE OF 50,000; IRAQ
PROCLAIMS KUWAIT'S ANNEXATION;
BUSH DRAWS 'LINE'

BYLINE: By R. W. APPLE Jr., Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1793 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 8


Thousands of elite United States troops, the vanguard of a force that senior
defense officials said may reach 50,000, took up positions in Saudi Arabia today
as President Bush vowed to defend the Middle Eastern kingdom and its oil
reserves, the richest in the world.

The President ruled out an immediate invasion of Iraqi-occupied Kuwait and said
economic sanctions imposed by the United Nations would be given time to do their
work of economic strangulation, forcing President Saddam Hussein of Iraq to
withdraw. But Mr. Bush and his aides made it plain that American land, sea and
air forces had been committed to the Persian Gulf area for the long term.

''A line has been drawn in the sand'' against any Iraqi invasion of Saudi
Arabia, Mr. Bush said.

'A Criminal Force'

With a lengthy war of nerves seemingly in prospect, President Hussein, refusing
to back down, announced the annexation of Kuwait and pledged to fight what he
called ''a criminal force'' assembling in the region under American leadership.

President Bush emphasized that ''we're not at war,'' and he described the
mission of American troops as defensive. But that description really applies
only in a tactical sense. In strategic terms, the American troops in Saudi
Arabia, backed by aircraft carriers, missiles, fighters, bombers, tanks and
other weapons, together with the embargo and a de facto naval blockade of Iraqi
commerce, are intended to help force President Hussein to pull back.

Disappointing the Bush Administration, Egypt and Morocco decided not to provide
troops, at least for the moment, to stand alongside the Americans and give the
multinational force an Arab element. Britain agreed to join the force, but
France did not. Italy and Spain agreed to provide crucial access to bases on
their soil for United States planes involved in the buildup.

Egypt Arranges Arab Talks

Senior European diplomats said the Administration still hoped that military
operations in the region could be put under the United Nations flag, but that,
they said, would take time and require persuasion of the Soviets and the
Chinese. Either could veto any such move in the Security Council.

An emergency meeting of the Council tonight to consider the Iraqi annexation of
Kuwait was adjourned until Thursday because the Moscow and Beijing
representatives said they had not received instructions from their Governments
on how to vote.

But both countries said they expect to support a draft resolution, submitted by
the Kuwaiti Government-in-exile, that declares the annexation null and void.

Led by President Hosni Mubarak of Egypt, the Arab nations arranged another
summit conference for Thursday evening in Cairo, in a final attempt to find some
peaceful solution. Representative Steven J. Solarz, a Brooklyn Democrat who
spent an hour with Mr. Mubarak today, said the Egyptian leader hoped to put
together an Arab deterrent force to which Egypt and several other Arab nations
would contribute soldiers.

But some political leaders said they feared that Mr. Hussein might attack Saudi
Arabia sooner rather than later. Backing Mr. Bush's action, Representative Les
Aspin of Wisconsin, the Democrat who heads the House Armed Services Committee,
issued a warning that ''there is a danger of a hot war, and the greatest danger
comes in the very next few days.''

'An Aggressive Dictator'

''Saddam Hussein sees us coming,'' Mr. Aspin said. ''He knows more troops will
be there tomorrow and still more next week. He could try to seize the oilfields
before we have enough men there to stop them and then hold those oilfields
hostage. That is the greatest and most immediate threat.''

Mr. Bush's tone, in only the third televised address to the nation of his
Presidency, was that of a leader preparing his country for war.

He described President Hussein as ''an aggressive dictator threatening his
neighbors'' and compared him with Hitler. He used emotionally charged words from
the late 1930's like blitzkrieg and appeasement. And he asked that ''in the
churches around the country, prayers be said.''

''Standing up for our principles is an American tradition,'' Mr. Bush said in
his speech from the Oval Office this morning. ''As it has so many times before,
it may take time and tremendous effort, but most of all, it will take unity of
purpose. As I have witnessed throughout my life in both war and peace, America
has never wavered when her purpose is driven by principle.''

Bush's Economic Concerns

The dispatch of American paratroopers and other forces was a historic
breakthrough for United States diplomacy, in that Saudi Arabia had finally
dropped its insistence on keeping American military aid concealed, and it may
lead other Arab states to do the same.

In addition, analysts contended that it was first time since World War II that
the United States had intervened militarily out of mainly economic concerns.

Had Syria been the target, a prominent international banker said, ''we wouldn't
have sent in the troops, because they don't have all that oil.''

The President emphasized economic concern by saying he hoped other oil producers
would ease the pain the embargo on Iraqi and Kuwaiti oil imposed on oil
consumers by increasing their own production, thus forcing elevated prices down.
The Administration expects Venezuela and Saudi Arabia, among others, to do so.
Mr. Bush also called on United States oil companies to avoid gouging, which they
have already been accused of doing.

British Contribute Forces

Congressional opinion swung solidly behind the President's action.

But a number of senators and representatives, Democrats and Republicans alike,
expressed anxety about the failure of most other countries to promise troops so
far for the joint military effort. Senator Bob Dole of Kansas, the Republcian
majority leader, said, ''The Arab countries have got to come to the party too.''

''I hope we won't be the Lone Ranger the way we were in Vietnam,'' said Senator
Alan Cranston of California, the second-ranking Senate Democrat.

The financial markets reacted to the latest developments in the crisis by
sending stocks up and oil prices down - the reverse of the last few days.

British contributions to the multinational force, officials in London said,
would include Tornado aircraft and several ships, but probably not any infantry
units.

Blocking Oil From Iraq

''The multinational effort is designed to deter Hussein,'' said Douglas Hurd,
the Foreign Secretary. ''If Iraq compounds this with a fresh act of aggression,
it will be extremely expensive, damaging and destructive to Iraq,'' he continued
- seeming to indicate that Britain was prepared to join the United States not
only in deterrence but also in counterattack if needed.

Perhaps with the thought that he would need the fullest possible Congressional
backing if a shooting war developed along those lines, Mr. Bush sent Congress
formal notification of his action under the War Powers Act, a piece of
legislation born in the aftermath of Watergate that Republican Presidents have
often ignored.

American military strength in the region already includes carrier task forces in
the Red Sea and the Indian Ocean, with a third steaming toward the
Mediterranean.

When all are on station, they will be able to block Iraqi oil shipments that
might reach the Saudi port of Yanbu, that might come down the Persian Gulf and
through the Gulf of Oman and that might reach Turkish ports. So far, the market
for Iraqi oil appears largely to have dried up.

Fear of Poison Gas

Among the elements being added by United States military planners are a brigade
of the 82d Airborne Division, from Fort Bragg, N.C.; a brigade of the 101st
Airborne Division, equipped with helicopters, from Fort Campbell, Ky., and a
brigade of the 24th Mechanized Infantry Division, equipped with tanks and
armored personnel carriers, from Fort McPherson, Ga.

Arab and European diplomats said that eventually all of the 82d and the 101st
would be sent, as well as antiaircraft and antitank missiles and some
intelligence equipment. Such a deployment could involve up to 50,000 men.

One of the major fears in official Washington about the course of action on
which President Bush has embarked is the Iraqi capacity for using poison gas.
Gen. Colin L. Powell, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, said at a briefing
at the Pentagon that Soviet-made Scud surface-to-surface missiles, now in
position to hit the Saudi capital of Riyadh or the country's main oilfields,
consituted ''one of the principal threats directed against Saudi Arabia.'' They
can be fitted with chemical warheads, and American intelligence has indicated
that some of them have been so armed.

Fate of Detained Americans

American forces have not faced chemical weapons in the field since the trench
warfare of 1918.

In total, the Iraqis are believed by American officials to have massed as many
as 100,000 troops in Kuwait. They appear to be digging in and maneuvering into
positions from which a ground attack could be launched, supported by tanks and
missiles.

Another problem is the fate of Americans in Kuwait and Iraq. They have not been
harmed yet. But there is a largely unspoken fear here that some are being held
as hostages.

Looting by Iraqis Reported

Iraq permitted United States officials to visit 38 Americans in a Baghdad hotel
today and released an American child, which some took as a mildly conciliatory
signal. But the 38 were held against their will under armed guard, and there was
no sign that the 3,000 or more other United States citizens trapped in the two
countries would be allowed to leave.

In addition, concern for the Americans' safety was heightened by reports of
widespread looting and raping of Kuwaitis by Iraqi soldiers, brought out by
Europeans who have managed to reach Saudi Arabia.

A third worry is the question of what Mr. Bush will do, having pledged as
publicly and as forcefully as a President can do that he would not permit the
Iraqi takeover of Kuwait to survive, if he fails in his attempt to make it
impossible for Mr. Hussein to hang on to the little sheikdom.

No one in the Administration was willing to say for quotation that the President
had held another option in reserve, that he could still convert the American
force in Saudi Arabia into an assault force and send United States bombers to
hammer Baghdad. But many officials made it clear that that possibility was in
the background.

''George Bush promised that this guy wouldn't end up with Kuwait,'' one of them
said. '' He hasn't staked his life on that, but he may well have staked his
political future on it. So in the end - six months, a year, who knows? - he may
try anything.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: August 10, 1990, Friday, Late Edition - Final

CORRECTION:

The main front-page article yesterday about the dispatch of American troops to
Saudi Arabia misidentified a Democratic Representative from Brooklyn. He is
Stephen J. Solarz.

GRAPHIC: Photos: The aircraft carrier Dwight D. Eisenhower traversing the Suez
Canal yesterday as part of the American response to Iraq's invasion. (Associated
Press); President Bush after addressing the nation on the gulf crisis. (Jose R.
Lopez/The New York Times) (pg. A1); map showing the disposition of United States
forces on and around the Arabian Peninsula. (pg. A14)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              137 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 9, 1990, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Once Again, Tired and Terrified Internal Refugees Wander Over Cambodia

BYLINE: By STEVEN ERLANGER, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1216 words

DATELINE: O KOKI, Cambodia, Aug. 2


Fleeing or forced from their homes by the stepped-up war in the Cambodian
countryside, huddling against a torrid sun or stinging rain in crude shelters of
thatch and plastic sheeting, they have the semivacant stare of refugees
everywhere.

But they are a relatively new phenomenon in Cambodia: peasants dislocated this
summer by the fighting against the Khmer Rouge, forced from their homes in large
numbers for the first time since the 1970's when the Khmer Rouge fought, and
defeated the American-backed Government. They have become internal refugees,
numbering up to 130,000 in at least nine provinces.

This has always been a guerrilla war of economic disruption and psychological
terror, of bridges blown up by high explosives and limbs blown off by plastic
Chinese mines the size and shape of hockey pucks.

But the shifting movement of the war since Vietnamese troops withdrew 11 months
ago has meant the shifting now of thousands more civilians, adding to the
continuing instability and deterioration of Cambodian life.

Accurate figures are hard to come by, but relief officials and diplomats in
Phnom Penh suggest that there are at least 30,000 refugees in the northwest,
near Battambang; perhaps 15,000 in Phnom Penh, 15,000 in Kompong Chhnang
Province, 15,000 in Kompong Speu, and slightly smaller numbers in Kompong Cham,
Kompong Thom, Kampot, Banteay Meanchey and Takeo provinces.

Shortages of 'Everything'

''They need everything,'' said a relief worker with long experience, citing an
immediate need for food, clothing, shelter, medicine, schools, health clinics,
agricultural implements and fertilizer. ''But even if it were all available
locally, which it is not, there isn't enough transport or fuel to get it where
it needs to go.''

The Government and aid agencies working here can supply only about 60 percent of
what is required, relief workers say, and there is a need again, for the first
time in 11 years, for specialists in emergency aid. The internal refugees are in
addition to the 300,000 or so Cambodians, themselves dislocated 11 years ago,
who have been living just inside Thailand since the Vietnamese drove out the
Khmer Rouge and first installed this Government.

But the isolation of the Government from the West, combined with the reluctance
of Western agencies and nations to be considered aiding what is partly a
military strategy, has meant no quick response to official calls for help. And
some agencies, in particular the International Committee of the Red Cross, are
still negotiating to insure that the delivery of aid is controlled to minimize
any diversion to the military or to private pockets.

No Sanitation, Much Illness

Of the nearly 7,300 people in 1,800 families here in this district of Kompong
Speu Province - 11 miles from Kompong Speu town and 35 miles southwest of Phnom
Penh - half have no shelter at all, relief workers and officials said. The
nearest water supply is over half a mile away; there is no sanitation, and the
many people ill with dysentery merely cross the dusty road to another field,
swarming with flies.

As the Khmer Rouge have stepped up their guerrilla war this spring and summer,
moving farther from their mountain and forest sanctuaries to attack district
towns, these Cambodians either fled their villages or have been moved, some
forcibly, by the Government.

Provincial and district officials say that at least 2,000 Khmer Rouge, half in
two divisions and the other half in smaller, mobile units, now range through the
Oral and Elephant mountains here, with several thousand more in neighboring
provinces. The mountains and forests have always contained Khmer Rouge, but now,
with Vietnamese troops gone, they range more widely.

Khmer Rouge attacks in five mountainous districts in this province -Oral, Phnom
Srouch, Kong Pisei, Tpoeng and Baseth - have forced the Government to pull back
at least two military headquarters. As part of a new strategy reminiscent of the
American ''strategic hamlet'' program during the Vietnam War, the Government has
evacuated peasants in these remote areas also, allowing the army to move more
freely and the air force to bomb.

Pulling Back

Here in Oral district, for example, the district town and the military
headquarters, once at Sangke Satap, 34 miles northwest of Kompong Speu town on
Road No. 42, were pulled back 23 miles to O Koki. With the headquarters have
come the residents of 28 of the 32 villages in the district, about two-thirds of
the district population.

''It's a bigger buffer zone for us,'' said Pen Sambo, the party chief of Oral
district, putting as good a face as possible on the retreat. ''Sometimes it's
ours; sometimes it's not. We call it a 'provisional liberated zone.' ''

The population movement deprives the Khmer Rouge of food, recruits, porters and
protection, he said, while the army continues its operations in the contested
area.

Yet nearly every day, a small patrol of Khmer Rouge comes out of the mountains
defining the horizon and moves close enough to fire a few rockets toward this
raw and already squalid settlement, planted with seeming randomness along this
unprotected and empty road.

Willing to Move

For Hoth Khem, a 54-year-old woman who seems much older and whose husband was
killed by the Khmer Rouge in 1977, the displacement has been a nightmare. The
army asked her family to move, she said, and she was willing, because ''the
Khmer Rouge was often presenting its face, even in the daytime.''

The Khmer Rouge also took their rice and animals, she said, and ''many young
people'' - nearly 1,000, Mr. Pen Sambo, the party chief, said - to carry
ammunition and food for them.

But they did not take her children. ''They were too small and sick, and the
Khmer Rouge said they were useless people,'' she said. She and her children
walked 11 days to arrive here; now they live in a passable hut and get some rice
from the Cambodian Red Cross, but they are ill with diarrhea and malaria, and
there is no medicine.

This is also the growing season, when peasants normally transplant their rice,
but the people here have had to abandon their animals and their fields. Some
have tried to scratch out new ones, but there are not enough tools or seedlings.
In any event, the rains are sparse this year in Kompong Speu, already Cambodia's
poorest province.

Som Keth, 55, has nine children, two of whom are in the army. He and the rest
walked 44 miles to get here, arriving three weeks ago. ''At first,'' he said
about his village, ''the Khmer Rouge had a good policy and treated people well,
and bought ducks and chickens and rice from the people.''

But after about a month, he said, ''they collected the people and had a meeting
and divided us,'' sending the youth to the mountains as porters and the local
leaders to be ''re-educated.''

Then, he said, staring off at the mountains, toward his native place, as the
Cambodians say, the Khmer Rouge harvested the crops, took the animals and burned
the houses.

Som Keth looked around at his shelter of saplings draped with plastic sheeting,
at his ox cart without an ox, at his one cooking pot and his tattered, filthy
clothing, while his youngest children scampered half-naked in the dust.

''It is safer now,'' he said. ''But we have nothing.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: As many as 130,000 Cambodian peasants have been forced to seek
refuge from a stepped-up war against the Khmer Rouge. This family, which owns
only an oxcart, is among 15,000 people living in makeshift huts in the province
of Kompong Speu who need food, shelter, schools and medicine. (Steven
Erlanger/The New York Times); Map of Cambodia showing location of O Koki.

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              138 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 9, 1990, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Lost Courage, Lost Play

SECTION: Section A; Page 22, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 340 words


Actors' Equity asserts that a British actor portraying a Eurasian in the musical
''Miss Saigon'' would be ''an affront to the Asian community.'' But refusing to
let him repeat his London role on Broadway is an affront to the essence of
theater.

The union claims to be taking a moral stand in the interests of its minority
members. The cause is just, but the effect is perverse. Understandably angered,
the producer, Cameron Mackintosh, has now canceled the U.S. production. That
means some three dozen Asian-Americans and other minority actors who would have
had roles will instead be jobless. So will scores of other performers, musicians
and stagehands in New York and on the road.

''Miss Saigon'' stars Jonathan Pryce as the Eurasian owner of a bar and brothel
in Saigon during the Vietnam War. Already established as a great actor on both
sides of the Atlantic, Mr. Pryce has won a Tony award as best actor on Broadway
and by all accounts gives an outstanding performance in ''Miss Saigon.'' And
what is greatness on the stage if not the versatility to star in many roles?

Legally, even morally, Actors' Equity has a weak case. It cannot dictate casting
for any show, home-grown or imported. Rather it has an agreement with British
Equity that allows stars to cross the ocean on a reciprocal basis. The union
suggests that Mr. Mackintosh go to arbitration, and concedes that he would
probably win. That's a cop-out; lacking the courage to offend a few members who
object to Mr. Pryce, the union wants to pass the buck to an arbitrator.

Actors' Equity is right to promote minority actors, but wrong to promote
stereotyping. Men and women have swapped roles for centuries. More recently
there has been a healthy crossing of racial and ethnic lines. Must Shylock
always be played by a Jew? No. Othello by a black? There was no outcry when
Edwin Booth took that role. Right now in Mr. Mackintosh's Los Angeles production
of ''The Phantom of the Opera,'' a black star plays the phantom.

Let Actors' Equity focus on actors acting.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              139 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 9, 1990, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Producer Cancels 'Miss Saigon'; 140 Members Challenge Equity

BYLINE: By MERVYN ROTHSTEIN

SECTION: Section C; Page 15, Column 4; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1859 words


The producer of the hit London musical ''Miss Saigon'' announced yesterday that
he was canceling the show's Broadway production, which had already sold a record
$25 million in advance tickets, because Actors' Equity had denied permission for
the English actor Jonathan Pryce to repeat his performance in New York.

The producer, Cameron Mackintosh, reached at his home in the south of France,
said yesterday that the cancellation ''is absolutely a final decision in the
light of Equity's repeated condemnation of our artistic decision on this
production.'' Mr. Mackintosh had said last month, in discussing a possible
cancellation of the show, that if Equity changed its mind by the beginning of
September, the production could still move ahead as planned. It was unclear
yesterday if that was still a possibility. Mr. Mackintosh said from France that
''if one day sense and reason prevailed, obviously I would like 'Miss Saigon' to
go to America.''

''But it would only be if the climate was right,'' he said, ''and I don't see
that happening.''

In a statement issued earlier by his London office, Mr. Mackintosh said: ''In
denying approval for Jonathan Pryce, Actors' Equity has violated its own
collective bargaining agreement with the League of American Theaters and
Producers as well as its agreement with British Equity. Under these agreements,
the only issue which Equity has the right to consider in making its decision is
whether or not Jonathan Pryce is a 'star.' Equity has previously certified Mr.
Pryce as a 'star,' when it endorsed his appearance on Broadway in 1984 under an
H-1 visa. Therefore, there is no legal basis for their objecting to his
admission for 'Miss Saigon.' ''

'A Moral Decision'

Equity, in its statement Tuesday barring Mr. Pryce, said that it could not
''appear to condone the casting of a Caucasian in the role of a Eurasian.'' Alan
Eisenberg, Equity's executive secretary, said on Tuesday that the union had not
dealt with the issue of whether Mr. Pryce was a star. ''This is a moral
decision,'' Mr. Eisenberg said, aimed at creating equal casting opportunities
for its minority members.

Mr. Pryce, speaking by telephone from backstage at the Theater Royal in London
between performances of the musical, said yesterday that he ''cannot envisage a
circumstance in which I would come to New York and do this production now.''

''I'm incredibly saddened by the decision,'' Mr. Pryce said. ''Equity is saying
this in no way reflects on my abilities or status as an actor for Broadway, but
I cannot be anything other than hurt or offended by it. It equates with being
called a racist.''

Mr. Pryce added that he endorsed everything in Mr. Mackintosh's statement.
''It's a legitimate argument they have, trying to insure that any racial
minority is given full opportunity to work in the arts,'' Mr. Pryce said. ''But
I thought logic and reason would prevail.'' Which Side of the Fence? ''I've
never had any doubts or qualms about playing the Engineer,'' he said. ''What is
appropriate is that the best person for the job play the role and I think it's
completely valid that I play the role. If the character is half Asian and half
European, you've got to drop down on one side of the fence or the other, and I'm
choosing to drop down on the European side.''

Mr. Eisenberg said yesterday that the union was ''very disappointed'' that Mr.
Mackintosh canceled the production. ''It's going to be a great loss to a lot of
people,'' he said, ''but our council believed it had to focus on the needs of
the industry.''

The vote of the Equity council on Tuesday denying the role to Mr. Pryce was
reportedly very close, with only about half of the 79 council members taking
part. The tally was reportedly either 23 or 22 to 18, but Colleen Dewhurst, the
president of Equity, said that the closeness did not reflect a division in
Equity over the decision. ''I think Equity is solid on this,'' Ms. Dewhurst said
yesterday.

A Broadway production of ''Miss Saigon,'' a musical about an American G.I. and
his Vietnamese girlfriend during the last days of the Vietnam War just before
the fall of Saigon, would have provided roles for 50 actors, about 34 of whom
would have been members of minority groups. Those jobs, as well as hundreds of
others from possible touring companies, are now apparently lost.

Equity had pointed out that under terms of the production contract, Mr.
Mackintosh had the right to take the matter to arbitration. But Mr. Mackintosh
said in his statement that he would not take the matter to arbitration ''simply
to prove a legal point.''

''The inaccurate and inflammatory statements which Equity has made concerning
'Miss Saigon' have served only to create a poisonous atmosphere in which
creativity and artistic freedom cannot function or survive,'' the producer's
statement added. ''Arbitration cannot clear this atmosphere, and if Equity is
unwilling to take steps to insure that reason and fairness prevail, then I have
no choice but to cancel 'Miss Saigon.' ''

Further Action Studied

''Equity itself has acknowledged that its position would be dismissed in
arbitration,'' he said. ''Is this responsible behavior for a union which claims
to represent the interests of artists?''

Bernard Jacobs, president of the Shubert Organization, at whose Broadway theater
the show was to have begun performances next March, said yesterday that he was
talking with his lawyers about possible further action. ''We believe Equity has
acted improperly, illegally and in clear violation of their contract with the
league,'' he said. ''They have no right to reject an actor for political
reasons.'' Harriet Slaughter, director of labor relations for the League of
American Theaters and Producers, said, ''There is great disappointment that
Equity did not act responsibly in terms of its commitment to the collective
bargaining agreement.''

In announcing its decision on Tuesday, Equity cited a clause in the production
contract in which all parties agree ''to continue their joint efforts toward,
and reaffirm their commitment to the policy of nondiscrimination, and to an
ongoing policy of furthering the principles of equal employment opportunity.''

Mr. Mackintosh, in his statement, said that ''the debate is no longer about the
casting of 'Miss Saigon,' but the art of acting itself.''

Accuses Equity of Bias

''Because we feel so strongly about our own artistic position, we understand the
depth of feeling within the Asian acting community and believe we share many of
their aims,'' he added. ''We passionately disapprove of stereotype casting,
which is why we continue to champion freedom of artistic choice. Racial barriers
can only undermine the very foundations of our profession.''

''Indeed, Equity has rejected our application solely on the grounds that Mr.
Pryce is Caucasian,'' the statement continued. ''By choosing to discriminate
against Mr. Pryce on the basis of his race, Equity has further violated
fundamental principles of Federal and state human rights laws, as well as of
Federal labor laws.''

Mr. Mackintosh said that he had spent $600,000 on the Broadway production so
far, ''all of which is now lost.'' Ticketholders may return their tickets to
Miss Saigon Refunds, P.O. Box 993, New York, N.Y. 10108. Refund checks will be
mailed or credit card credits issued.

The dispute over Mr. Pryce's appearance on Broadway began when David Henry
Hwang, the Tony Award-winning author of ''M. Butterfly,'' and B. D. Wong, who
won a Tony Award as best supporting actor in that play, complained to Equity.

Mr. Hwang issued a statement yesterday in which he said he had informed Equity
10 days ago that he would support whatever decision they determined to be in the
best interests of their membership. ''It has certainly never been my intention
to see a show canceled,'' the playwright said. ''I simply felt that an important
point had to be made, and this has clearly been achieved.''

A Division of Opinion

In the theater industry yesterday, opinion was divided on the issue, with many
people strongly condemning the Equity move and others backing it.

Arthur Rubin, vice president and general manager of the Nederlander
Organization, the second-largest Broadway theater owner, said he believed that
''Equity is 100 percent wrong.''

''The issue of an Asian role being played by a white man is an incorrect issue
in this day and age, when we want blacks to be able to play whites and Asians to
be able to play whites,'' Mr. Rubin said. ''We are trying to establish the fact
that anybody should be able to play anything.''

Rocco Landesman, president of Jujamcyn Theaters, the No. 3 Broadway theater
owner, was even more vehement in his opinions. ''The nicest thing I can say
about this decision is that it's stupid,'' Mr. Landesman said. ''It's also
self-destructive. They're canceling work for a lot of their membership.''

Mr. Landesman added he felt that ''the most appalling thing about this is
Equity's moral self-righteousness.''

''It seems to me they have a doubtful stand when they say that nontraditional
casting can only go one way,'' he added. ''I thought that in the end they would
come to their senses.''

Frustration Cited

Joanna Merlin, co-chairwoman of the Nontraditional Casting Project, a nonprofit
organization that seeks to advance the principles of nondiscriminatory casting,
said she felt the vote reflected ''the deep and intense frustration Asian and
other ethnic actors feel because they are denied equal opportunities in
employment.''

But she added: ''However strongly Equity feels they must condemn the casting of
Jonathan Pryce for these reasons, I believe their vote seriously threatens
freedom of artistic choice. How can anyone legitimately dictate who will or will
not be cast in a show except the creative team?''

The Pan Asian Repertory Theater issued a statement, however, applauding ''the
courageous decision of Actors' Equity.''

''This action sends a clear message to members of the commercial producing
establishment that Actors' Equity will vigorously defend the rights of artists
of color under any and all circumstances,'' the Pan Asian Repertory statement
said.

Joseph Papp, the head of the New York Shakespeare Festival, who has been a
pioneer in the casting of minorities in nontraditional roles, said he backed the
Equity decision.

''I spoke to a young Asian actor last night and asked him how he felt about
it,'' Mr. Papp said, ''and he spoke with such eloquence about how this Equity
decision was a tremendous symbol for him. And as he spoke some of the doubts I
had about the decision disappeared. I don't like anybody to tell me how to cast
a play. But I think that for people concerned with race it was the proper
position for them to take.''

''There's something maybe foolish, but brave, about Equity's position,'' Mr.
Papp added. ''I think in the final analysis their position will mean more
employment for Asian-American actors. As a producer, I have a certain resistance
to their position, but as a citizen, and because of my commitment to minority
casting, I think they did the proper and heroic thing.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Cameron Mackintosh, Producer (Michael Le Poer Trench); Alan
Elsenberg, Executive Secretary, Actors' Equity (The New York Times); Jonathan
Pryce, Actor (Camera Press); David Henry Hwang, Author of 'M. Butterfly' (The
New York Times) (pg. C15); ''I think that for people concerned with race it was
the proper position for them to take,'' said Joseph Papp, head of the New York
Shakespeare Festival. (Associated Press) (pg. C17)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              140 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 10, 1990, Friday, Late Edition - Final

What '9-Year-Old Shot in Head' Means

SECTION: Section A; Page 24, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 235 words


To the Editor:

I watch the news on television. I read the papers. There seems to be a natural
tendency for the mind to habituate, to become less sensitive to the horrible.
This must be the reason that guns are still legal, why there is no ban on
handguns, automatic and semiautomatic weapons.

As a physician in a large inner-city hospital, I can tell you that the horror of
trauma does not go away. It is always there. The most horrific cases are the
children as innocent victims of stray bullets meant for someone else. If you
have never heard the screams of parents carrying the limp, bloody body of their
child into an emergency room, you have no idea what ''9-year-old shot in head in
Brooklyn'' really means.

During the Vietnam War, hundreds of thousands protested the senseless killing.
Why aren't there massive marches on Washington demanding the immediate cessation
of the sale of all weapons that obviously are not meant for hunting? Our cities
have become war zones. Why are we not protesting? Why are we not marching? We
are becoming desensitized.

Violent crime cannot be countenanced with passivity. We cannot watch the news
and say to ourselves night after night, ''What a pity,'' and go to bed. Our
lawmakers have procrastinated long enough. It is time for this country to wake
up. It is time for a national referendum on gun control.

MICHAEL RICHTER, M.D.
Brooklyn, July 29, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              141 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 10, 1990, Friday, Late Edition - Final

The Editorial Notebook;
Vietnam Again, for the First Time

BYLINE: By DAVID C. UNGER

SECTION: Section A; Page 24, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 573 words

DATELINE: HO CHI MINH CITY, Vietnam


Fifteen years after North Vietnamese tanks smashed into Saigon's Presidential
Palace, there are still two Vietnams. The Republic of (South) Vietnam, that
artificial creation of French colonialism and cold war politics, is no more. But
commercial capitalism, the American presence and the Viet Cong-led insurrection
pressed a distinctive subculture onto the South. The political ramifications
endure.

No American is a total stranger in Ho Chi Minh City, as Saigon is now officially
known. English is widely spoken. Ordinary Vietnamese greet Americans with
surprising warmth. And even for those who weren't there ''before 1975,'' as the
local euphemism puts it, locales made familiar by war movies and the nightly
television news are everywhere.

The first glance of my room at the old Majestic Hotel brought back memories of
the opening scenes of ''Apocalypse Now,'' when Captain Willard lies in a similar
hotel room contemplating his assigned mission up the Mekong River. Just a few
blocks away, the former U.S. Embassy, its rooftop helipad intact, is occupied by
a state petrochemical company. Nearby is the old Presidential Palace, now
offering guided tours.

Two other museums present the official history of the war from the Communist
side, displaying captured American aircraft, tanks and high-tech artillery
pieces and recounting the atrocities committed by the U.S.-backed Southern
regime.

But many old-time residents of Saigon have different memories from the pre-1975
years. There is little evident bitterness over a costly and futile war. Instead
there is a kind of nostalgia for what, from today's vantage point, seem happier,
more prosperous times. Those rosy recollections indict the economic failures of
Communist rule. The Communist leadership itself acknowledges those failures and
for four years has been encouraging market-oriented economic reform.

That has not only unleashed the strong commercial instincts of the South but has
also begun to spread private economic activity northward to Hanoi, for 35 years
a bastion of Marxist-Leninist orthodoxy. In a reversal of the pattern of the
1960's, today's infiltration routes run from south to north.

The irony would be more delicious if economic reform had not been coupled with a
nasty political backlash. Vietnam's Communist rulers are prepared to tolerate
capitalist economics. But, frightened by the example of Eastern Europe, they
fear any accompanying decentralization of political power.

A wave of arrests earlier this year has chilled political discussion. A
disproportionate number of those arrested appear to be Southerners, including
many who were closely associated with the Communist movement before 1975.

Vietnam was isolated from the outside world for more than a decade after the
war, thanks to an American-sponsored economic embargo and hostile international
reaction when Hanoi invaded and occupied Cambodia. Now Vietnamese troops are
back home. Western trade and investment are on the rise. Deals with Visa and
MasterCard have recently been signed, although Americans are still prohibited by
United States law from using such credit cards or doing business in Vietnam, or
even placing phone calls to that country.

Those policies, large and small, are overripe for review, especially since the
United States is now beginning a dialogue with Vietnam. The psyches of America
and Vietnam are tied too closely together for lasting estrangement.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              142 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 10, 1990, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Agent Orange Study Was Obstructed, Panel Says

BYLINE: By KEITH SCHNEIDER, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 709 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 9


After 14 months of investigation, a House committee concluded today that the
Reagan Administration had obstructed a $43 million Federal health study of
Vietnam veterans exposed to the defoliant Agent Orange, causing the study's
cancellation.

A panel of Federal officials and scientists halted the study in 1987, saying it
was scientifically impossible to establish the levels of exposure for individual
veterans.

But the House committee, after reviewing evidence from the National Academy of
Sciences, the Defense Department and the Centers for Disease Control who had
participated in the health study, said military records could be used to
identify veterans exposed to Agent Orange.

A spokesman for the Centers for Disease Control, which had been supervising the
study, said today that the agency had not seen the House report and was not
prepared to respond.

Fear of Liability Cited

The report, by the House Government Operations Committee, said the White House
feared that if a health study found a link between the veterans' exposure to
Agent Orange and any illnesses the Government could be liable for billions of
dollars in compensation claims. Veterans who say their injuries or illnesses
were caused by Agent Orange do not now receive compensation from the Government.

While most Republicans on the committee supported the report, 6 of the 15
Republican members disagreed with the conclusions. In a dissenting report, they
said ample evidence existed to conclude that the health study was canceled
solely on scientific grounds, and called the report an ''ideological assault
upon a Republican White House.''

The report is the latest aspect of a scientific and political struggle over
Agent Orange that has periodically engulfed Federal health and environmental
agencies, Congress, veterans' groups and the courts since the issue arose in
1978.

The report was based on an investigation by Representative Ted Weiss, a
Manhattan Democrat who is chairman of the committee's Subcommittee on Human
Resources.

Agent Orange, a herbicide widely used by American forces to destroy cover and
crops used by Communist troops in the Vietnam War, contained trace amounts of
dioxin, a chemical compound known to cause tumors and birth defects in
laboratory animals.

Vietnam veterans exposed to it believe Agent Orange caused numerous illnesses
and birth deformities. Last week the American Legion and Vietnam Veterans of
America filed separate lawsuits in Federal District Court here against two
Federal health agencies and the Department of Veterans Affairs for failing to
complete the health study of Vietnam veterans.

In 1979 Congress passed a law ordering the Veterans Administration, the
precursor of the Department of Veterans Affairs, to make the first comprehensive
assessment of the health of veterans exposed to Agent Orange. A vital facet of
the study was a project to review military records and locate troop movements
through regions sprayed with Agent Orange.

The V.A. was unable to develop the protocols for conducting the health study,
and in 1982 Congress transferred the research to the Centers for Disease Control
in Atlanta.

Records Termed Inadequate

According to the committee report, the White House began to direct essential
aspects of the C.D.C. study through the Agent Orange Working Group, a 34-member
panel of Federal scientists and health officials established in the Carter
Administration who reviewed studies of Vietnam-era defoliants.

The most important decision of the panel was its determination in 1987 that the
Pentagon's records on troop movements in areas that had been sprayed with Agent
Orange were not adequate for conducting the study. Gaps and flaws in the
records, the panel said, made it impossible to accurately measure a soldier's
exposure to the defoliant.

But the House report concluded that such measurements were possible.

The report said, ''The White House was deeply concerned that the Federal
Government would be placed in the position of paying compensation to veterans
suffering diseases related to Agent Orange, and feared that providing help to
Vietnam veterans would set the precedent of having the U.S. compensate civilian
victims of toxic contaminant exposure, too.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              143 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 10, 1990, Friday, Late Edition - Final

News Summary

SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1333 words



International    A2-11

A blockade of Iraq will begin in the next few days and will be enforced by the
United States and allied naval forces in the Red Sea, Indian Ocean,
Mediterranean Sea and Persian Gulf, U.S. officials said.    Page A1

A meeting of Arab leaders ended abruptly after an Iraqi delegation turned up
unexpectedly and demanded to take over the seat reserved for Kuwait. The
emergency meeting was postponed for a day.     A1

Americans in Kuwait may not leave the country, Iraq informed the United States.
The notification raised fears that Iraq may use the thousands of Americans and
other foreigners stranded there as a bargaining chip or a shield against attack.

    A1

Americans being held in Iraqi hotels are not being called hostages by the State
Department, but their families across the country say that is the word to
describe their plight.    A9

U.N. council declares void Iraqi annexation of Kuwait    A11

News analysis: Iran has kept quiet since Iraq invaded Kuwait last week,
assailing the Iraqi move but saying little else about the expanding crisis in
the Persian Gulf, an area Teheran has traditionally viewed as its sphere of
prime concern and influence.    A11

U.S expects its force to be in place in a month    A8

Lack of a press pool with U.S. forces angers media    A10

Israel responded to Iraq's threat to attack with chemical weapons by conducting
its first test of the Arrow air defense missile, which is intended to shoot down
ballistic missiles. Israeli military officials said the test was a success.
A11

Military analysis: A stalemate between Iraq and the United States may be rapidly
developing as American forces pour into Saudi Arabia and the Persian Gulf.    A8


No oil emergency yet, energy officials assert    A11 Kremlins softens its threat
to Armenia    A3

Hot vents in Lake Baikal hint ocean in the making    A6

Fierce fighting erupts near Moonrovia    A3

Sandinistas criticize own ideology    A4

Quayle warns Haiti to hold fair election    A4

Prices jump in Peru, and the protest is swift    A5

After 32 years of democracy, fears of a coup in Venezuela    A3

Head-Smashed-In Journal: In the bison's land, pride lives on    A4

National    A12-15, B8

Frank Lorenzo is stepping down as chairman of Continental Airline Holdings Inc.,
formerly the Texas Air Corporation, and is selling all his stock in the company
to the Scandinavian Airline System.    A1

Georgia's election system, which requires candidates to participate in a runoff
if none receives 50 percent of the vote in primary elections, was challenged in
a suit filed by the Justice Department.    A1

A segregated golf course in Alabama has forced residents of Birmingham to
re-examine the progress of race relations since the days of Commissioner Bull
Connor and his police dogs.    A12

F.B.I. settles black agent's suit on race bias    A13

Active-duty military troops have been used for the first time to fight marijuana
growing in the United States. They have spent the past two weeks raiding
clandestine marijuana gardens in the King Range National Conservation Area in
California.     A12

Agent Orange study was obstructed, panel says    A12

Washington Talk: The old maxim that a poor economy means bad news for the party
in power may not hold true for President Bush and the Republicans. The crisis in
the Persian Gulf could give the party a political boost in this fall's
elections.    A15

The flaw in the Hubble telescope appears to have been caused by a manufacturing
error rather than a design problem, a Federal panel reported. The defect is a
spacing error of about one millimeter in an optic device used to guide the
making of the mirror.     A14

Reduction ordered in diesel fuel sulfur    B8

Scientists have discovered a gene responsible for a disfiguring disorder of the
nervous system. They have also discovered how the gene causes the disorder.
B8

AIDS programs used to curb drug addiction    A14

Study offers hope for reducing assault injuries    A14

Regional    B1-6

The region's already frail economy is endangered by the higher oil prices that
have prevailed since Iraq invaded Kuwait, experts say. But no one predicts the
kind of adversity produced by the oil crisis of 1973.    B1

A lawyer who exposed corruption in New York City government by disclosing that
he paid kickbacks on a city contract was suspended from practicing law for his
part in the scheme. The lawyer, Michael G. Dowd, was disbarred for five years.
    B1

Major celebrities in East Hampton are just homeowners when it comes to applying
for zoning variances. But how will the board deal with a request to build a dock
for a 137-foot boat?     B1

A transit police officer shot a suspect in a chain-snatching after chasing him
for several blocks in the Bronx. The suspect, who was apparently unarmed at the
time, died of a gunshot wound to his head.    B1

The judge in the jogger trial instructed the jury that contrary to defense
assertions, the law did not necessarily require parents to be present for the
questioning of the three youthful defendants.    B3

Reporter's Notebook: Jogger jury weighs a jumble of details    B3

5,000 more police officers are needed, panel asserts    B4

Construction company owner killed in Brooklyn    B4

Five in Queens indicted; tied to cocaine ''franchises''     B6

Curbs due on rackets at the Fulton Fish Market    B3

Port Authority looking to buy Aqueduct track    B3

Business Digest    D1

Weekend

Ball-park food is now cuisine    C1

Antiques show at Southampton     C12

Weekender Guide    C5

Theater: On Stage    C2

Of ''Miss Saigon'' and Equity    C3

Film: At the Movies    C6

''Flatliners''    C6

''The Two Jakes''    C1

''Air America''    C8

''Ariel,'' from Finland    C10

Italian film festival    C14

Music: Duke Ellington's jazz    C13

From Sonic Youth    C19

Art: Swimsuits through the years    C22

''Photographers' Muses''    C23

Visitor from the 17th century    C24

Auctions    C16

Restaurants    C20

Word and Image: Dean Rusk and Yukio Mishima    C24

The 50's recalled in new novel    C26

Law Page    B10

At the Bar

In sex case, focus is on multiple personalities

Barry juror falls ill and deliberations are suspended

Obituaries    B9

Howard O. McMahon, former head of Arthur D. Little

Sports

The owner of the New York Yankees, George Steinbrenner, often enlisted past and
present agents of the Federal Bureau of Investigation to conduct unofficial
background checks of business associates and employees, former F.B.I.
investigators said.    A1

Baseball: Mets come out swining    A17

Steinbrenner unhappy with deal, signs suggest    A17

Yanks top Mariners     A19

Column: Vecsey on Rob Moore    A17

Football: Giant chance for Emanuel    A21

Golf: Corporations may be cautious about sponsorships    A17

Wadkins leads P.G.A.    A18

Editorials/Letters/Op-Ed

Editorials    A24

The siege of Iraq

Messinger's obstructionism

David C. Unger: Vietnam

Letters    A24

William Safire: Reading Saddam's mind    A25

Kamel S. Abu Jaber: Once more, the U.S. misreads the Arabs    A25

Ken Bode: As a political issue, S.& L.'s fail again    A25

Dick Cavett: My union, Actors' Inequity    A25

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              144 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 10, 1990, Friday, Late Edition - Final

CONFRONTATION IN THE GULF: U.S. SET TO BLOCKADE BAGHDAD'S SHIPPING; IRAQ DETAINS
FOREIGNERS, UPSETS SUMMIT;
50 SHIPS ASSEMBLE

BYLINE: By R. W. APPLE Jr., Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1876 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 9


United States and allied naval forces in the Red Sea, Indian Ocean,
Mediterranean Sea and Persian Gulf, which will soon constitute an armada of more
than 50 major ships, will begin enforcing a blockade on Iraqi commerce within a
few days, American officials said today.

The United States appealed again, in a tone of some anxiety, for other nations
to send ground forces to aid in the defense of Saudi Arabia, an enterprise that
Administration officials said could last a year and a half or more. The same
officials said that considerably more than 50,000 United States ground troops
might eventually be needed in the gulf region.

Iraq sealed its borders to all but diplomats, blocking the departure of most of
the 3,500 Americans trapped in that country and Kuwait, and United States
intelligence specialists said they appeared to be hostages, in fact if not in
name. Marlin Fitzwater, the White House spokesman, said Washington hoped to get
them out, ''and the best way to do that is to keep our cool.''

Defensive Posture in Kuwait

The Pentagon reported that Iraqi forces in Kuwait have adopted a defensive
posture, easing fears that President Saddam Hussein would strike swiftly, while
the American presence in the region remained relatively small. Pentagon
officials said tonight that 18,000 fresh Iraqi troops had entered Kuwait,
bringing the total to 138,000, with 32,000 more moving south.

A dispatch from Kuwait City by a correspondent of the New China News Agency said
Iraqi troops, supported by machine guns, artillery and rocket launchers, were
digging in for ''a life-and-death fight.''

The Iraqi Ambassador in Athens said that his country would use chemical weapons
if attacked.

Warning Against New Terrorism

As President Bush planned to depart for a vacation in Maine on Friday, officials
in Washington and in Europe also warned that President Hussein might decide to
mount a new terrorist campaign against the United States to counter Mr. Bush's
moves. Such a campaign, they said, might be led by Abu Nidal, the leader of an
extremist Palestinian faction, who they said had surfaced in Baghdad in recent
days.

But the biggest concern here was the failure of other nations to send troops to
help the Americans now digging in and beginning training operations at an air
base at Dhahran, near the gulf, and around the Saudi capital, Riyadh. Seeking to
put the best face on things, Mr. Fitzwater, the White House spokesman, mentioned
a 3,000-strong force of the Gulf Cooperation Council, composed of troops from
the small sheikdoms in the region, but that unit has been in Saudi Arabia for
some time.

''This is the ball game,'' said Representative Les Aspin, the Wisconsin Democrat
who heads the House Armed Services Committee. ''On a scale of one to 10, with 10
a total disaster, no Arab ground troops means a 9, and no ground troops from
anyone but us and the Saudis means about a 12.''

Senator Sam Nunn of Georgia, also a Democrat, who heads the Senate Armed
Services Committee, said, ''If it appears that it's the United States and Saudi
Arabia against the rest of the Arab world, then that is not going to be in our
long-term interest.''

The reason, as Richard W. Murphy, a recently retired Assistant Secretary of
State for Middle Eastern Affairs, explained, is that ''then Saddam and the other
nationalists would find it easy to discredit the Saudis as the tools of the
so-called American-Zionist conspiracy.''

Turkey Says No to Troops

So far, no one, not even the British, who are sending planes, ships and
technicians but no ground forces, has agreed to send infantrymen to stand
alongside the Americans. An Arab meeting that was supposed to address the matter
was delayed until Friday, and Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d, visiting
Ankara, failed to persuade Turkey to commit troops, though he won some promise
of wider access to Turkish airfields for United States aircraft.

But top Washington policymakers continued to insist tonight, as they have
insisted for several days, that after the Arab nations had completed their
elaborate round of diplomatic consultations, perhaps by early next week, troops
from Egypt, Morocco and possibly Tunisia will go to Saudi Arabia.

France indicated that it would reinforce its presence in the area by sending an
aircraft or helicopter carrier -the Foch, the Clemenceau or the Jeanne d'Arc. On
the matter of troops, President Francois Mitterrand said: ''France would like to
see the problem solved within the Arab community. If that turns out to be
impossible, France will assume its responsibilities.''

Gerhard Stoltenberg, the West German Defense Minister, said the furthest his
country would go would be to send warships to replace American ships diverted to
the gulf from the Mediterranean. The Soviet Union said it would do nothing
unless the military operation was under United Nations auspices.

Administration officials said that after President Bush spoke by telephone with
Prime Minister Bob Hawke of Australia, a country that sent troops to fight with
Americans in Vietnam, there were ''positive signals.''

In an elaboration of estimates made on Wednesday, military officials said United
States ground strength in and near Saudi Arabia would approach 50,000 within a
month, with 10,000 to 20,000 more on shipboard nearby. About 4,000 men and women
are already there.

A report late tonight by The Associated Press said that Pentagon plans called
for the ultimate dispatch of a force of 250,000 to Saudi Arabia. One of the
handful of senior policy planners in the Administration described that figure as
preposterous, but said that after the 50,000 ground troops had reached their
posts a month from now, a policy review would be undertaken that might well
result in many more troops being deployed.

Status of War Powers Act

Clarifying another point, Mr. Fitzwater said Mr. Bush, like his predecessor,
Ronald Reagan, considered the Vietnam-era War Powers Act unconstitutional, so
the White House was sending to Congress ''a notification consistent with'' the
act, rather than the formal document the act requires. The same procedure, he
added, had been used at the time of the Grenada invasion in 1983 and the Panama
invasion in 1989.

To insure that the effort would not be undercut by budgetary stringency, Mr.
Fitzwater disclosed, Mr. Bush was ready to move soon, under a provision allowing
him to specify such exceptions, to provide that automatic cuts in spending
required under the Gramm-Rudman-Hollings law would have no impact on forces in
the gulf.

Cuts of up to $100 million, half in the military budget and half in domestic
programs, will take effect on Oct. 1 if Congress and the Administration cannot
agree on a deficit-reduction package. By exempting Middle Eastern operations,
budget experts in Congress noted, the White House will be forced to absorb cuts
elsewhere in the Pentagon budget to compensate.

The American deployment, which has been given the code name ''Desert Shield,''
is the largest by the United States since the war in Vietnam, and it may last
nearly as long.

'In This for the Long Haul'

''We're in this for the long haul,'' said an Administration official. ''It's
certainly a matter of months, it could go a year, could go a year and a half.
It's not inconceivable.''

Henry Schuler, who heads the energy security programs at the Center for
Strategic and International Studies, a Washington research center, said the
Americans might have to stay ''more or less permanently.'' He said a propaganda
campaign led by President Hussein, identifying the United States and its allies
as the implacable foe of the Arab state and ''the defiler of Muslim holy
places,'' might well leave the Saudi Government vulnerable for many years to
takeover or intimidation by the Iraqis.

Diplomats in Riyadh, the Saudi capital, said United States marines had landed
today near Khafji, a coastal oil city about seven miles south of the Kuwait
border. Reports from California said large numbers of marines were moving out of
Camp Pendleton on their way to the Middle East, and other units were expected to
be sent from the big Marine base at Okinawa in the Pacific.

Representative John M. Spratt of South Carolina said that A-10 Warthog jets,
which are designed to stop enemy tanks, were on the way from Myrtle Beach Air
Base in his state to the gulf region. Three squadrons of the air-to-ground
attack planes were said to be involved. Air National Guard members in a handful
of states were called to active duty.

U.N. Declares Annexation Void

On the diplomatic front, the United Nations Security Council voted 15 to 0 to
declare the Iraqi annexation of Kuwait, announced on Wednesday, to be null and
void. Yemen, the sole Arab member, voted with the majority.

And North Atlantic Treaty Organization foreign ministers prepared for a meeting
in Brussels on Friday that may produce further pledges of support.

There were also suggestions among diplomats here that Iran and Syria had agreed,
at the request of the United States, to conduct maneuvers or other diversions on
their borders with Iraq, a traditional enemy of both.

Pete Williams, the Pentagon spokesman, said of the 138,000 Iraqi troops now
estimated to be in Kuwait: ''It would seem to us that they are working hard to
hold on to what they have acquired. They seem to be in a defensive posture, but
nonetheless, Iraqi forces are still capable of offensive action, and at the same
time, more Iraqi military units appear to be heading south from Kuwait.''

Temperatures Reach 120

With Saudi infantry, artillery and tank units moving up to the former Neutral
Zone separating Saudi Arabia from Kuwait, across a vast desert where summer
temperatures reach 120 degrees, soldiers of the two nations were almost within
sight of each other. Western diplomats reported that scores of armored personnel
carriers were streaming north along the coastal highway leading north from the
capital.

In a rare and emotional speech to his people, King Fahd of Saudi Arabia demanded
that the Emir of Kuwait, Sheik Jaber al-Ahmed al-Sabah, who took refuge in
Riyadh last week, be restored to his throne. The King called the Iraqi invasion
of Kuwait ''the ugliest aggression in modern Arab history.''

The prospective blockade, which was first disclosed by a senior Administration
official in a background briefing at the White House, would include French and
British ships and those of other nations with naval detatchments in the region.

In fact, the mere proclamation of a blockade might do the job, because merchant
ship captains are reluctant to risk seizure of their ships or cargo.

Iraq's Market Drying Up

The market for Iraq's oil, its only significant export, is already drying up
because of United Nations sanctions, and Iraq has has closed one of two
pipelines across Turkey that used to carry about half of Baghdad's 2.7 million
barrels a day in oil exports. The other is putting oil in storage tanks, and
when they are full, the Turks will shut off that one as well.

A pipeline across Saudi Arabia is still open but may be closed shortly.

According to American intelligence, no Iraqi crude oil is being loaded into
tankers in any port now.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Map showing the disposition of American forces in and around the
Arabian Peninsula. (pg. A8)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              145 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 10, 1990, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Jonathan Pryce, 'Miss Saigon' and Equity's Decision

BYLINE: By FRANK RICH; Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section C; Page 1, Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1597 words

DATELINE: LONDON, Aug. 9


Only a few hours after Actors' Equity in New York announced its decision to bar
Jonathan Pryce from acting in a Broadway production of ''Miss Saigon,'' Mr.
Pryce was back on stage here, doing his job in the theater, giving an
electrifying performance in the role of his career.

The scene was a packed Wednesday matinee at the Theater Royal, Drury Lane, the
enormous, legendary house that has long played home to visiting American actors
in the musical theater, from Mary Martin, who opened ''South Pacific'' in London
40 years ago, to the imported New York company that introduced the English to
''A Chorus Line.'' London is not known for producing exciting musical-theater
performers, and in nearly 30 years of watching musicals here, I have seen only
two singing and dancing stars who could be mentioned in the same breath as the
Broadway greats the West End has so frequently had to airlift from New York. One
is Robert Lindsay of ''Me and My Girl.'' The other is Mr. Pryce.

The occasion for Mr. Pryce's triumph, of course, is the new musical by the
French authors of ''Les Miserables,'' Alain Boublil and Claude-Michel Schonberg,
who, with the collaboration of the American lyricist Richard Maltby Jr.,
relocate the tragic tale of ''Madama Butterfly'' to Saigon in 1975. But Mr.
Pryce's character in ''Miss Saigon,'' known as the Engineer, has no antecedent
in the Puccini opera; it is instead a variant on the German nightclub Emcee
played by Joel Grey in ''Cabaret,'' another musical about modern civilization
sliding into the charnel house of racism and war in the name of patriotism.

Like Mr. Grey, Mr. Pryce jolts the show into the realms of dark magic in its
opening seconds. When the spindly actor first appears, he is wearing a garish,
satiny pimp's suit grotesquely parodying Western fashions of the 1960's: a mauve
jacket with outsized lapels and bellbottoms to match. His expression is that of
a hangman's, with coal-black eyes staring out from under a high, gleaming bald
dome fringed by spiky, silver-flecked hair. ''Welcome to Dreamland!,'' he calls
to the audience and to the G.I.s entering a steamy bar. Lest the delights within
his establishment not be apparent, he sticks some fluttering fingers to the wet,
extended tongue of his lascivious grin. Then the same fingers wiggle forward to
grab an invisible, potential customer's cash and, just as quickly, tighten into
a fist to simulate a more violent sex act on Dreamland's bill of fare. In the
scenes to come, ''Miss Saigon'' tells of one of the Engineer's Vietnamese
bargirls, the 17-year-old Kim, and the American Marine who unknowingly leaves
her pregnant before leaping onto the helicopters of the American evacuation.
While the Engineer plays a minor role in that story, his main duty is to
personify the spirit of the war in Vietnam itself - of warped ideals, bottomless
corruption, unspeakable atrocities, hypocritical politicians (East and West) and
moral chaos. He's not really an Engineer, but rather a parasitic fixer who
attaches himself to any modern war front: pimp, profiteer, bogus-Rolex salesman,
sewer rat. He will fleece all comers, whether they pledge allegiance to Uncle
Sam or Uncle Ho.

With his elongated death's head, perpetually swiveling pelvis and sleazy leer,
Mr. Pryce can effortlessly carry all the metaphorical weight ''Miss Saigon''
shovels upon him. Like the Lenny Bruce-ish role that won him a Tony Award on
Broadway in Trevor Griffith's ''Comedians'' 15 years ago, Mr. Pryce's Engineer
flashes a sharp edge at a bourgeois audience. Throughout the evening, his voice
lurches dementedly among Hollywood B-movie accents that, like his wardrobe, are
a nightmarish apotheosis of the fashions and cultural kitsch that American
commerce dumps indiscriminately into the Third World. In ''The American Dream,''
a thematic turn with which the Engineer stops the show late in Act II, Mr. Pryce
not only sings and high kicks with a demented rage that draws new blood from
tired lyrical volleys at American materialism, but he also takes a flying leap
onto the hood of a white Cadillac convertible and demonically simulates a
masturbatory orgasm.

This is a dangerous performance as well as a brilliant one, and it is as
essential to ''Miss Saigon'' as Mr. Gray's was to ''Cabaret.'' Maybe even more
so. As emotionally and at times musically powerful as the main drama of this pop
opera is - who would not be moved by the plight of the abandoned Kim and her
child? - the evening trails off into vague characterizations and musical
monotony for large chunks of its post-war second half. By then, the ragged
staging (by Nicholas Hytner) and design (by John Napier) must depend for
levitation on the celebrated onstage helicopter, which proves only a
special-effect stunt of the Universal Tours variety.

Given the rest of ''Miss Saigon'' - even were there not a principle involved -
the producer Cameron Mackintosh had no choice but to cancel the Broadway
production if he could not employ Mr. Pryce. A producer's job is to present the
best show he can, and Mr. Pryce's performance is both the artistic crux of this
musical and the best antidote to its more bloated excesses. It's hard to imagine
another actor, white or Asian, topping the originator of this quirky role. Why
open on Broadway with second best, regardless of race or creed? But there are
principles at stake, too, and even if Mr. Pryce's performance were easily
replicated by another actor, Mr. Mackintosh would still be right to cancel
''Miss Saigon'' rather than surrender his and his creative team's artistic
rights on the grounds Equity has advanced.

The barring of Mr. Pryce is insupportable on every level. By refusing to permit
a white actor to play a Eurasian role, Equity makes a mockery of the hard-won
principles of non-traditional casting and practices a hypocritical reverse
racism. This is a policy that if applied with an even hand would bar Laurence
Olivier's Othello, Pearl Bailey's Dolly Levi, and the appearances of Morgan
Freeman in ''The Taming of the Shrew'' and Denzel Washington in ''Richard III''
in Central Park this summer. Right now in London, to take only one of hundreds
of examples that could be cited to puncture Equity's position, a black English
actress, Josette Simon, is playing the character modeled on Marilyn Monroe in a
National Theater production of Arthur Miller's ''After the Fall.''

Even if there were some credible intellectual rationale (and formula) for an
Equity policy calling for single-race exclusivity in the casting of some roles
and complete racial freedom in the casting of others, Equity could hardly have
picked a worse example to argue the case than the Engineer in ''Miss Saigon.''

The Engineer is Eurasian in the first place (half French, half Vietnamese,
according to a song lyric) only because of a plot twist that requires the
character to have Vietnamese citizenship papers. The role is in reality a
theatrical device, a chorus, an eternal camp follower - alternately American and
Satanic in personality, a character without a proper name and without an ethnic
or national identity of any recognizable sort in the text or on stage. Mr. Pryce
now plays him without any Asian makeup, and the Engineer could be acted without
any textual revision or ethnic makeup by black and Hispanic actors as well as by
whites and Asians. If anything, the Engineer is a character that could have been
invented as a textbook example to promote the idea of non-traditional casting.
When Colleen Dewhurst, the president of Equity, likens ''Miss Saigon'' to a
''minstrel show,'' she is demagogically misrepresenting the role and Mr. Pryce's
performance. Or, worse, is it possible that she has not even bothered to go see
the fellow actor whose work she has branded as perpetuating a racial stereotype?

The one unassailable point in the Equity argument about ''Miss Saigon'' - that
Asian actors must have the acting opportunities racism has denied them in the
past - is also poorly served by the union's behavior. By inviting the
cancellation of ''Miss Saigon,'' Equity has denied its minority members the 34
Asian, black and Hispanic roles in this musical - and not merely minor ones, as
the union rhetoric would have the innocent believe. The show's title part of
Kim, for starters, has far more stage time and many more songs than the
Engineer; because of the vocal demands, this one role alone requires the hiring
of two Asian actresses with star billing in London.

But as Mr. Mackintosh said in his statement canceling the Broadway production of
''Miss Saigon,'' this one musical and the art, money and jobs it represents are
really beside the point now. Much more is at stake. At a time when many people
in the American arts community are rightly worried about grave threats against
the freedom of artistic expression in the United States, a major organization of
American artists has poisoned the atmosphere further by seeking to repress that
freedom. And it has done so by distorting the artist's work under attack and by
confusing the political issues, as mischievously as some conservatives have made
sport of the work of Karen Finley and Robert Mapplethorpe.

Watching Jonathan Pryce create riveting drama on stage in ''Miss Saigon'' this
week, I felt transported by the actor's art, as practiced by a master operating
with the uninhibited liberty that must be any artist's birthright. By barring
that art for American audiences under the disingenuous guise of promoting
democratic principles, Actors' Equity has, I fear, stumbled into its very own
Vietnam.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Lea Salonga and Jonathan Pryce (Michael LePoer Trench)

TYPE: Critic's View

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              146 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 10, 1990, Friday, Late Edition - Final

TV Weekend;
2 Generations of Rusks On Vietnam and Its Toll

BYLINE: By WALTER GOODMAN

SECTION: Section C; Page 24, Column 5; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 677 words


Tonight's edition of ''20/20'' goes to Athens, Ga., for an account of the
reconciliation of Dean Rusk, the former Secretary of State, and his son,
Richard, after years of division over the elder Rusk's role in the Vietnam War.
The program, at 10 o'clock on ABC, does not go deeply into the reconciliation,
which began in 1985; the occasion for dealing with it now seems to be the recent
publication of ''As I Saw It,'' which Dean Rusk wrote with his son's assistance.

The son tells of calling his father from Cornell during the height of the war
and pleading with him not to send hundreds of thousands more men to Vietnam as
the Administration was planning: ''Pop, for God's sake, don't do it! Don't do
it!''

''It just seemed like pouring lives down a drain,'' Richard Rusk says. When his
father visited Cornell, some students greeted him wearing death masks. The
younger Rusk suffered a nervous breakdown, which he attributes to the clash
between his love for his father and his opposition to the war.

As for Dean Rusk himself, now 81, the years seem not to have softened him or
made him more forthcoming. Asked by Stone Phillips, the ''20/20'' correspondent,
whether his son's efforts had changed his mind, the man who served the Vietnam
policies of both John F. Kennedy and Lyndon B. Johnson replies: ''I have decided
to rest with my share of the responsibility for the events of those days.''

He does, however, admit to ''two mistakes.'' He says that he underestimated the
tenacity of the North Vietnamese and overestimated the patience of the American
people. Viewers will be left with the impression that a reconciliation of father
and son has not done much to cause Dean Rusk to question the actions that
separated them.

Of Yukio Mishima

''The Strange Case of Yukio Mishima'' is not hyperbole. As tonight's episode of
''The Creative Edge,'' at 9 o'clock on Channel 13, confirms, Mishima, the most
popular Japanese writer of his time, was afflicted or inspired by broodings on
violence, power, heroism and death. He is doubtless best remembered for his
public suicide by ritual hara kiri in Tokyo in 1970, fulfilling what he called
his heart's leaning toward glorious death.

The interviews with associates, friends and lovers and the excerpts from his
works, read by John Hurt, add up to a surrealistic portrait. Mishima was at once
an intellectual and a body builder who posed for poster art; a husband and
father who had love affairs with female impersonators; a right-wing militarist
and a draft-dodger; a Western-style celebrity and a tradition-minded
nationalist. A friend describes him as ''part gentleman and part gangster.''

Pride in his samurai heritage ran powerfully through both his writing and his
actions. ''I want to make a poem of my life,'' he wrote; part of that poem
consisted of developing a muscular torso so that he might destroy it as an act
of defiance of nature before age took its course. It is not surprising that he
identified with paintings of the martyred St. Sebastian.

Toward the end of his life (he was only 45 years old when he killed himself),
his disgust with his country's eager acceptance of Western values led him to
create the Shield Society, described here as ''the world's least armed, most
spiritual army.'' His handful of followers were dedicated to defending the
divinity of the Emperor, opposing Communism and reviving the national spirit.

No assessment is attempted of the work of a writer who was nominated three times
for the Nobel Prize, but in illuminating the impulses that moved him, this
fascinating documentary leaves the impression that for all his allegiance to the
spirit of his ancestors, he was very much a man of the politically and
spiritually turbulent 1960's.

20/20

An interview with Dean and Richard Rusk; produced by Ine Riisna; Stone Phillips,
correspondent. At 10 tonight on ABC.

The Creative Edge: The Strange Case of Yukio Mishima Produced and directed by
Michael MacIntyre; Anthony Wall and Nigel Finch, executive producers. At 9
tonight on Channel 13.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Yukio Mishima, the subject of tonight's 'Creative Edge.''
(Channel 13)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              147 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 11, 1990, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

CONFRONTATION IN THE GULF;
U.S. Says Its Troops in the Gulf Could Reach 100,000 in Months

BYLINE: By R.W. APPLE Jr., Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1403 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 10


Pentagon officials said today that the American force mobilized to defend Saudi
Arabia against possible Iraqi attack could reach 100,000 in a matter of months,
and President Bush warned Baghdad not to try to ship oil through an undeclared
allied naval blockade.

The White House hailed the decision of Arab nations to send troops to Saudi
Arabia and to join in the worldwide economic quarantine of Iraq.

Two days ago, military officials suggested 50,000 as the upper limit for the
ground force being assembled in Saudi Arabia unless fighting broke out.

With positions on both sides evidently hardening into long-term confrontation
and hostility, Canada, France and Australia announced that they were sending
ships to join American and British vessels in the waters of the Middle East.

Speaking to reporters aboard Air Force One on his way to Maine, Mr. Bush avoided
using the word ''blockade,'' apparently because questions of leadership need to
be worked out, as well as legal problems. But he made it clear that any Iraqi
ships trying to do business as usual would be challenged.

A Test of Wills

Suggesting that the United States and its allies face not so much a test of arms
with President Saddam Hussein of Iraq as a test of wills, Mr. Bush said there
was no sign that the Iraqis ''would be foolish enough to cross that border''
from Kuwait into Saudi Arabia. And Foreign Minister Tariq Aziz of Iraq vowed
that his country would stay in Kuwait despite the economic and military
pressures the rest of the world could muster against it.

NATO Ground Forces Expected

An American official traveling from Brussels to Washington on the plane carrying
Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d said some members of the NATO alliance
would also send ground forces to the Persian Gulf region, in addition to ships
and planes. The broad international response to American pleas for help
constituted a victory for the Administration, which had feared trouble if United
States troops and ships seemed alone.

There was no progress, however, on efforts by American diplomats to win
Baghdad's permission for 3,500 United States citizens trapped in Iraq and Kuwait
to leave. Indeed, President Hussein responded defiantly to his increasing
economic isolation and military vulnerability, calling on Arabs everywhere to
rise up in a holy war, overthrow the Saudi royal family and drive Western powers
out of the region. His bellicose words deepened fears in Washington that he
plans to use the Americans and other foreigners, all de facto hostages for more
than a week, as diplomatic pawns. A majority of the members of the Arab League
voted at a conference in Cairo to send troops to Saudi Arabia and to support
economic sanctions. It was not immediately clear which countries would do so,
although Egypt, Morocco and Syria were widely mentioned, and it was not known
whether they would form part of a multinational force or stand apart as a
separate Arab contingent.

''I do not believe involvement in hostilities is imminent,'' Mr. Bush told
Congress in a message this morning. But the seriousness with which the
Administration regards the prospect of eventual combat in the Persian Gulf was
underlined by its plans to send a pair of 1,000-bed hospital ships to the area
in the next few days.

Mr. Baker said there were indications that Iraq was moving military units up to
its border with Turkey and pouring more forces into occupied Kuwait, where there
are already at least 138,000 Iraqi troops.

'Backed Into a Corner'

''He's backed into a corner,'' Mr. Bush said of President Hussein as he flew to
his home in Kennebunkport, Me. ''He's been isolated by the rest of the world.
Nobody supports him.''

He dismissed the Iraqi dictator's calls for a holy war as ''a rather frantic
ploy'' that ''won't work.''

''I am pleased the way our allies are coming through,'' the President added.
''The troubling thing is that we're up against a man who is known for his
brutality and irrationality and who has taken a step that, though widely
condemned, has still not been reversed.''

Speaking after a closed-door session of NATO foreign ministers in Brussels where
he appealed for help, Mr. Baker said: ''We all have an interest in thwarting
Iraq's menacing and unlimited ambitions. If might is to make right, then the
world will be plunged into a new dark age.''

In addition to the difficulty of fulfulling his pledge to force the Iraqis out
of Kuwait, Mr. Bush's most pressing concerns at the moment are the fate of the
trapped Americans, including 38 held in a Baghdad hotel, and the potential for
Iraqi terrorism, aides said. The State Department issued a bulletin warning
against possible Iraqi terrorist attacks on American installations and
individuals.

Blockade, but No Blockade

In what amounted to a full news conference on Air Force One, the President said
that sanctions were already hurting Iraq but that they could ''be tightened even
more.''

Then he in effect proclaimed a blockade while saying he was not doing so, with
the words, ''I would advise Iraqi ships not to go out with oil.'' Mr. Bush
declared that he would say no more ''because there are a lot of things going on
right now that I don't feel like commenting on.''

In Brussels, Mr. Baker said that with ships of many nations taking part, someone
would have to act as ''a traffic cop'' to avoid confusion. At the United
Nations, there was disagreement as to whether a blockade had been authorized
under Chapter 7 of the organization's Charter when the Security Council voted on
Monday to impose economic sanctions, or whether a new vote was needed.

As for the President's plans, Mr. Bush said he would not be held hostage in the
White House by the current crisis - an obvious allusion to Jimmy Carter's
experience as President when Iran held American hostages for 444 days, releasing
the final 52 only as Ronald Reagan was being inaugurated. Mr. Bush, defending
his intention to take a 25-day vacation in Kennebunkport, said, ''I think the
American people want to see life go on so long as they understand that their
President and his top officials are on top of a troubled situation.''

'Peaceful Resolution' Seen

In his letter to Congressional leaders, sent in lieu of formal notification
under the disputed Vietnam-era War Powers Act, Mr. Bush said: ''I do not believe
involvement in hostilities is imminent; to the contrary, it is my belief that
this deployment will facilitate a peaceful resolution of the crisis.''

He also pledged that ''our armed forces will remain so long as their presence is
required to contribute to the security of the region'' - a period that some
experts think could last for years.

The Administration continued to avoid using the word ''hostages'' to describe
the Americans trapped in the Middle East. Mr. Baker explained the hesitancy by
saying, ''Nothing has been asked or demanded for their freedom, so we are not
calling them hostages.'' Marlin Fitzwater, the White House spokesman, said, ''We
are told they are being treated decently.''

Evaluating the prospects of winning freedom for the 3,500 Americans, Mr. Bush
commented: ''We're not hopeless. But as we've seen with hostage situations - and
I don't think this is one - sometimes it's very difficult.''

American troop strength in the region continued to increase today, with some
units being transported to the peninsula in airliners chartered from Eastern
Airlines and other carriers. Considerable numbers of airplanes, including C-130
transports from Pope Air Force Base, N. C., and F-16 jet fighters from Shaw Air
Force Base, S. C., arrived in the last 24 hours.

Elements of the 24th Mechanized Infantry Division, based at Fort Stewart, Ga.,
moved by road today to the port of Savannah, the Army announced, to be loaded
aboard a troopship, the Capella, for the trip to Saudi Arabia.

The Pentagon said the hospital ship Comfort, now berthed in Baltimore, and the
hospital ship Mercy, docked in Oakland, Calif., were being prepared for active
duty in the Persian Gulf. Both are relatively new and can accommodate
battle-related surgery in air-conditioned operating theaters.

More than 35 major United States ships, including three aircraft carriers, are
already in the Persian Gulf, the Indian Ocean, the Mediterranean Sea and the Red
Sea, or on the way. Britain, France and the Soviet Union already have ships
there as well.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              148 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 11, 1990, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Political Rivals Jockey in Phnom Penh

BYLINE: By STEVEN ERLANGER, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 4, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 898 words

DATELINE: PHNOM PENH, Cambodia, Aug. 6


Asked several months ago about the position of Hun Sen, the young and highly
visible Cambodian Prime Minister and Foreign Minister, a Cambodian official
smiled broadly. ''Don't forget Hun Sen is only No. 3 in the party,'' he said.
''Chea Sim is No. 2.''

After a series of arrests, shuffles and realignments, the influence of Mr. Chea
Sim, 20 years older than Mr. Hun Sen and president of the National Assembly, is
more apparent.

Some of Mr. Hun Sen's closest, most pragmatic and non-ideological allies have
been ousted or pushed aside, replaced by people regarded as aligned, beholden or
related to Mr. Chea Sim, who is 58 years old.

Mr. Chea Sim, born in Svey Rieng Province bordering Vietnam, is said to have
started ''united front work'' against French colonial power in the late 1940's
and 1950's, becoming a fighter in 1952, at 20.

His 'Greatest Political Age'

Stephen Heder, a Cambodian scholar studying the backgrounds of the leadership,
says Mr. Chea Sim, having been a Communist for some 40 years, is revered as
having ''the greatest political age of them all.''

Having fought with the Khmer Rouge against the Lon Nol Government, Mr. Chea Sim
was a district secretary in Prey Veng after 1975. He fled to bordering Vietnam
sometime after May 1978, said Mr. Heder, who is on leave from Amnesty
International.

Like Mr. Hun Sen and the country's President and party General Secretary, Heng
Samrin, Mr. Chea Sim is thought to have ''very little blood on his hands,'' Mr.
Heder said. This Government's first Interior Minister, Mr. Chea Sim retains
close ties to the ministry.

A Buddhist monk when young, Mr. Chea Sim is regarded as most responsible for the
open revival of Buddhism here, and is said to have favored the general
liberalization of economic and social life that ran against the tenets of
orthodox socialism.

He is described as a traditionalist and ultranationalist, deeply suspicious of
too much Western, Thai or Vietnamese influence. Those around Mr. Heng Samrin,
first installed by the Vietnamese and regarded now as something of a balancer
and figurehead, are said to be closer to Hanoi. Like those around Mr. Chea Sim,
they are said to be worried about losing their jobs in any Cambodian settlement
and have insisted that there be no dismantling of the current administration.

Hun Sen 'Chastened'

''They like Hun Sen and know they need him,'' a senior East European diplomat
said. ''But this is a collective Government, and I think the others thought Hun
Sen was getting a swelled head. I think he's been chastened now.''

Cambodian officials and diplomats also suggest that Mr. Hun Sen's efforts to woo
Prince Norodom Sihanouk back home and improve relations with Thailand and the
West as he tried to negotiate a favorable peace were not paying off. The belated
shift in American policy away from the Khmer Rouge may help Mr. Hun Sen, but has
not yet altered this view.

Perhaps most important, the officials said, was a badly organized effort to form
a second party by the former Transport and Communications Minister, Ung Phan,
who was put under house arrest in late May, when Mr. Hun Sen was in Vietnam. The
two men are said to be ''as close as two fingers,'' and it is suggested that Mr.
Hun Sen was aware of Mr. Ung Phan's plans.

Mr. Chea Sim and Mr. Heng Samrin ordered the house arrest of Mr. Ung Phan and
five others, including Kan Man, the deputy director of the European and American
bureau of the Foreign Ministry.

In late June, the state press agency called the affair a ''coup plot'' financed
by ''foreign espionage circles,'' but that explanation has been officially
discarded since.

Bad Timing Is Seen

The officials, some of whom say Mr. Ung Phan was corrupt, argue that his plans
to announce his Liberal Social Democratic Party were spectacularly mistimed.
They say he scheduled a demonstration for June 4, the start of peace talks in
Tokyo among the Cambodian factions and also the anniversary of the killings in
Beijing.

Senior diplomats say this story is plausible, but cannot be confirmed. They do
suggest that after the Tokyo talks, however, Mr. Hun Sen made another error.
Announcing the Government's candidates for a Supreme National Council to
represent Cambodia's sovereignty in any peace settlement, he did not consult Mr.
Chea Sim and Mr. Heng Samrin, the diplomats say, and included only one ally of
Mr. Chea Sim's, the Interior Minister, Sin Song.

Soon after, another friend of Mr. Hun Sen, Khieu Kanharith, an outspoken editor
of the semiofficial weekly Kampuchea, was dismissed. He was replaced by Keo
Prasath, a former Ambassador to Moscow. Mr. Ung Phan's replacement was named:
Ros Chhun, secretary general of a citizen's front run by Mr. Chea Sim, his
uncle.

Another ally of Mr. Chea Sim, Sar Keang, who is an alternate Politburo member,
has replaced Men Saman, a moderate who had been the only woman on the Politburo.
She has been appointed head of the Federation of Trade Unions, a not very
important post in this poor, agricultural country.

As for Mr. Hun Sen, he has been unavailable to the press lately. Mr. Chea Sim
does not see Western journalists.

Paradoxically, however, a senior East European diplomat said he thought that the
Government was more united and stronger than before, in large part because ''the
lesson to Hun Sen was administered cleanly, and with no real cruelty.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              149 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 11, 1990, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

CONFRONTATION THE GULF;
In Multinational Force, Pride Can Get in the Way

BYLINE: By MALCOLM W. BROWNE

SECTION: Section 1; Page 9, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 793 words


As the United States prepares for the active participation of military allies in
its confrontation with Iraq, experts predict that the command and control of
multinational forces will pose staggering problems.

Officers of American units being dispatched to Saudi Arabia are already on the
ground there, and with the promised arrival of units from other Arab countries
as well, military experts assume that coordination difficulties will
proliferate.

According to Western military officials with long experience in the Persian
Gulf, multinational military coordination might eventually become one of
Washington's most serious problems as it attempts to stimulate military
cooperation among friendly forces against a common potential enemy.

''United States military advisers have been working in Saudi Arabia since
1949,'' a former senior official said. ''And the relations between American
advisers and Saudi officers over the years have created headaches you wouldn't
believe. At times, the Americans were almost tearing their hair out through
frustration. With U.S. personnel now swarming into Saudi Arabia as full-fledged
combatants rather than merely as advisers, the potential for trouble has
increased manyfold.''

National pride is an important component of the problem.

Tensions Over Command

''It is certain that the Saudis would never accept an American commander of a
joint American-Saudi force,'' an American official formerly stationed in Saudi
Arabia said. ''It is equally certain that the Americans would not accept a Saudi
in that role.''

Now that a multinational force will include other Arab nations, like Morocco,
Egypt, and Syria, each with their own longstanding frictions with the Saudis and
one another, the problem is expected to become far worse.

''It would take the skills of a T. E. Lawrence to get these guys to act in
concert,'' an analyst said. ''And I haven't noticed any Lawrences in the
corridors of the Pentagon.''

Thomas Edward Lawrence, celebrated by his admirers as Lawrence of Arabia, was a
British agent and guerrilla warfare specialist who helped to organize a
successful Arab uprising against the Ottoman Empire during World War I. His
successes in holding rival Arab forces together in joint military actions were
based on his intimate knowledge of tribal customs, language and sensitivities.

Islamic Law and Western Troops

Troublesome incidents involving American military advisers and Saudi authorities
have occurred in the past. Islamic law, rigidly enforced in Saudi Arabia,
prohibits possession or consumption of alcohol or pornography (including
magazines that many Americans would consider merely racy) and bans the defiling
of mosques and holy places. Tourists and other visitors have been accused of
desecrating Islamic holy places.

American military commissary stores and post exchanges traditionally have
stocked many items forbidden in Saudi Arabia.

Another possible source of trouble has to do with women. Saudis strongly
disapprove of unmarried women and men associating with each other in public. But
the Pentagon acknowledged on Thursday that some American servicewomen were among
the United States forces on the ground in Saudi Arabia.

The Arabian American Oil Company and other Western businesses in Saudi Arabia
have usually housed employees in comfortable compounds sufficiently segregated
from the Saudi environment to avoid cultural clashes. American servicemen and
servicewomen will also live in segregated compounds. But if and when the
American presence in Saudi Arabia reaches 50,000, some contact with the local
population is inevitable.

Command and coordination of multinational forces have posed problems for
American leaders throughout history. During World War II, rivalry between the
American and British commanders, Gen. Dwight D. Eisenhower and Field Marshal
Bernard L. Montgomery, led to disagreements. In Vietnam, relations were always
uneasy between the Saigon Government's commanders and Americans sent initially
as advisers and later as combatants.

Some analysts cite the United Nations Command in Korea in 1950-53 as a fairly
successful example of cooperation among the armed forces of many nations. Even
the mutually hostile Greek and Turkish military missions were coordinated by the
supreme American commander.

But other experts note that the predominantly European nations that fought in
Korea as adjuncts of United States forces, who bore the brunt of combat after
1950, shared cultural, political and military traditions, whereas the
multinational force being assembled against Iraq is far more diverse. They say
that organizing a joint multinational command that includes the United States as
a senior partner will prove extremely difficult.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Fifteen U.S. vessels, among them the aircraft carrier
Independence, seen here arriving in Arabian Sea, are now in the gulf or near its
entrance. (Associated Press)

TYPE: Military Analysis

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              150 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 11, 1990, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Equity Plans to Meet on Thursday

BYLINE: By MERVYN ROTHSTEIN

SECTION: Section 1; Page 16, Column 4; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 491 words


Actors' Equity announced yesterday that it would meet on Thursday to re-evaluate
its decision not to let the English actor Jonathan Pryce appear on Broadway in
''Miss Saigon,'' the hit musical in which he is starring in London. In rejecting
Mr. Pryce, Equity had said it could not ''appear to condone the casting of a
Caucasian in the role of a Eurasian.''

The actors union called the meeting of its council in response to petitions from
more than 150 of its members asking that the decision be reconsidered. An Equity
spokesman said yesterday that the number of signatures on the petitions
continued to grow.

The show's producer, Cameron Mackintosh, announced on Wednesday that he was
canceling the Broadway production, saying that Equity had no legal basis to bar
Mr. Pryce. But after hearing of the petitions, Mr. Mackintosh said on Thursday
that ''if there was a complete about-face by Equity, under the pressure of their
own membership, which changed the atmosphere, I would be happy to discuss the
situation with anybody.''

Colleen Dewhurst, Equity's president, discussed the issue yesterday with Mayor
David N. Dinkins, who had offered to help. Equity said yesterday that Ms.
Dewhurst and Alan Eisenberg, the union's executive secretary, ''will be
continuing a dialogue with the Mayor.''

Two Records

The show, about an American soldier and his Vietnamese girlfriend during and
after the Vietnam War, was budgeted at $10 million, which would have made it the
most expensive production in Broadway history, and had an advance ticket sale of
more than $25 million, also a record. It was scheduled to begin performances in
March at the Broadway Theater with a cast of 50, including 34 roles for ethnic
minority actors. The role that Mr. Pryce plays is that of the Engineer, a
Eurasian who runs a bar and brothel in Saigon during the closing days of the
war.

Mr. Mackintosh, in announcing cancellation of the show on Wednesday, said that
the only contractual issue the union had the right to consider was whether Mr.
Pryce was a star, and that it had previously certified the actor as one. Mr.
Eisenberg said the union had not dealt with the issue of stardom but had made a
''moral decision'' to try to create equal casting opportunities for its minority
members. The dispute began when Equity received letters from B. D. Wong, an
Asian-American actor who won a Tony Award for best supporting actor in ''M.
Butterfly,'' and David Henry Hwang, the author of that play, complaining about
the casting of Mr. Pryce in the role of a Eurasian.

An Equity spokesman said the union had received many letters and phone calls
opposing its rejection of Mr. Pryce. The Anti-Defamation League of B'nai B'rith,
in a letter to Ms. Dewhurst, called the decision ill advised and urged the union
to reconsider, saying Equity's insistence that the role be played by an Asian
''diminishes artistic freedom and the creativity of individual actors.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              151 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 11, 1990, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Getting Behind 'Desert Shield'

SECTION: Section 1; Page 24, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 471 words


In a wise change of course, the Bush Administration has prevailed upon Saudi
Arabia to permit firsthand coverage of the U.S. troop deployment by American
journalists. Beginning this weekend, a pool of representative reporters will be
admitted.

The pity is that the decision came so late, suggesting that the Pentagon has yet
to learn from its mistakes in limiting coverage of the Grenada and Panama
invasions.

The deployment in Saudi Arabia puts the lives of thousands of troops in peril
for months, if not years. Costly in dollar terms and risky in diplomatic terms,
''Desert Shield'' requires public support. Only credible information can assure
that support in a region now boiling with Iraqi cries for a holy war against
American forces.

Initially, the Defense Department appeared to bow to a Saudi refusal to permit
American reporters. Dismay was heightened by President Bush's careless statement
that ''There's plenty of reporters in Saudi Arabia,'' when he would have been
hard pressed to name one such American.

In reversing course, the Pentagon has begun to abide by its own rules. Aiding
the Saudis does not require adopting the values of a closed society - and that
point should never have been left in doubt. In any military operation,
journalists are surrogates. Their independent accounts are the indispensable
corrective to official smoke. Police states like Iraq can invade in stealth and
occupy in secrecy. But American experience attests that without public
understanding and approval, no sustained military venture can succeed.

This argument was supposed to have been settled in 1983, after the justifiable
uproar over the exclusion of journalists from the invasion of Grenada. A special
panel made recommendations and the Government endorsed them. A news media pool
was established, subject to crisis call and pledged to maintain secrecy.

The Pentagon press pool was indeed activated, and on one occasion its members
were flown to the Persian Gulf. But the system buckled in the Panama invasion
last year. Journalists were not given access to the operation until after U.S.
forces had landed and the battle was well under way. The public was kept
informed only because of the fortuitous presence of reporters already in Panama.

The Pentagon's hostility to journalists stems partly from resentment over
critical coverage in Vietnam, and partly from concern for secrecy. But the media
pool was devised to meet security concerns. To blame the messenger for a bad war
misreads the lessons of Vietnam. If Saudi Arabia needs the protection of
American troops, Americans need the protection of free information.

Freedom of the press does not exist for the press but for the people. Upholding
that principle is every bit as vital as sending ships, planes and combat troops
to an endangered Saudi Arabia.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              152 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 11, 1990, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

CHRONICLE

BYLINE: By SUSAN HELLER ANDERSON

SECTION: Section 1; Page 29, Column 1; Style Desk

LENGTH: 114 words


The 10th annual New York City Triathlon tomorrow is being sponsored by a man who
will compete himself in the 25-mile swimming, bicycling and running race. The
sponsor, ROBERT F. X. SILLERMAN, has raised nearly $200,000 from individuals and
businesses for his own participation; he says he is donating the money to a
program to help for Vietnam veterans who suffer from post-traumatic stress
disorder.

Mr. Sillerman is the chief executive of the Sillerman Companies, which own
broadcasting properties. The program for the veterans is being conducted in
Northampton, Mass., where Mr. Sillerman owns two radio stations.

He has competed in two triathlons. ''I lived,'' he said dryly.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              153 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 12, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

CONFRONTATION IN THE GULF;
Poll on Troop Move Shows Support (and Anxiety)

BYLINE: By MICHAEL ORESKES

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 13, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1147 words


Americans rallied around President Bush after he ordered military forces to the
Persian Gulf, but the public's support is tempered by an undercurrent of anxiety
and skepticism of the sort that has hampered American efforts to project power
in the world since Vietnam, according to a poll by The New York Times.

Americans who expected a long war, for example, were far less likely to support
sending troops than were those who thought a long war unlikely.

In general, the public was divided over whether the United States would end up
fighting Iraq. Half expected a bloodless resolution to the confrontation, but a
third said they expected fighting. The rest said they did not know what to
expect.

Showing the same support that the population typically has of presidents at the
start of past foreign crises, 74 percent of Americans said they approved of the
way Mr. Bush was dealing with Iraq's invasion of Kuwait.

Contrasting Historical Views

But reservations were close to the surface among the 670 people interviewed by
telephone on Thursday and Friday. While 6 out of 10 accepted Mr. Bush's
comparison of President Saddam Hussein of Iraq to Hitler, 4 out of 10, in
answering a separate question, said they agreed with a different historical
parallel: that getting involved in the Middle East is a lot like getting
involved in Vietnam in the 1960's.

Americans conceded in the Times poll, which had a margin of sampling error of
plus or minus four percentage points, that they had known little about Iraq and
Kuwait just two weeks ago. Only a quarter of those surveyed correctly identified
the government of Saudi Arabia as a monarchy.

Celinda Lake, a Democratic poll taker, said that as recently as last Monday
people she interviewed were having trouble grasping that the confrontation was
with Iraq, not Iran.

It has become axiomatic, particularly since America's failure in Vietnam, that
the outcome military efforts is heavily dependent on the reaction of the public.

The movement of United States troops to Saudi Arabia, America's first important
post-cold war military action outside the hemisphere, will be a test of
President Bush's ability to hold the support of a public that has been turning
increasingly homeward since the collapse of Communism. Indeed, before Iraqi
tanks rolled into Kuwait 10 days ago, some political analysts had even begun
using terms like ''neo isolationist'' to describe emerging American attitudes.

General Fear of Entanglements

Given the public's lack of knowledge about the details of the conflict, the
poll's findings suggest that the uneasiness is more an expression of general
fear of foreign entanglements than of opposition to the specific actions in the
Persian Gulf.

Support for the American intervention was strongest among the best educated,
those with the highest incomes and those who had been following the news from
the area most closely. It was weakest among women, blacks, those with lower
incomes and less education, and those paying least attention.

A similiar pattern has been noted by historians studying the early stages of the
Vietnam War. The well-educated and well-informed tended to support President
Lyndon B. Johnson's initial commitments, while the less-educated and
less-informed, many more of whom were being called upon to fight, tended to be
more opposed. It was only later, when opinion leaders became divided, that a
sense of disunity enveloped the nation.

Politicians around the country last week were already noticing the double edge
of public opinion about the Persian Gulf.

''It is not a clear message,'' said Senator Paul Simon, Democrat of Illinois.
''The majority say, 'Let's stand up to this guy,' '' referring to the Mr.
Hussein.

Mr. Simon, who is campaigning for re-election, said he shares this view, but
added: ''There is a second wave of public opinion which says, 'Don't let
American troops get involved there.' There are two different threads of public
opinion. Vietnam is still a part of our heritage. There are those who say,
'Let's not get involved.' ''

A Consistent Apprehension

Through a series of questions, a remarkably consistent 4 out of 10 Americans in
the poll expressed reservations about the American intervention.

Even though President Bush emphasized that he had exhausted other options, 4 in
10 Americans said he was too quick to send troops.

Even though Mr. Bush addressed the nation and held a news conference on
Wednesday, the day before the survey began, 4 in 10 also said he had not clearly
explained why United States troops were sent.

And even though the President said the nation's vital interests were at stake, 4
in 10 again said that American intervention just helped to protect the profits
of the big oil companies.

Different people expressed different reservations, so all told, two thirds of
those surveyed agreed with at least one of those negative sentiments.

Support for the President

But Americans are not translating this undercurrent of concern into overall
disapproval. Political scientists have long noted a ''rally-round-the-flag''
phenomenon, in which trouble overseas, from the Cuban missle crisis to the
invasion of Panama, is followed by a temporary jump in a President's standing.

In keeping with that, President Bush's action in the Persian Gulf appears to
have reversed a slide in his approval ratings that had been under way for a
number of weeks and was being accelerated by increasing public awareness of
economic deterioration.

In the latest poll, 72 percent said they approved of how Mr. Bush was handling
his job and 19 percent said they disapproved.

Mr. Bush's approval rating was up from 60 percent in a Gallup Poll conducted
July 19-22, after Mr. Bush abandoned his ''no new taxes'' pledge.

The jump in Mr. Bush's approval was measurable even in the course of the week. A
poll by CBS News on Tuesday and Wednesday, just as he announced American
military intervention, found 66 percent approved the way he was handling the
Presidency and 22 percent disapproved.

Political Implications

The number of Americans who say they were paying close attention to the Persian
Gulf situation has, not surprisingly, increased sharply in the past week, from
18 percent in a Gallup Poll last weekend, shortly after the Iraqi invasion, to
28 percent in the CBS News poll at midweek, to 37 percent by the end of the week
in the New York Times Poll.

Since those who said they paid more attention tended to be the most supportive
of American involvement, the increasing number of Amerians now following the
developments will provide Mr. Bush with a chance to consolidate support in the
days ahead.

On an issue related to the Persian Gulf crisis there was widespread agreement in
the poll. Seven out of ten Americans said the upsurge in oil prices came because
the oil companies were basically greedy.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              154 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 12, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

One Sign of Our Times: World's Refugee Flood

BYLINE: By HENRY KAMM, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 16, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1760 words

DATELINE: GENEVA


Fifteen million men, women and children are biding their time outside their
countries, often in great deprivation, internationally recognized as refugees.

Officials concerned with the problems of uprooted people believe these refugees
to be only part of one of the overriding problems of this age.

Thorvald Stoltenberg, the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, sees
those who have been granted refugee status as the formally acknowledged segment
of a worldwide mass movement of the deprived toward more prosperous regions.

Official and nonofficial specialists the world over share his perception.

Asylum Requests Grow Swiftly

Increasingly, such newcomers seek the protection of refugee status to legitimize
their stay, despite efforts by governments to limit asylum requests.

Applications to Europe, the United States and Canada, the traditional
asylum-granting regions, have risen from 25,000 in 1973 to 600,000 this year,
according to estimates. That does not include migrants living short of legality
in parts of the world.

The situation now is similar in ways to the great refugee upheavals of World War
II. John A. Scanlan, an Indiana University Law School professor who is an
authority on the subject, said that a State Department report in June 1945
estimated the total of refugees at 33 million to 43 million. He said that by the
end of 1948, the total had dropped more than half, to somewhere between 16
million and 18 million.

In recent years, countries have used various measures to thwart applications for
asylum, like the United States policy of turning back Haitian boat people while
they are still at sea.

Roger P. Winter, director of the United States Committee for Refugees, said in
an interview in Washington that of 22,000 Haitians intercepted by the Coast
Guard since 1981, only 6 had been allowed to proceed to port.

Officials of the High Commissioner's agency said that immigration officials in
Western Europe often search airliners before allowing passengers to get off, and
turn back potential asylum seekers before they can apply. Sometimes, the
officials go to countries likely to produce refugees and sit next to airline
employees at check-in counters to deny boarding passes to people suspected of
wanting asylum. Who Is a True Refugee? The stream of migrants is blurring
established definitions of who is a refugee and casts suspicion over the motives
of those who claim asylum to escape violence or persecution in their own
countries.

Mr. Stoltenberg said such suspiciousness was wrong because morally the
motivation of people fleeing poverty was equally valid.

''The problem is poverty,'' said Mr. Stoltenberg, who is 59 years old and a
former Minister of Defense and Foreign Affair in Norway as well as a longtime
leader of the Labor Party. ''The majority of the world live in deep poverty.

''People will say: 'Why should this happen now? After all, we have had poverty
since historic times.' They forget that we have had two revolutions.

''First, there is the information revolution. People now, even if they are very
poor, know how people live in other parts of the world.

''The other is the transport revolution. It is much easier than before to be
transported over long distances. We cannot hide away anymore. You can't hide
away from the world.''

Boat People Symbolize Plight

Throughout a 90-minute interview at his agency's headquarters, the High
Commissioner singled out the controversy over the plight of Vietnamese boat
people in Hong Kong as characterizing the complexities of the problem.

It encapsulates the grave questions posed by the mass movements, and illustrates
the divisions provoked among those who receive appeals for asylum and the
dilemma confronted by those who are entrusted with the care of the uprooted.

''The Hong Kong situation is a symbol of what might face us all over the
world,'' Mr. Stoltenberg said.

About 55,000 Vietnamese are confined in camps intentionally kept at minimum
survival level by the British colonial authorities to deter further arrivals.
''People are living on shelves,'' said the High Commissioner.

In a screening started by Britain in 1988, which broke its 13-year pattern of
automatically granting refugee status to fleeing Vietnamese, most boat people
have been labeled ''economic migrants,'' meaning they fled not persecution but
poverty.

Forcible Repatriation

Under an agreement reached by all concerned countries under the High
Commissioner's auspices last year, those ''screened out'' are to be returned to
Vietnam.

That assent by the organization charged with being the advocate for refugees has
provoked internal debate in the agency and nongovernmental refugee
organizations. If voluntary returns do not resolve the problem, forcible
repatriation, for which no date was set, was implictly agreed to.

About 4,000 Vietnamese have gone back of their free will and 51 were deported in
November. Forced returns were then suspended because Vietnam and the United
States, in rare agreement, raised strenuous objections.

The issue has led to intense controversy, as Britain and the Southeast Asian
nations that are the refugee boats' first ports of call demand forced return.

Malaysia, Thailand and other countries of ''first asylum'' have pushed most new
refugee boats back out to sea. They and Britain demand that the United States
either accept for asylum all Vietnamese refugees or drop its opposition to
forcible return.

Political Refugees Favored

''The usual principle is that those who are political refugees get asylum, those
who are not have to go back,'' the High Commissioner said.

Outlining the controversy over whether that should apply in Hong Kong, he
continued: ''I try to get consensus, because if I don't manage that, the
alternative is rather gloomy. It will be breakdown of 'first asylum,' and it
would mean drowning of tens, hundreds, maybe more people.''

The High Commissioner said that his organization was formally responsible only
for those who are granted refugee status. ''But at the same time, I do fully
respect those who flee their countries because of poverty, because it may be
more dangerous to go back to poverty than to political persecution,'' he said.

Nonetheless, he said, to safeguard the possibility of finding asylum for
refugees, repatriation is necessary. He said his office monitored the safety of
those who had returned and provided economic assistance to the communities from
which they had come to stimulate people not to leave.

'Psychologically Filled Up'

That is outside his agency's formal mandate, he said, but if there is no
repatriation of migrants declared illegal, the world's readiness to grant asylum
to recognized political refugees would break down. He said potential asylum
countries were not necessarily ''physically filled up but psychologically filled
up.''

Refugee officials and representatives of nongovernmental organizations devoted
to the problem agree with the High Commissioner's view that the sense of being
''filled up'' has led to increasing restriction on the part of Western
Governments. ''Most governments feel they are on the verge of losing control,''
Mr. Stoltenberg said. ''I definitely fear a Fortress Europe.'' Dennis McNamara,
until recently deputy director of the High Commissioner's International
Protection Division, wrote in an article soon to be published in Refugees, the
agency's monthly, that in seeking to limit the flow of potential asylum-seekers,
Governments have introduced measures that ''often ignore the crucial distinction
between refugees or asylum-seekers and ordinary migrants'' and endanger the
principle of refugee protection.

He listed strict advance visa requirements and heavy penalties for airlines that
transport people without evidence of approved entry at their destinations. As an
example, Mr. McNamara said such practices had greatly curtailed the movement to
Europe of Tamils seeking refuge from the civil war in Sri Lanka.

Aftermath of World War II

Emphasizing that the number of present and potential uprooted people far
exceeded the 15 million under his care, the High Commissioner said that even the
15 million for the most part no longer fit the definition on which his
organization's mandate, dating to 1951 and expanded in 1967, is based.

It was intended to fit the refugees of the aftermath of World War II and the
subsequent takeover of Eastern and Central Europe by the Soviet Union.

''In 1951, there was a limited group of people that needed to be helped, and
they all came from the same environment,'' he said, noting their largely
European background that fitted them readily into Western countries of asylum.
''It was relatively easy to be nice and kind. Today, it is a global issue.''

Much of the emphasis in the High Commissioner's tasks has shifted to assuring
temporary asylum and feeding and housing vast groups more than protecting
individual rights and helping refugees to find resettlement.

''There are millions outside their countries without prospect, hope or desire
for a resettlement,'' said Court Robinson of the United States committee. ''They
are offered no prospect of resettlement and none of going home.''

The biggest group, even allowing for what is believed to be inflated numbers,
consists of 3.2 million Afghans in Pakistan and 2.3 million in Iran. #4.4
Million African Refugees Civil strife has produced 4.4 million refugees in
Africa. The largest single group is 820,000 from Mozambique who have found
asylum in Malawi, one of the world's poorest nations.

Mr. Stoltenberg said the Horn of Africa, which he considers the most intractable
problem region, showed ''the trends of our time.'' He said, ''We don't have wars
between states any longer, but we have 38 wars within states.''

As a result, 685,000 Ethiopians are reported to have taken refuge in Sudan,
384,000 Sudanese and 324,000 Somalians in Ethiopia, and 600,000 Ethiopians in
Somalia. Most of those figures are widely held to be exaggerated.

About a million refugees have been resettled in the United States, 447,000 in
Canada and 822,000 in Europe. Those statistics do not include people who have
become citizens of their new countries or asylum-seekers. In Latin America, 1.2
million have been resettled.

''I am convinced that we will have a future with much more movement of people,''
the High Commissioner said. ''There is no doubt. That is a part of the future
that we have shaped. My worry is that we will not be able to cope with those who
flee from poverty.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH



GRAPHIC: High Commissioner for Refugees, sees those who have been granted
refugee status as the formally acknowledged segment of a mass movement of the
deprived toward more prosperous regions. (Associated Press)
Photos: Of the 15 million people worldwide who are recognized as refugees by the
United Nations, about 55,000 are Vietnamese boat people confined by the British
authorities in subsistence-level camps in Hong Kong. A boatful of refugees
arrived in Hong Kong last month. (Associated Press); Thorvald Stoltenberg, the
U.N.

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              155 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 12, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

HOME ENTERTAINMENT/VIDEO: NEW VIDEO RELEASES

SECTION: Section 2; Page 26, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 584 words



Born on the Fourth of July
1989. MCA/Universal. $91.95. Laser disk, $39.98. 2 hours, 25 minutes. Closed
captioned. R.

A gung-ho marine when he's sent to Vietnam, Ron Kovic (Tom Cruise) returns a
paraplegic and undergoes a radicalization that turns him into an implacable
spokesman for Vietnam Veterans Against the War. Oliver Stone's film, based on
Mr. Kovic's book, possesses ''enormous visceral power . . . stunning when it is
most specific,'' as on the battlefield, in rat-infested veterans hospitals or in
the Kovic household on Long Island where his well-meaning but bewildered family
is unable to cope with their son's rage. ''As much as anything, Ron Kovic's
story is about the vanishing of one man's American frontier.'' (Vincent Canby)

Blue Steel
1990. MGM/UA. $89.98. LD: $24.98. 1:42. CC. R.

Kathryn Bigelow's good-looking thriller pairs Megan Turner (Jamie Lee Curtis),
an eager and smart police rookie, with Eugene Hunt (Ron Silver), a high-gloss
yuppie and gun fetishist with a murderous streak. Their attraction to and
subsequent stalking of each other strain credulity, but Ms. Curtis ''makes Megan
so appealing that the film holds together even when it has no reason to.''
(Janet Maslin)

Revenge
1990. RCA/Columbia. $89.95. LD: $39.95. 2:03. CC. R.

Jay Cochran (Kevin Costner) and Miryea (Madeleine Stowe) are lovers, to the
annoyance of her husband Tiburon (Anthony Quinn), a Mexican mover and shaker who
usually has people assassinated but in this instance has Miryea's face slashed
and Jay beaten to a pulp. Despite the brutality, Tony Scott's film is ''soft and
aimless . . . too prettily photographed'' with performances that lack
conviction. ''Mr. Costner and Miss Stowe look right, but they never appear to
connect, even when one is atop the other.'' (Canby)

Joe Versus the Volcano
1990. Warner. $92.95. LD: $24.98. 1:42. CC. PG.
For his first directorial effort, the writer John Patrick Shanley, who also
rendered the screenplay, marshals a fine cast - Tom Hanks, Meg Ryan, Amanda
Plummer, Lloyd Bridges - and indulges in ''comic fantasies that are consistently
small ones.'' In return for six weeks of high living, Joe (Mr. Hanks) agrees to
jump into a volcano. ''Not since 'Howard the Duck' has there been a big-budget
comedy with feet as flat.'' (Canby)

Hanussen
1989. RCA/Columbia. $79.95. 2:20. R. In German with English subtitles.

A Hungarian psychic (Klaus Maria Brandauer) foresees a future that includes the
rise of the Nazis. With the 20's and 30's portrayed as perilous times for
psychics, how does one live with such an explosive piece of information? Istvan
Szabo's film is ''thick with period costumes and thin on coherence and
character. . . . Mr. Brandauer's performance consists of smiling a lot and
looking gallant in his misery. It's not easy knowing it all.'' (Canby)

Flashback
1990. Paramount. No price listed. LD: $34.95. 1:48. CC. R.

What begins as an engaging comedy ends up ''woozy and sort of distraught.''
Dennis Hopper gives a ''secure, richly comic'' performance as a 60's
counter-culture holdover who emerges from 20 years underground to face charges
that he once disconnected Spiro Agnew's private car from a campaign train.
Kiefer Sutherland is almost as good as an uptight agent of the Federal Bureau of
Investigation. The two make a fine movie up to the last 30 minutes when ''people
start telling the truth, real guns are fired and the farce collapses.'' (Canby)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              156 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 12, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

The Editorial Notebook;
Vietnam's Golden Opportunity

BYLINE:  By David C. Unger

SECTION: Section 4; Page 20, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 541 words


Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam Vietnam's Communist leaders now have the long-awaited
chance to open their country to a brighter economic future. But that will
require them to move away from dogmatic foreign policy positions of the past.
Thanks to Vietnam's withdrawal of its occupation army from Cambodia and
Secretary of State Baker's new diplomatic initiative to prevent a Khmer Rouge
victory there, direct talks are now under way. The path toward better relations
between the United States and Vietnam is now clearer than at any time since
1975.

The big question is how much flexibility Vietnam will show in response. By
agreeing to pragmatic compromises on election procedures for Cambodia, Hanoi
could move the discussion forward to include working out an early end to the
U.S. economic embargo against Vietnam and normalizing relations.

A week of talks with Government and Communist Party officials, including Foreign
Minister Nguyen Co Thach, persuaded me that some Vietnamese leaders understand
just what kind of response is needed from them. But it remains to be seen
whether these more visionary leaders have a mandate to proceed, given recent
intra-party battles linked to leadership succession and the upheaval in Eastern
Europe.

The pivotal issue remains Vietnam's terms for a political settlement for
Cambodia. But Washington is no longer in the impossible position of asking Hanoi
to accept a transitional role for the murderous Khmer Rouge. What Hanoi is now
asked to accept is neutrally conducted elections, with at least the possibility
of a defeat of the present pro-Vietnamese administration led by Prime Minister
Hun Sen. The Hun Sen Government has already agreed to neutral supervision of
elections, but still claims a right to organize the voting. Washington is
looking for Hanoi's help in getting Phnom Penh to change its mind.

Vietnam is reluctant to be seen twisting its Cambodian ally's arms. But its own
reasonable security interests are limited to avoiding a Khmer Rouge triumph, not
to guaranteeing the perpetuation of the Hun Sen regime. By using its influence
to produce a compromise settlement, Hanoi can both help marginalize the Khmer
Rouge and open the door for its own economic revival.

Fifteen years of Western economic pressure have kept Vietnam impoverished - even
while its Southeast Asian neighbors have enjoyed a spectacular economic boom.
Until 1986, Vietnam's own rigidly Marxist economic policies compounded the
damage. But recent years have brought a sweeping economic reform, which has
begun to interest investors from Japan and the European Community.

An end to the U.S. economic embargo could produce a major breakthrough, and
facilitate Vietnam's access to loans from the international development banks.
The collapse of Communism in Eastern Europe is forcibly weaning Vietnam from its
trade and aid relationships of recent decades. The same events have fueled a
sharp debate within the Communist hierarchy over the desirability of wider
external relations and internal political reform.

For Vietnam's battle-hardened Communists, to open up to change is to risk the
personal and ideological fruits of victory. Yet to cling to obsolete and
unworkable dogmas could prove more dangerous still.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              157 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 12, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Hers;
A Forgiving Land

BYLINE: By Lady Borton; Lady Borton is writing a book, ''After Sorrow,'' about
Vietnam.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 14, Column 3; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 1272 words


Hands up, American!'' Second Treasure said in Vietnamese. She poked my ribs.
''You're under arrest!''

I lifted my sandals over my head. In the moonlight, the tiger cactuses along the
rice paddy loomed like phantoms with prickly limbs. ''Forward!'' Second Treasure
said, in a teasing voice. Second Treasure was leading me into Ban Long, a
village of 4,000 people in the Mekong delta southwest of Saigon. Throughout the
war, Ban Long had been a Vietcong base. American B-52's had bombed the village,
turning houses into craters, families into corpses. Agent Orange had stripped
the earth of green.

Now, 15 years later, foliage obscured the moon. Milk trees hung heavy with
fruit. Frogs chortled. Frangipani flowers like tiny trumpets broadcast their
insistent perfume. Amazing, I thought: The earth has forgiven us. During the
war, I'd worked in Vietnam with the Quakers as a health administrator. Ten years
later, in 1980, I lived in Malaysia's largest refugee camp for Boat People who'd
fled Vietnam. Now, I wanted to know Vietnamese who had chosen to stay.

''We'll stop at my father's,'' Second Treasure said. She pointed to a wooden
house in a grove of breadfruit trees. I balked. Between me and the house stood a
creek with a ''monkey bridge'' - a single palm trunk. Muddy footprints greased
the palm's bark. ''Dead already,'' I muttered in Vietnamese.

Second Treasure stepped onto the bridge. Her face was open, like a lotus at
midday. She reached for my hand. In the darkness, braced by this former Vietcong
woman, I edged across .

This trip, earlier this year, was my fourth visit to Ban Long since the war. I
remained the only foreign writer whom the Vietnamese allowed to live with
peasants in the countryside. I was watched by the curious villagers. Unbearably
so. I was the circus come to town.

''A giant!'' the kids announced. Wherever I went, they stepped on my heels,
petted my arms. ''She's furry like a monkey!'' ''Look,'' they whispered,
surprised that hair could be curly, ''it's like dead vines.''

''The giant,'' they declared whenever I teetered across a bridge, ''is timid,
like a toddler.''

These children had never seen an American. Even teen-agers couldn't remember the
war. In contrast, during his 80 years, Second Treasure's father had known only
15 years of peace.

I called Second Treasure's father Senior Uncle, the same title the Vietnamese
had given Ho Chi Minh. Uncle was a tiny man with huge hands. He could swing
among the water apple trees, gathering the dimpled fruit as nimbly as his
grandsons. His mind was equally keen. Yet with me Uncle repeated himself, as if
to make up for the years he had missed knowing me.

''Child,'' Uncle said each evening as we rinsed our bowls in the creek, ''always
save rice for tomorrow. Who knows? Tomorrow you may have nothing to eat. Never
drink from the creek. Drink from the rain-water crock under the eaves . . . .''

''Father - - - -''

Second Treasure worried I might find Uncle boring. She hovered, tending me as if
I belonged to an endangered species.

During the war, Second Treasure had commanded 100 Vietcong guerrillas. She would
load her canoe with grenades and rifles, concealing the contraband with leaves.
Then she'd slip along Ban Long's sluices and creeks. Whenever helicopters
appeared, she jumped overboard.

''Always keep two holes above water,'' she said, touching her nostrils.

''We were rats,'' her father said. ''We lived underground, in tunnels. Slept by
day, prowled at night. Our feet knew the way. But we were different from rats.''
He chuckled. ''We were smarter.''

During the war, Uncle had organized Ban Long's literacy campaign. To his
lifetime treasures - a Confucian primer, a book on Lenin, a volume of Ho Chi
Minh's poetry - he now added the photo book of America my father had sent with
me. Uncle showed the photographs to every neighbor who visited. ''Do you have a
water buffalo?'' one woman asked me.  ''Do you eat watermelon?'' a second said.
''Do you fish in a bomb crater?'' Fifth Brother asked. ''You don't grow rice?''
his mother, Third Sister, exclaimed. She'd lost three sons during the war.
Toothless, she mashed her betel nut in an American shell casing. ''Then how do
you eat?''

One day, Third Sister laughed so hard she couldn't finish her betel nut. Eight
women had come to visit. Middle-aged, they looked like a bridal party posing for
a silver anniversary photo. All wore traditional overblouses in varying hues and
the traditional loose, black trousers. They asked about American bridal dress.

''What?'' Third Sister said at my description. ''No trousers?'' The women
rollicked at this immodest thought. They knew only the traditional Vietnamese
dress, two skirt panels that flow over loose trousers.

As with everything else, the villagers watched me harvest. Second Treasure,
standing among them, chuckled as I stepped off the paddy dike.

''Please!'' said an old woman bent like a walking cane, ''don't take your pretty
white legs into the paddy muck.''

I sank to midcalf in mud. I slogged toward the row of women harvesting. The mud
sucked me off balance. ''Did she drink rice wine?'' the old woman asked. The
harvesters cut the tall rice with sickles. They set the grasses aside on the
stubble. They cut and set, cut and set, moving together in a long line, as if
choreographed. Sickle in hand, I joined them. ''Hold the grass further down,''
Second Treasure yelled.  I slid my left hand down. ''No! Five plants at once.''
I sliced the grass. ''No, no, farther up.'' I set the grasses aside. ''Lay the
stems even!'' I felt like a dancing bear. I'd had days of this. I was tired of
Second Treasure telling me when to wash my feet, how many bowls of rice to eat,
when to shake out my grass mat, when to climb into the canoe. I stood up, sickle
in hand, fuming.

''Didn't Uncle Ho say, 'Eat with the people, live with them, work with them?' ''
''Yes.'' ''When did Uncle say, 'Stand on the dike, give orders.'?'' Second
Treasure looked dismayed. Her face wilted. I was horrified. I'd been
insensitive. Rude. ''Forgive me,'' I said in Vietnamese. ''Hello?'' Second
Treasure said in English. To get me to smile, she tried all the phrases I'd
taught her. ''O.K.? Thank you?'' Then she herded the watchers down the paddy
dike, her laughter reaching back across the mud and stubble.

My last evening, the harvesters came to visit. They brought milk fruit, water
apples, breadfruit and dried tamarind. ''Please,'' they said, ''take these gifts
to the women in America.''

After they left, Uncle approached me. In his palms he cradled a tiny photograph.
He pressed it into my hands. ''This is the only picture of me young,'' Uncle
said. ''Give it to your father. Tell him to come live with me in Ban Long. I'll
take care of him in his old age.'' It's even more amazing, I thought: the people
have forgiven us. Later that evening, Second Treasure and I swung together in
the hammock. She worried about her teen-age son, who ran with a fast crowd in
town. She couldn't keep him in bicycle brakes. She worried about her father
alone in the countryside. Recently he'd fallen from a tree.

''Older Sister,'' I asked when the conversation lulled, ''are you a communist?''
Her fingers fluttered, No. ''Uncle?''

''No, no! Father fought the French rulers 30 years before he heard of
communists.''

Second Treasure nodded toward her father's house under the breadfruit trees. The
fragrance of ripe fruit tinged the air. Somewhere in the distance, an owl called
out, ''cu cu,'' sounding its Vietnamese name.

''Don't you understand, Little Sister?'' Second Treasure said. ''This is all we
wanted.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              158 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 12, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

New & Noteworthy

BYLINE: By GEORGE JOHNSON

SECTION: Section 7; Page 28, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 956 words


THE BOSS: J. Edgar Hoover and the Great American Inquisition, by Athan G.
Theoharis and John Stuart Cox. (Bantam, $5.95.) By examining recently released
files from J. Edgar Hoover's Federal Bureau of Investigation, the authors tell
the story of an ideologue who converted an arm of the Justice Department into an
empire. ''This strong book proves that, at the top, the bureau was turned into
what could be called the H.B.I. (Hoover Bureau of Investigation),'' Herbert
Mitgang said in The Times in 1988.

BUFFALO AFTERNOON, by Susan Fromberg Schaeffer. (Ivy, $5.95.) Fresh out of
reform school, Pete Bravado tries to escape the hell of his life in Brooklyn for
the jungles of Vietnam. When this novel was published in 1989, our reviewer,
Nicholas Proffitt, called it ''one of the best treatments of the Vietnam War to
date. . . . The war almost explodes off the page. . . . Mrs. Schaeffer takes us
on a Dantesque tour of a green hell where teen-age American boys play soccer
with severed human heads, dig up Vietnamese graves looking for enemy supplies
and mount bleached skulls on their armored vehicles like so many carriage
lamps.''

WILY VIOLETS & UNDERGROUND ORCHIDS: Revelations of a Botanist, by Peter
Bernhardt. (Vintage, $9.95.) An expert in botany tells about the sex lives of
plants and other biological curiosities. ''It's hard to choose among the riches
Mr. Bernhardt offers as he weaves his way from grassland to city street, outback
to backyard,'' Sara B. Stein said here last year. ''At every stop, something is
pollinating something.''

THE STORY OF ANNIE D., by Susan Taylor Chehak. (Fawcett Crest, $4.95.) After a
suicide and a string of rape-murders, a doctor's wife tries to discover what has
gone wrong with her small Nebraska town. ''In Ms. Chehak's spare prose, which is
smooth and hard as a rock without being barren, the narrative reads with the
force and generational sweep of some ancient rural myth,'' Marilyn Stasio said
here last year. 1929: The Year of the Great Crash, by William K. Klingaman.
(Perennial/HarperCollins, $11.95.) A historian re-creates the atmosphere of 1929
America, showing how insider trading and mass euphoria caused Wall Street to
collapse. Last year our reviewer, Mary Beth Grover, said the author ''expertly
relates the stock market to other major events in 1929.''

THE HOUSE OF STAIRS, by Barbara Vine. (Onyx, $4.95.) Written pseudonymously by
Ruth Rendell, the plot of this mystery turns on a murder - but it is not clear
until near the climax exactly who was killed. The novel is ''a whydunit, plus a
donewhat,'' MacDonald Harris said in The Book Review in 1989. ''Barbara Vine is
a master practitioner of the genre in which we are not certain until the end
what the crime was.''

THE INTERN BLUES: The Private Ordeals of Three Young Doctors, by Robert Marion.
(Fawcett Crest, $5.95.) A doctor at a New York City medical center asked three
interns to keep a diary of the grueling marathons that have become part of
American medical education. Last year our reviewer, Ronni Scheier, said that
''the interns' self-pity and obsession with sleep grow tedious,'' but ''as a
cautionary tale about the perils of seeking care at teaching hospitals, the book
is forceful.'' In ''JUST A NURSE'': From Clinic to Hospital Ward, Battle Ground
to Cancer Unit - the Hearts and Minds of Nurses Today (Dell, $4.95), two nurses,
Janet Kraegel and Mary Kachoyeanos, asked some of their colleagues to tell their
side of the medical care story.

WILD AMERICA: Stories, by Jayne Loader. (Ivy, $4.95.) When this collection of
short stories was published last year our reviewer, Jack Butler, said: ''Jayne
Loader shows a busy, inventive intelligence and a talent for fast, entertaining
narrative. . . . Her characters are mean, venal, trapped, deluded, empty,
maddened and hopeful, but never happy.''

THE AMBIGUOUS IROQUOIS EMPIRE: The Covenant Chain Confederation of Indian Tribes
With English Colonies From Its Beginnings to the Lancaster Treaty of 1744, by
Francis Jennings. (Norton, $12.95.) The author shows that despite the
assumptions of ethnocentric historians, cultural communication between European
settlers and American Indians was not a one-way street. In 1984 our reviewer,
Ronald Sanders, called this ''a fine history built on painstaking scholarship
and written in a vigorous narrative style.''

SWANN, by Carol Shields. (Penguin, $7.95.) After Mary Swann, a farm wife, is
brutally murdered in a small Canadian town, her poetry is discovered and she
becomes a literary cause celebre. Carol Shields' novel ''takes aim at everything
from feminism to academic scholarship to Canadian provincial life and its
aspirations to culture,'' Christopher Lehmann-Haupt said in The Times last year.
''She is profoundly concerned with the gulfs that exist between art, its creator
and its audience. In the best passages of 'Swann' these gulfs inspire a feeling
that approaches awe.''

THE MADWOMAN'S UNDERCLOTHES: Essays and Occasional Writings, by Germaine Greer.
(Atlantic Monthly, $12.95.) In 1987 our reviewer, Linda Blandford, said Germaine
Greer shows here that ''she is, perhaps, one of the marvelous letter writers of
an age that no longer trifles with them much. Her essays, columns and books -
transcripts as they are of a heroic heart and intellect - seem to have been
dashed off in the fire and dispatched to her many sisters.''

THE RUN AROUND, by Brian Freemantle. (Bantam, $4.95.) In trying to foil an
assassination plot in Geneva, Charlie Muffin, a renegade British intelligence
agent, manages to offend his allies almost as much as his enemies. Last year our
reviewer, Newgate Callendar, said the novel is ''great fun . . . even with the
author's stylistic idiosyncrasies.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Susan Fromberg Schaeffer (Jerry Bauer/Alfred A. Knopf)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              159 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 12, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THE WORLD;
Cambodians Face Loss of Eastern Aid And Trade

BYLINE: By STEVEN ERLANGER

SECTION: Section 4; Page 4, Column 4; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 948 words

DATELINE: PHNOM PENH, Cambodia


SOVIET retrenchment and the collapse of Communism in Eastern Europe, hailed in
the West as the opening to a harmonious new post-cold-war world, promises yet
another disaster for the people of Cambodia, who have already had their share of
ravaging at the hands of external forces.

The Government of Prime Minister Hun Sen, installed in 1979 after Vietnam
invaded and ended the Khmer Rouge's brutal rule, has depended on aid from what
was once a solid, Soviet-led bloc to finance its reconstruction of Cambodia and
its intensifying war for survival against Khmer Rouge guerrillas. Cambodia is
isolated by the West and still subject to an American-led embargo on investment
and trade.

Even today, with socialist ideological solidarity in tatters, aid from the
countries of Comecon, the Eastern-bloc trading association, represents an
estimated 80 percent of Cambodia's annual budget.

That is about to change dramatically, even as the Khmer Rouge presses its war of
destabilization in the countryside and as Cambodians die in greater numbers.
Comecon's five-year plan for aid, trade and investment expires at the end of
this year. On Jan. 1, the fantastic world of soft credits, weird barters and
transferable rubles will come to an end, and Eastern Europe's trade
relationships will be based on market prices and hard currencies.

The Soviet Union and the Eastern European countries want relationships with all
countries built on ''mutually beneficial grounds,'' Eastern European diplomats
here keep saying. ''Translated,'' one said, ''that means dollar for dollar.''

Can one form such a relationship with Cambodia? ''Ah,'' the diplomat said. ''Of
course you cannot.''

The coming aid reductions provide an incentive for Cambodia, and for Vietnam,
too, to improve relations with the West. The desire for Western aid adds further
pressure to both countries to seek a peaceful settlement to the Cambodian
conflict, since the United States has made a settlement a prerequisite to
improved relations. The aid factor is one reason Washington is hopeful for the
success of its recent shift in Cambodia policy, which involves direct talks with
Hanoi and probably Phnom Penh.

For Moscow especially, Cambodia's dependency creates a special responsibility.
The Soviets provide the greatest share of Cambodian aid, followed by the East
Germans and the Czechs. It financed the 11-year Vietnamese intervention in
Cambodia and the client Government that emerged.

But the Soviet Union no longer has the money or, seemingly, the will to project
an ideology onto developing countries anywhere. And Moscow is healing its split
with China, chief backer of the Khmer Rouge.

''But it's true, there is a question of credibility involved,'' said a Soviet
diplomat here. ''There is also a feeling of moral responsibility to help this
Government defend itself from the Khmer Rouge.''

So the Soviet Union, he said, would continue to supply the Hun Sen Government
with arms so long as other countries, in particular China, continue to supply
the Khmer Rouge and the non-Communist factions allied to them. Moscow wants a
moratorium on such aid, he said. Cambodian officials complain that the arms
supply from Moscow has already been reduced.

Still, arms are almost the least of Cambodia's problems. The Soviet Union
provides all of Cambodia's oil and gasoline, for instance, and nearly all of
Cambodia's electricity comes from oil-burning generators. A halt in the flow of
oil would be a disaster both economically and militarily. Yet it is clear, the
Soviet diplomat admitted, that Cambodia cannot pay market prices in hard
currency for its oil, let alone its fertilizer.

So what will happen? ''I think we must continue,'' the diplomat said. ''But an
agreement has not yet been worked out.'' For the first time, he said, the Soviet
Union has a sort of functioning Parliament, with real politics driven by
domestic concerns, that will also have a say on foreign policy and aid.

An associated problem is the Soviet Union's request for assistance from the
International Monetary Fund. The fund prohibits loan recipients from providing
aid to any third country.

An American veto bars the fund itself from helping Cambodia, which will suddenly
be faced with an enormous financial squeeze at a time when inflation is high and
the economy shaken by war.

Such dire economic factors quite probably were a major topic in recent United
States-Soviet discussions on bringing about a settlement in Cambodia. Last
month, Washington announced that it was withdrawing diplomatic support from the
Khmer Rouge-led opposition and allowing export licenses for humanitarian aid to
Phnom Penh. The latter move was an indication that Washington intends to try to
help Moscow keep Phnom Penh breathing until a settlement can be fashioned.

The coming unification of Germany poses another problem. Cambodia is one of the
few countries where East Germany has an embassy and West Germany does not. The
Hun Sen Government, desperate for a breakthrough to the West that might bring
replacement aid, is hoping that a united Germany will maintain its embassy here.

But some East European diplomats said it is now almost certain that Germany,
afraid of stepping out ahead of the rest of the West, would keep its economic
commitments to Cambodia but downgrade its embassy here to a mission only.

Of course, recognition alone, even by hundreds of countries, won't save Mr. Hun
Sen from the Khmer Rouge. But these are early days yet, and while the Khmer
Rouge fighters are disrupting the countryside, they are not near the gates. A
general economic collapse and associated popular panic, however, might bring
them there soon enough.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              160 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 12, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Pursued by His Dead Stepmother

BYLINE: By EDWARD HOWER; Edward Hower is the author of the novels ''The New Life
Hotel'' and ''Wolf Tickets.''

SECTION: Section 8; Page 11, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1045 words



TO ALL APPEARANCES A LADY
By Marilyn Bowering.
336 pp. New York: Viking. $18.95.

Those who think of Canada as a staid and proper place will have their
misconceptions swept away by Marilyn Bowering's historical novel of the bad old
days in Vancouver, British Columbia. Back then, vigilantes and smugglers,
restless sea captains and idealistic reformers, Chinese gangsters and opium
traders made the city as colorful and violent a community of misfits as could be
found anywhere.

Ms. Bowering tells two linking tales: one of a modern half-Chinese bachelor
seeking to discover his parents' true identities, the other of his mother's and
father's adventures during the late-19th-century period of colonial expansion in
the Far East and British Columbia. In 1957, Robert Lam sets off on a sea voyage
with a briefcase full of just-discovered family documents. He is leaving behind,
he thinks, his 100-year-old stepmother, who has just died and left him free to
travel. But Lam Fan, the irascible old lady, appears on board as a ghost. She is
determined to lead him - by guile if necessary - to understand the hard life his
family once lived as immigrants to Western Canada, and to be proud of both his
Chinese and British ancestors.

India Thackery, Robert's English mother, and Lam Fan, her Chinese adoptive
sister, came to Vancouver from Hong Kong at the turn of the century, following a
stormy voyage on a clipper ship via Kowloon and Saigon. Robert's father
emigrated from China, driven by memories of mass famine and cannibalism. His
mother's husband, Robert Haack, washed up in Canada from California.

All these people were in various ways sustained and undone by the opium trade
that flourished quasi-legally in pioneer North America. Miss Thackery, a kind,
idealistic Victorian lady, was quietly employed as a bookkeeper in an opium
factory; Lam Fan was a lifelong addict of the factory's wares; and the hapless
Robert Haack was a would-be opium smuggler who made enemies both among the
Chinese who controlled the business and the white vigilantes who sought to
exclude the prosperous immigrants.

Haack is the novel's most fully developed character, a drifter capable of both
courage and cowardice, decency and hypocrisy, sentimentality and
cold-bloodedness. His chance meeting with Robert Louis Stevenson and his love
for the tender India Thackery inspire him to try bettering himself, but the
impulsive ways he tries to gain respectability often land him in jail or worse.
India Thackery, too, is appealing, as ingenuous and thoughtful as her young
Chinese half sister is sly and impulsive. When the thieves who rob the opium
factory maroon India on an island of quarantined Chinese lepers, she reacts to
her predicament with great resourcefulness and charity.

Is this story beginning to sound melodramatic? Well, it is, but that's all
right. The 19th-century part of the novel is a tale of the times, featuring
improbable plot twists and a cast of broadly drawn characters reminiscent of the
fiction of Charles Dickens or Mark Twain. As fanciful as the story is, it
provides a vivid picture of life in frontier Vancouver, which, like London slums
or Mississippi River towns, could be as brutal as it was hospitable to
newcomers.

Ms. Browering, an accomplished Canadian poet, has researched her material
thoroughly and reports it with an eye to evocative details. When India and
Robert go in search of a child prostitute India is intent on rescuing, they
visit the makeshift lodging of some out-of-work settlers - ''a group of men
sitting on an ice-covered floor around a small pile of leaves, which one man was
attempting to blow alight. Another man was being shaved by a companion, and
another lay on straw, smoking a pipe. They nodded politely to [a visitor] but
had eyes for the food in his hands. In a corner, a man wrapped in rags and
newspapers tried to hide the rat he'd been skinning with his fingers.''

The modern scenes, which take up about a quarter of the novel, are less
successful. For one thing, they are overresearched; we learn a lot more about
navigating the waterways of British Columbia than necessary. Also, neither
Robert Lam nor Lam Fan develop well as characters in these sections. Robert has
but one note to sing, that of a confused truth-seeker. Lam Fan is not a very
interesting ghost; her one note is shrill and pedantic. Both characters seem
willed into place as plot devices to give the book a complicated structure that
it doesn't need.

Rather than holding the novel together, they constantly interrupt its flow.
Juxtaposing stories from different centuries with their contrasting world views
doesn't work. The technique almost forces the reader to skip over the
present-day adventures of Robert and his ghostly stepmother in order to find out
what will happen next in the much more compelling tale they are unfolding about
their ancestors.

Marilyn Bowering does have a fascinating story to tell. If only she had told it
more simply! Still, ''To All Appearances a Lady,'' though not a completely
satisfying novel, is ambitious and often enjoyable.

'DIRTY, DIRTY ROBERT!'

I sat on the broken steps and looked out into the darkened world I had known
since childhood: the ghosting apple trees, the tilted greenhouses, and
surmounting all the dark face of Christmas Hill. In this International
Geophysical Year, in which nations had joined harmoniously together to observe
the marvels of the earth, atmosphere, and space, in which boys in their twenties
handled millions of dollars' worth of rocketry, I, Robert Louis Lam, three years
from retirement, had quarrelled with a one-hundred-year-old woman over my
future.

I sighed and thought about the Rose and what it would be like to set sail in her
and never come back. And as I did, an icy hand gripped my shoulder and a voice
shrill with anger cried out, ''Dirty Robert Lam! Dirty, dirty Robert!'' I turned
at that to see Fan standing there in her nightgown, holding a knot of papers in
her shaking hand. . . .

I stood up and put my arms around her. Her head touched my chest, her arms felt
like small dry sticks. She tried to say more, but her mouth was dry, and I could
smell on her breath the sour fume of opium.

From ''To All Appearances a Lady.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              161 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 13, 1990, Monday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

Confrontation in the Gulf;
U.S. Aid Helped Hussein's Climb; Now, Critics Say, the Bill Is Due

BYLINE: By MICHAEL WINES, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1870 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 12


For 10 years, as Iraq developed a vast army, chemical weapons, nuclear ambitions
and a long record of brutality, the Reagan and Bush Administrations quietly
courted President Saddam Hussein as a counterweight to Iran's revolutionary
fervor. Now, critics say, Washington is paying the price for that policy.

Iraq is a power with a 200,000-man army in Kuwait and nearby Iraqi territory and
designs on the world's petroleum stocks, while the United States has hastily
mounted its largest military mobilization since Vietnam to keep Saudi Arabia
from sharing Kuwait's fate.

Iraq reached these heights with American acquiescence and sometimes its help. It
benefited from a thriving grain trade with American farmers, cooperation with
United States intelligence agencies, oil sales to American refiners that helped
finance its military, and muted White House criticism of its human rights and
war atrocities.

A Big Buyer of Food

The United States removed Iraq from its list of nations supporting terrorism in
1983. The action was significant for it opened the door to Federal subsidies and
loan guarantees.

Since 1982, Baghdad has become one of the biggest buyers of United States rice
and wheat, purchasing some $5.5 billion in crops and livestock with federally
guaranteed loans and agricultural subsidies and its own hard cash. It also has
been extended some $270 million in Government-guaranteed credit from the
Export-Import Bank to buy other American goods, despite repeated failures to
make loan repayments on time.

Current and former Government officials also say the Central Intelligence Agency
provided the Iraqis with valuable information on the military operations of
their Iranian foes. In return, the United States received what the officials
called largely disappointing data on terrorism, the Soviet Union and Iran.

The Cost Could Be High

The United States has had other cozy relationships with autocratic leaders in
places like the Philippines and Panama. Some of those ties have been warmer than
the ones with with Iraq.

But many critics, and some former Administration officials, say the potential
costs of the Reagan and Bush Administrations' dance with President Hussein
threaten to be especially steep. Beyond the prospect of a war over oil, the
muted American reaction to the use of mustard and nerve gases by Iraq against
Iran, first reported in March 1984, and its rocketing of Iranian cities with
intermediate-range ballistic missiles may have encouraged the spread of such
weapons - a problem some officials now regard as among the United States' most
pressing national security concerns.

Speaking today on the ABC News program ''This Week,'' Secretary of State James
A. Baker 3d said as much. ''I do think it's worth looking at, in the future,
arms sales practices and policies,'' Mr. Baker said. ''We're very concerned
about chemical weapons proliferation. These things, though, have all come about
in the last three or four years. We should have been more concerned about all of
this, perhaps going further back.''

In an interview last week, a senior Pentagon official in the Reagan
Administration, Richard L. Armitage, said that ''in retrospect, it would have
been much better at the time of their use of gas and IRBM's if we'd put our foot
down.''

''The mistake we made was not pushing very hard and loud for international
action,'' he said.

Mr. Armitage and other officials said they did not press for further punishment
of Iraq at the time because they hoped to expand American influence with Mr.
Hussein and shore up Iraq's ability to pursue the war with Iran.

Relationship Is Defended

The Administration has argued publicly that the relationship with Baghdad was in
the United States' interest because Iran threatened to rout Iraq in their
eight-year war, which ended in 1988. After the war the argument was that
economic and political ties were the only hope of influencing President Hussein.

In the weeks before the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait, the White House abandoned even
that tack, fighting trade sanctions against an increasingly belligerent Iraq by
contending that they would hurt American farmers and businessmen without swaying
Baghdad in the least.

Some members of Congress, especially from agricultural states, also lobbied
strongly against sanctions and for increased trade.

Today, Administration officials concede that the policy did not work. But they
insist, in the words of a senior State Department official, Edward W. Gnehm,
that ''it was incumbent on us to try.''

''As a powerful nation with a global outlook, we are obliged to develop as close
relationships as possible with countries in these positions, especially where we
have strategic interests,'' Mr. Gnehm, the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State
for Near Eastern and Asian Affairs, said in an interview last week. ''There was
a reasonable expectation that Saddam Hussein might well want to develop closer
ties to the West. He has an oil-based economy that was tied to the West. He had
a technology base with Western interests.''

Policy Called Craven

''There were lots of things in the equation that didn't work,'' Mr. Gnehm said,
''but we hoped to be able to weave him into the fabric of Western nations. And
we never tried to build that relationship with an extended hand without pointing
out these problems with the other hand. I can only say it failed.''

Mr. Armitage said the United States was never unaware of Saddam Hussein's
potential for evil. ''We knew this wasn't the League of Women Voters,'' he said.

Critics call that policy craven. They say it encouraged Iraq to become ever more
brutal by leaving the impression that no bad deed would go punished.

''We were so desperate to believe we could convert him that we were taken
completely in,'' said Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato, a New York Republican who is
one of Iraq's leading critics. ''And the State Department was a willing
accomplice to it, because they wanted to believe, too.''

The Bush and Reagan Administrations declined to punish Iraq when it used poison
gas against Iranian soldiers in 1984 or against its own Kurdish citizens in
1988, and did not protest when President Hussein bought 45 American helicopters,
worth $200 million, with assurances that they were for civilian use, then
transferred many, if not all, to his military.

Taken Off Terrorist List

The Reagan Administration removed Iraq from its list of terrorist nations in
1983, and declined to reinstate it in 1985, although the terrorist Abul Abbas
took refuge in Baghdad after masterminding the hijacking of the cruise ship
Achille Lauro, and Iraq refused American requests to expel him. More recently,
Abu Nidal, another notorious terrorist leader, is said to have re-established an
operations base in Iraq.

Nor did the Bush Administration publicly protest the forced relocation of at
least 500,000 ethnic Kurds and Syrians in the late 1980's, although the act
violated principles of the 1948 Genocide Convention, according to Middle East
Watch, a human rights organization. And last year, despite a State Department
report that described Iraq's human-rights record as ''abysmal,'' the Bush
Administration declined to join 12 other Western powers in calling for a United
Nations inquiry into Iraq's treatment of its population.

The beneficiary of these acts, President Hussein, had denounced America as an
enemy from the 1960's until the early 1980's. Then setbacks in his war with Iran
appear to have provoked an abrupt shift.

''He made it clear that Iraq was not interested in making mischief in the
world,'' said Donald Rumsfeld, a former Defense Secretary who, as a Middle East
envoy, reopened discussions with Mr. Hussein in 1983. ''It struck us as useful
to have a relationship, given that we were interested in solving the Mideast
problems.''

'Almost a Nil Relationship'

The spur to Washington's interest was Iran. A former Senate Intelligence
Committee member recalled officials, ''white as sheets,'' warning in the
mid-1980's that Iran might overwhelm Iraq.

''We got fired up and said, 'My God, we can't let Iran win this war,' '' said
Mr. Armitage, now a State Department negotiator.

In that context, Iraq's use of poison gas in 1984 and 1988 was seen as
troubling, but not enough so to rupture the new ties. The Reagan Administration
publicly protested, limited Iraq's access to gas components and joined a United
Nations condemnation of chemical weapons, but levied no other punishment.

In 1986, officials said, intelligence experts, Israel and other gulf states
began to warn that Iraq could emerge from the Iran war as a menacing regional
superpower. Espionage exchanges began to wither, and Mr. Armitage said the
Pentagon maintained ''almost a nil relationship'' with Mr. Hussein.

But Iraq's growing might and ruthlessness appears to have had little effect on
the conduct of diplomatic or business ties with Iraq. ''There was outrage here,
going back to the chemical weapons issue,'' said Richard W. Murphy, the senior
Middle East diplomat in the Reagan Administration's State Department, ''but we
didn't support sanctions when they first came up because we thought we were
getting somewhere in private channels. And we thought that unless they were
internationally applied, sanctions wouldn't do the job.''

Mr. Hussein insisted in ''back channels'' that Iraq had no designs on its
neighbors once the war ended, Mr. Murphy said.

Growing Militance a Concern

In the Agriculture Department, sales of farm goods to Iraq rose from $100
million in 1982 to $727 million by 1986. Almost all of the increase was on
credit supplied by Washington. By 1989 the loans reached $1.2 billion.

Iraq's growing militance was a frequent concern in meetings, said Mel Sims, an
Agriculture Department sales manager who visited Iraq often in the 1980's.

''I began to sense more political pressures'' from supporters of sanctions in
the late 1980's, Mr. Sims, now retired, said in an interview. ''But here again,
the State Department did not support them.''

''There are some who might say, 'You helped Iraq grow stronger,' and that, I
think, is a true statement,'' he said. ''But it's hard to predict what countries
will do.''

A Lost Chance for Change

Critics say the Bush Administration missed a chance to change its policy toward
Iraq after the war with Iran ended in 1988, removing the major reason for
American support of an increasingly aggressive Government.

The Administration and farm-state members of Congress successfully opposed
legislation last September that would have suspended export credits and loan
guarantees to punish Iraq.

New sanctions legislation swept through Congress last month, days before Iraq
invaded Kuwait, over State Department objections that ''it would be the American
farmer and the American exporter who would, in effect, be punished.''

The House sponsor of the sanctions legislation, Representative Gus Yatron,
Democrat of Pennsylvania, dismissed that argument. ''Given the State
Department's low-key and ineffective response to human rights abuses in Iraq,''
he said in a statement in April, ''you would never know that such heinous abuses
were taking place.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: August 15, 1990, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

CORRECTION:

An article on Monday about American policy toward Iraq misstated the year in
which the United States removed Iraq from a list of nations that sponsor
terrorism. Iraq was taken off the list in 1982, not 1983.

GRAPHIC: Photo: 1988: A child said to be a victim of chemical warfare
recuperating in an Iranian hospital during the Iran-Iraq war. Critics say one of
the most pressing national security concerns in the Persian Gulf is the possible
use of mustard and nerve gases by the Iraqis. (Reuters) (pg. A9)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              162 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 13, 1990, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Confrontation in the Gulf;
BUSH ORDERS NAVY TO HALT ALL SHIPMENTS OF IRAQ'S OIL AND ALMOST ALL ITS IMPORTS

BYLINE: By MICHAEL R. GORDON, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1461 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 12


President Bush ordered the United States military today to block exports of
Iraqi oil and all imports to Iraq except some food shipments, Administration
officials said. The blockade would fulfill the President's threat to halt Iraqi
commerce.

Defense Secretary Dick Cheney and other top national security officials
immediately began preparing specific orders to the Navy for carrying out the
action, which Administration officials avoided calling a blockade.

The order to halt all ships involved in Iraqi commerce came as President Saddam
Hussein of Iraq suggested that he might withdraw his forces from Kuwait if
Israel first withdrew from the occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip and if Syria
pulled its soldiers out of Lebanon. Washington and Israel dismissed such a deal.


Iraqis Asked to Cut Back

Predicting that ''the spark of war, if started, will burn many,'' Mr. Hussein
had earlier asked Iraqis to cut their food consumption drastically in
anticipation of a long standoff with American, Arab and European forces in the
Saudi desert. [Excerpts from Mr. Hussein's address, page A8.] A senior Bush
Administration official said the United States calculated that Iraq would begin
to feel the effects of economic sanctions imposed by the United Nations in a
month, but that it would take three or four months for the measures to bite
deeply.

In London, the British Government said today that a British businessman was shot
to death by Iraqi soldiers as he tried to flee Iraq and enter Saudi Arabia, The
Associated Press reported. It was the first official report of a Westerner being
killed by Iraqi troops in Kuwait.

Citing a Kuwaiti Request

In authorizing the first American naval blockade since the Vietnam War, Mr. Bush
did not wait for the United Nations to take further action to enforce the
sanctions it imposed on Iraq last week. But Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d
said the Administration was responding to a request submitted today by the
exiled Emir of Kuwait, and that this would satisfy the requirements of the
United Nations Charter. [Transcript of White House statement, page A11.] The
White House said it would coordinate the naval action, which will primarily
involve shipping in the Persian Gulf and Red Sea, with other nations that have
deployed ships near the Arabian Peninsula. It was not immediately clear whether
any of the other nations would help intercept vessels that may try to run the
blockade.

Awaiting a Challenge

The United States was keeping careful watch on the Alqadisiyah, an empty Iraqi
tanker at Yanbu, the Red Sea terminus of a pipeline carrying Iraqi oil across
Saudi Arabia. But it was not clear when or if the tanker would be loaded and
attempt to leave, and thus test the blockade.

The blockade would apply to all ships that might try to trade with Iraq or
Iraqi-occupied Kuwait. But Administration officials said today that the trade
embargo was generally being observed, and that only a small number of Iraqi
ships were being actively monitored.

A State Department official said there were no plans now to intercept air
traffic with Iraq, in part because oil is too bulky to be shipped by air in
significant quantities. For other products, American officials are relying on
the international sanctions imposed by the United Nations.

As in 1962, when the United States called the halting of Soviet missile
shipments to Cuba with naval forces a ''quarantine,'' the Bush Administration
avoided using the term blockade to describe its actions.

Apart from avoiding the connotation of an act of war, officials said, the
careful phrasing might be intended to sidestep the question of whether the
United States needs a new vote by the United Nations Security Council
authorizing the halting of Iraqi shipments.

Administration officials said they hoped the mere threat of a blockade would
prevent any shippers from violating the United Nations economic sanctions.

Some American military planners said they were told to make arrangements for a
stay in Saudi Arabia that could last six months or even more. United States
military forces in Saudi Arabia are now said to total around 10,000, the
spearhead of a multinational force arrayed against an Iraqi force in Kuwait and
southern Iraq that Mr. Cheney estimated today at more than 200,000 men.

Troop Projections Vague

Appearing on the NBC News program ''Meet the Press,'' Mr. Cheney declined to say
how many troops the United States might eventually deploy in Saudi Arabia.
Pentagon officials have said they are planning a ground force in the range of
100,000 and that the precise size will depend on Iraqi military preparations.
The Administration has offered no public estimate, but contingency plans have
been made for a force that could exceed 200,000.

Although their primary task has been described as protecting Saudi air bases
where American planes are stationed, a military official said the American
troops had started running patrols around the oil fields and refineries near the
Dhahran air base, where they are encamped. The American force took its first
casualty today, an Air Force sergeant who was reported to have been killed in an
accident in Saudi Arabia.

News reports from the region quoted an Iraqi Government spokesman as saying that
the authorities had been instructed to ''facilitate the travel of the Arabs and
foreign residents in Kuwait and other cities of southern Iraq.''

The announcement suggested that more than one million foreigners trapped in
Kuwait and Iraq, including about 3,500 Americans, might be allowed to leave. But
a State Department official said the United States had no knowledge of Americans
being allowed to leave either country.

Mr. Bush told reporters today at his vacation retreat in Kennebunkport, Me.,
that the naval quarantine was being conducted in accordance with the United
Nations sanctions. Administration officials pointed out that they received the
request for aid in enforcing the United Nations embargo today from Sheik Jaber
al-Ahmed al-Sabah, the Emir of Kuwait, who has taken refuge in Saudi Arabia
since Iraq invaded his country on Aug. 2.

Mr. Baker, appearing on the ABC News program ''This Week,'' said the request
gave the United States legal authority to institute what he called
''interdiction'' of Iraqi oil shipments under the United Nations Charter.

In a written statement issued in Kennebunkport, Marlin Fitzwater, the
President's spokesman, cited Article 51 of the Charter, which permits United
Nations members to take individual or collective action in self-defense while
the Security Council is considering measures of its own.

Requests to Other Nations

Mr. Fitzwater said Kuwait had also asked some of the other nations with ships in
the region, which include Britain and France, to ''take appropriate steps'' to
enforce the United Nations sanctions and that Washington would coordinate its
actions with those countries. Throughout the gulf crisis, the United States has
sought broad international support for its military moves.

Mr. Baker said the blockade would begin ''almost instantly.''

The Saudi Government could prevent the shipment of any Iraqi oil from Yanbu by
refusing to load the oil that flows into the port via the pipeline through the
Saudi desert. The Turkish Government has already taken such action at
Mediterranean ports.

Saudi Pipeline Still Open

Saudi Arabia has not yet cut off the flow of Iraqi oil through its pipeline, but
it is expected to do so once the United States marshals an adequate force on its
territory.

During the television interview, Mr. Baker focused primarily on the interception
of oil shipments from Iraq. The effort seeks to cut off Mr. Hussein's sole
source of funds for replenishing a national treasury drained not only by this
military exercise, but by eight years of war with Iran.

But Mr. Baker told reporters later that the embargo would go ''beyond just
oil.'' Another senior official said the net would be ''very complete,''
suggesting that it would apply to imports of food and other supplies to Iraq
beyond the small, strictly humanitarian shipments provided for by the United
Nations sanctions.

During a round of golf in Kennebunkport, Mr. Bush was asked if the halt in Iraqi
commerce would apply to food and other supplies as well as oil. He replied:
''Just watch. Everything.''

Mr. Baker declined to say what actions United States forces would be authorized
to take to stop vessels involved in trade with Iraq.

Norman Polmar, the author of several books on naval warfare, said blockades
normally are enforced by sending a small warship, like a frigate, alongside a
merchant ship. The warship's crew signals the vessel to stop and then lowers
boats to approach it.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Map of Iraq showing location of Yanbu.

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              163 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 13, 1990, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Cambodia Seeking Direct Talks With the U.S.

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Page 7, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 417 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Aug. 12


Prime Minister Hun Sen of Cambodia has expressed hope that the United States
will talk directly to his Government on ending the long war in his country.

Mr. Hun Sen, quoted today by the official Cambodian press agency S.P.K., held
out the prospect that talks with his Government could help resolve the issue of
United States servicemen still missing in action from the war in Indochina
during the 1960's and 1970's.

''I think that to end the present conflict there will be reasons for the United
States to start direct talks with the Phnom Penh Government,'' he said. ''It is
up to the United States to decide, because the ball is on their side of the
field.''

Mr. Hun Sen, whose Vietnamese-backed Government is not recognized by Washington,
made his remarks at a news conference in the Cambodian capital on Thursday. The
S.P.K. report was monitored in Bangkok.

Officials from the United States and Vietnam met in New York last Monday to
discuss settlement of the conflict.

That meeting followed Washington's announcement on July 18 it would no longer
support occupancy of Cambodia's seat in the United Nations by a three-party
guerrilla coalition dominated by the Khmer Rouge.

The Phnom Penh Government, ostracized by the West and almost all Asian countries
since it was set up by invading Vietnamese troops in 1979, craves recognition.
It has been watching for signs that the international community has softened its
position since Vietnam brought home its combat troops last September.

The Khmer Rouge, during whose 1975-79 control of Cambodia a million people were
killed, have gained militarily since Hanoi's pullout.

Mr. Hun Sen said the United States and Phnom Penh both agreed that the Khmer
Rouge should not be allowed to return to power.

He said talks could cover verification of the withdrawal of foreign troops from
Cambodia and humanitarian matters, including the tracing of Americans missing in
action, still a contentious issue in the United States.

The first official United States search team to visit Cambodia took home six
sets of possible remains last month. Washington portrayed that as a nonpolitical
contact with Phnom Penh.

Mr. Hun Sen said he hoped the United States would go further and also end its
support for the two non-Communist factions in the guerrilla alliance with the
Khmer Rouge.

He hinted that if the alliance lost its United Nations seat, Hanoi and Phnom
Penh would be more open to allowing the United Nations a major role in a peace
settlement.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              164 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 13, 1990, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Confrontation in the Gulf;
An Old Desert Hand Commands U.S. Forces

BYLINE: By ERIC SCHMITT, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 10, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 650 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 12


As head of a command once viewed as something of a misfit in the Pentagon's
organizational charts, Gen. H. Norman Schwarzkopf finds himself playing a
pivotal role in the largest United States military operation since Vietnam.

General Schwarzkopf, the leader of the United States Central Command, which
spans United States military activities in 19 countries in the Middle East,
Africa and Persian Gulf, is in charge of American armed forces sent to defend
Saudi Arabia against an Iraqi invasion.

A tall, burly man nicknamed ''the Bear,'' General Schwarzkopf is a combat
veteran who is experienced in desert maneuvers. He once commanded the 24th
Mechanized Infantry Division, which is now preparing for deployment in Saudi
Arabia. The division regularly trains in California's Mojave Desert and, every
two years, joins Egyptian troops for desert maneuvers in their country.

Operation Desert Shield

The Central Command, known in military jargon as Centcom, has few military units
directly under its command and must call upon those in the United States or
other theaters when it faces a military threat.

Unlike other geographical commands, which have headquarters in their areas of
responsibility, Centcom is based at MacDill Air Force Base in Tampa, Fla.,
because no Middle Eastern country is willing to be its host.

In the last 10 days, the 55-year-old general has been instrumental in shaping
the American military response, dubbed Operation Desert Shield. He briefed
President Bush the day after Iraq invaded Kuwait, and he later accompanied
Defense Secretary Dick Cheney to Saudi Arabia, where Mr. Cheney presented
intelligence reports to King Fahd that persuaded the King to allow United States
forces to land there.

At a briefing at Central Command headquarters today. General Schwarzkopf told
reporters, ''I would never tell you that the American forces that are there are
100 percent out of harm's way.''

But he continued with an avowal of American strength and a warning to the
Iraqis. ''We have built up a great deal of force over there now,'' he said,
''and if they do make an attack they are going to pay a price for it.''

Base Is in Florida

General Schwarzkopf, who was named to head the Central Command in 1988,
coordinates all planning from his Florida base. The Pentagon said that for now,
at least, its top officer in Saudi Arabia will be Lieut. Gen. Charles A. Horner
of the Air Force.  General Schwarzkopf graduated from the United States Military
Academy in 1956 and later earned a master's degree in missile engineering from
the University of Southern California.

After two tours in Vietnam, first as an adviser to an airborne division of the
South Vietnamese Army and later as commander of a battalion in the 23d Infantry
Division, General Schwarzkopf commanded infantry brigades at Fort Richardson,
Alaska, and at Fort Lewis, Wash. Then he took charge of the 24th Mechanized
Infantry, the Army's elite tank division, at Fort Stewart, Ga., between 1983 and
1985.

In 1983, he was plucked from Fort Stewart to serve as the Army's adviser to the
task force that invaded Grenada. ''In effect, he was the land forces
commander,'' said Vice Adm. Joseph Metcalf 3d, retired, who was the operation's
overall commander.

In addition to experience in jungle and desert warfare, General Schwarzkopf
carved out a niche at the Pentagon as the Army's director of military personnel
and later as the Army's Deputy Chief of Staff for Operations and Plans.

For General Schwarzkopf, the Persian Gulf crisis is a page from testimony he
gave to Congress six months ago.

The greatest threat to American interests in the gulf region ''is the spillover
of a regional conflict which could endanger Americans, threaten U.S. interests
or interrupt the flow of oil, thereby requiring the commitment of U.S. combat
forces,'' he told the Senate Armed Services Committee on Feb. 8.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Mark McBride, left, and Tom Carney praying yesterday at the
First Assembly of God church in Clarksville, Tenn. Both belong to the Army's
101st Airborne Division and could be deployed to the Persian Gulf. (Associated
Press)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              165 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 13, 1990, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Confrontation in the Gulf;
Many Prominent Americans Support the President's Action in the Gulf . .
.Resistance to Blatant Aggression, Defense of Allies and, Above All, Oil

SECTION: Section A; Page 10, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 2691 words



Henry Kissinger

National security adviser to Richard M. Nixon, 1969-75; Secretary of State,
1973-77. Now chairman of a consulting firm, Kissinger Associates.

The fundamental problem, it seems to me, is that this is the most blatant case
of 1930's-style aggression in the entire postwar period. In the middle of peace,
without any particular provocation except the desire for more territory, Iraq
has annexed Kuwait. If that is permitted to stand it will lead to a whole series
of conflicts and revolutions in the region.

I referred to Germany in the 30's and not to Soviet expansionism in the 1950's
because the Soviet Union did not actually annex those countries. Rather, it
insisted on its right to impose puppet governments on unwilling populations.
Saddam Hussein is actually abolishing a state and a dynasty that has ruled
Kuwait for 250 years.

If Saddam Hussein succeeds, in particular on the basis of the arguments he has
used -that Iraq has an implicit right to supplant Arab states by military action
- all the principalities in the gulf will be put at risk because virtually every
country in the area, including Jordan, fits Hussein's criteria for justifying
the overthrow of Kuwait, with the possible exception of Egypt.

If Hussein succeeds, a cycle of conflicts in the Middle East is absolutely
inevitable, probably culminating in an Arab-Israeli war.

If Saddam Hussein can make his coup stick, in the face of unanimous opposition
from the United Nations, a worldwide embargo and a U.S. military deployment, we
will enter a period of growing chaos.

Edward W. Said

The Old Dominion Foundation Professor in the Humanities, Columbia University; a
member of the Palestine National Council.

As an Arab and an American, the awful events unfolding in the gulf fill me with
dread and sorrow. I have grown up with the spectacle of Arab and American
interests in the Middle East for the most part in conflict. My assessment of
American interests today as they have been acted apon and spoken about by
President Bush now and in the past is that these interests are the unimpeded
flow of relatively inexpensive and abundant Arab oil, the compliance of one or
several Arab leaders with U.S. interests basically in protecting the flow of oil
and not standing in the way of America's other major interest: Israel.

Beyond that, I have felt that the aspirations, the attempt to deal with a
difficult historical legacy, the desire to achieve development and independence
which have characterized the best of Arab nationalism - all these have never
been considered to have entered the pursuit of American interests in the region.
It is true that the Arab world today presents a sorry spectacle, with all sorts
of inequities, tyrannies and mediocrities to make us all feel ashamed. Saddam is
one of the results of the difficulties the Arab world faces - a tyrant and an
aggressor, who seems nevertheless to speak to hidden emotions and frustrations
in the collective Arab soul.

I am also angered as to why an illegal Iraqi occupation of Kuwait has aroused
far more American force and passion than the brutalities and callousness of
Israel's 23-year-old occupation of Arab land.

John C. West

Attorney and Distinguished Professor of Middle East Studies at the University of
South Carolina; Governor of South Carolina, 1971-75; Ambassador to Saudi Arabia,
1977-81.

We do have a tremendous economic stake in the Mideast. We cannot afford to have
Saddam Hussein or anyone else who is unfriendly to the United States control
nearly half of the world's oil supplies. The fact is that we are far more
dependent on imported Mideast oil than we want to admit. For example, in 1973,
when we had the first oil embargo, we were importing less than 30 per cent of
our oil. President Nixon declared Operation Independence, saying we would be
free of imported oil in seven years. . . . The crisis ended, Mr. Nixon's plans
were shelved, the next crisis came in '79, and at that time we were importing 40
percent of our oil.

In the late 70's, the Congress appropriated $88 billion for alternate energy
sources and to meet the problem of dependence upon foreign oil. Again, the
crisis ended, and there is at most only one small part of that program still
alive.

Today . . . the person who controls half of the world's oil resources determines
the world economic outlook, inflation, and whether we have a depression or
whether we have prosperity.

The United States has some difficult times ahead. The history of boycotts'
working is not good. But the hope must be maintained that the boycott of Iraq,
including a shutting off of the oil supplies, will cause Saddam Hussein to
retreat. If that does not work, we are faced with a long stalemate with our
soldiers and airmen in a combat status in a hostile foreign environment, not
unlike Vietnam.

Rep. Ted Weiss

Democrat of New York, a member of the House Foreign Affairs Committee.

For those of us who remember World War II, and know how it happened, what Saddam
Hussein is doing bears a startling resemblance to how Hitler behaved. There were
terrible consequences then, when the international community did not stand up -
it just encouraged aggression.

I have had no reluctance whatsoever to speak out against American military
action when it was illegal or improper, but I support U.S. policy when it stands
up to illegal and improper behavior in other nations. . . . Secondarily, what is
happening in the Middle East is important because of the oil - it is of terribly
important concern to our economy. . . .

If you allow someone like Saddam Hussein to get a stranglehold on oil
production, it gives him control of our economy. The price of oil operates on
the basis of availability.

If you give that kind of control to a person such as Saddam Hussein, who is
very, very ruthless, the consequences would be very, very dire.

I've been touting Saudi Arabia as a moderate force in the region, one we had the
capacity to rely on, so it is nice to know that in fact, they are willing to let
us help them defend themselves. . . .

Also, the crisis demonstrated that when Israel expresses its concern for its
security, it is not being paranoid. There are nations surrounding her which are
in fact very aggressive and very powerful. The safety and security of Israel has
to be one of the top priorities for Israel and to her friends.

Rep. Patricia Schroeder

Democrat of Colorado and a member of the House Armed Services Committee.

Basically, our main interest in Saudi Arabia and Kuwait comes down to a
three-letter word, oil. It is oil, oil and oil. Regrettably, we have diverted
all our attention away from an energy program, and alternate sources of energy.
We don't seem to have any capacity as a nation to think long-term: anyone who
looked at the region could tell it has not gotten any more stable, and we
certainly know the entire industrialized world relies heavily on oil. The world
economy is quirky enough without a massive oil shock.

That's why we didn't have time to play around in dealing with this crisis. . . .
Saddam Hussein had to be told that if he crossed the border into Saudi Arabia,
he would be picking a fight with a force that is far bigger than just Saudi
Arabia. We had to do that to convey our seriousness.

The thing I wish is that we had gone in under a United Nations flag. We did it
the last time - reflagging the Kuwaiti tankers. We have become the 911 for the
world. This time, we obviously had international support . . . and the Soviets
also sided with us. As a military exercise, this is going to be very costly, and
I wish we didn't have to bear all of the cost by ourselves.

The tragedy of this is that some will use the crisis to insist that we need an
MX missile and a B-2 bomber and S.D.I. If we had spent the billions of dollars
those weapons systems cost on building up our energy independence, we would have
something to sell to the rest of the world, we would be like Saddam Hussein.

Jesse Jackson

Ran for the Democratic nomination for President in 1984 and 1988.

My position has been that we must defend our allies, protect our national
interests, and contribute to world stability. . . .

Kuwait and Saudi Arabia are our allies and whenever the free passage of traffic
in the gulf has been threatened, they have allied with us. In the cold war, they
have been our trading partners, and have played a factor in the price stability
of petroleum, which affects us and the Western world. They have done things to
support us, when we needed it, and they had no place else to go.

Saudi Arabia is more of an asset to us than Grenada was a threat, Kuwait is more
of an asset to us than Noriega was a threat. . . .

We went to Saudi Arabia with an invitation, so it was not an invasion as it was
in Panama and Grenada. In Panama and Grenada, we violated international law and
put in our own governments and the world scorned us for doing so. In this case
Hussein broke international law. He said he would not invade, and he did. He
said he would withdraw from Kuwait, and then he annexed. And then he began
moving toward Saudi Arabia. Saudi Arabia asked for our help. It seems to me that
we were obliged to respond.

Hopefully, our military presence there will serve as a deterrent to Hussein's
expansion, and our diplomatic and economic initiatives will be a factor in
getting him back to his borders and getting all parties around a table for a
negotiated settlement. . . . Our military presence must be temporary, for the
longer they are there, the more hostilities they will engender. And that's why
we must put at least as much energy into helping the Arab nations' summit
succeed, led by Mubarak, as any other tactic.

James R. Schlesinger

Richard M. Nixon's Secretary of Defense, 1973-1975 , and Jimmy Carter's
Secretary of Energy, 1977-79. Now a counselor at the Center for Strategic and
International Affairs in Washington.

Why is Saudi Arabia so important? Because it is the largest producer of oil, and
the U.S. is becoming increasingly dependent on foreign sources of supply.

Could we survive without Saudi Arabia? Sure. We would find ourselves more
subject to the whims of those who control the supply, but the U.S. is a large
and powerful country.

Oil prices would be higher, and probably more erratic; there would be
conservation, fuel-switching, and there would be a tendency to turn to other
sources of supply for oil itself. Even if Venezuela and Mexico could meet the
U.S.'s oil needs, they could not compensate for the oil dependence of Europe and
Japan. But the U.S. would then lose its position as the leader of the world in
the post-cold war atmosphere.

We were right to provide troops in Saudi Arabia as a deterrent to dissuade Iraq
from attacking Saudi Arabia. We had a commitment, which has been stated and
restated since the late 1970's. . . . For us to stand aside and watch Saudi
Arabia be swept away would be the equivalent of standing by and watching Berlin
be swept away in the 1940's.

I'm not sure Mr. Bush's political objectives of immediate and total and
unequivocal withdrawal of Iraq from Kuwait and the restoration of its legitimate
rulers, are achievable. We may have prematurely set our feet in concrete over
this.

George W. Ball

Lawyer; Under Secretary of State, 1961-66; United States Representative to the
United Nations, 1968; a senior partner, Lehman Brothers, 1969-1982.

President Bush basically had no serious option but the one he is pursuing. I
think it is very important, however, that he not fall into the habit of talking
about this as though this were an American operation. . . . The legitimacy of
what the United States is doing depends now on the Security Council resolution.
It's a United Nations action; he's got to keep that firmly in the forefront.

Even in the most moderate Arab countries, the Arabs privately have a
considerable admiration for Saddam Hussein because they have such contempt for
the Kuwaitis, who have been the beneficiaries of enormous wealth and . . . have
behaved in an extremely self-indulgent way.

One of the major reasons that the Saudis are not better equipped than they were
to resist this aggression is because the American Congress has bowed to the
pressure of the Israeli lobby and denied the Saudis the military hardware that
they have tried to buy.

While the United States a few years ago was the greatest creditor nation in the
world, we are now the greatest debtor nation, and we are able to maintain
ourselves in substantial part because of the flow of investment money from the
oil-producing countries. . . . Should Saddam Hussein be permitted to roll over
on the Saudis, then with his Iraqi-Kuwaiti-Saudi production, he would have a
stranglehold on the world oil market - and he would be the last person who would
be inclined to use his money to . . . mitigate our position as a debtor.

Richard Helms

Former Director of Central Intelligence and former Ambassador to Iran, now an
international consultant in Washington.

The vital interest of the United States in Saudi Arabia is oil. With a capital
O. Any interest that we have in Kuwait is the same: oil.

When I use the term ''oil,'' I am referring of course to crude oil production.
It is the movement of this crude oil to refineries around the world which keeps
the wheels of industry humming and the wheels of automobiles turning. Also oil,
as the Shah used to say, is a precious commodity, because it provides the basis
for a whole series of plastic byproducts as well as petrochemicals of different
kinds.

The current crisis in the Middle East indicates once again how important it is
for the United States to establish an energy policy. We have made various passes
at this difficult activity, but each time whatever crisis has arisen, it has
passed over, and the American public has forgotten the vital importance of crude
oil to our economy, if not our very existence.

In recent years our import of crude oil has steadily risen until it is now
almost 50 percent of our needs. This is a dramatic change from the days when
Texas oil dominated the American domestic scene. It is incumbent upon the
country - the President and the Congress - to wrestle with this difficult
problem of an energy policy. Otherwise the United States, in fact the free
world, will become increasingly hostage to unpredictable events in the Persian
Gulf area.

Bernard Lewis

Cleveland E. Dodge Professor of Near Eastern Studies Emeritus at Princeton
University.

I can understand the irritation of people who ask why on earth should we get
involved with all these difficult and troublesome people in far places. . . .
Nevertheless I feel that irritation is misplaced.

It seems to me that there are two major reasons why we should be concerned about
the Middle East to the point of doing something about it - and even incurring
some risks. The first point is oil, which is necessary not only for this
country, which now imports almost half its oil, but also for the free world
generally.

There is a real danger that one country, one government, you might almost say
one man, would control so large a proportion of the world's oil that he would
have power over not only pricing but also supply. He could allocate and price as
he chose, and thereby exercise a degree of control which is more than
unacceptable - which is positively dangerous.

Ultimately the only way to escape from this dilemma is to escape from oil, which
pollutes the sea, the land, the air, politics, the economy, and much else
besides.

The second point, which I think is even more important, is that if in this year
1990 a country may simply invade and annex a neighbor while the world merely
says tut, tut and does nothing effective about it, then this is the first step
to the breakdown of the international order. . . . If we let this pass, we shall
be back in the international jungle of the 1930's, and we know where that led.

These comments were elicited in telephone interviews by Eric Pace and Alessandra
Stanley.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Political figures commenting on the conflict in the Gulf (The
New York Times; Brian LaPeter/The Island Packet; Associated Press; Frank C.
Dougherty; William E. Sauro/The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              166 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 13, 1990, Monday, Late Edition - Final

IN THE NATION;
Bush's Double Gamble

BYLINE: By Tom Wicker

SECTION: Section A; Page 15, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 749 words


If President Bush loses the gamble he took in pledging that Iraq's conquest of
Kuwait ''will not stand,'' he might turn out to be a loser in American politics
too.

For the moment, polls and every other indication suggest that the Democratic
Congress as well as the American people approve of Mr. Bush's determination to
oppose Saddam Hussein, even to send troops to Saudi Arabia to guard a prime
source of Western oil against any further Iraqi aggression.

Mr. Bush's well-received performance as Commander in Chief also may have allowed
him to recover, at least for the time being, from reaction against his broken
pledge not to raise taxes, and to rise above a surge of unwelcome economic news.

That's not surprising. Presidents who take military action abroad, particularly
if they invoke rhetoric appealing to the overdeveloped American sense of
self-regard, always benefit from a rally-round-the-flag effect. Mr. Bush spoke
in ringing tones of turning back an aggressor and played on memories of the
disastrous failure of other nations to stop Hitler's Germany at the outset.

Prudently, the President did not picture his defense of Saudi Arabia for what it
also is: protection of the oil supplies that fuel Western economies. Americans
are not so ready to fight wars for such realistic but unidealistic reasons.

Nor has the word ''Panama'' passed Mr. Bush's lips in the Middle East crisis.
But Panama is relevant, for at least two reasons. One is that not a few nations
and at least a few Americans regard the U.S. conquest of that country as having
been aggression masquerading as ''Operation Just Cause.'' George Bush thinks
that's different; that was our aggression, not their aggression.

The second reason is that in Panama, U.S. forces were able to make the hit,
quickly win a one-sided battle, and come home before the criticism began to
build. So were the forces engaged in Ronald Reagan's glorious victory over Cuban
construction workers in Grenada. In the age of television, such hit-and-run wars
can be celebrated, since there's no need or time to watch on the home screen as
a long parade of body bags comes sadly home.

The Bush Administration, perhaps at the behest of the feudalistic Saudi regime,
did not permit a U.S. press pool to accompany the first troops sent to the
desert - despite pledges, after Grenada and Panama, not to black out the U.S.
public again. That may suggest White House hopes, however vain, for another
quick, successful, vote-getting operation.

In the Middle East, that may not be in the cards. Indications are that Saddam
Hussein will not invade Saudi Arabia and undertake the war with the U.S. that
Mr. Bush's moves make a certain result. But nothing suggests, so far, that Mr.
Hussein will pull out of Kuwait and restore the emirate, in effect surrendering
to Mr. Bush's public demand.

If the President then tries to throw Iraq out of Kuwait by military force, it
will not be a quick or bloodless operation, and it might not even be successful;
and the alternative, as it now appears, would be stalemate in the desert - Iraq
in Kuwait, the U.S. in Saudi Arabia. As became evident in Korea and Vietnam,
however, the American public has little tolerance for long, limited, stalemated
wars and the high casualty rate they bring.

If such a stalemate develops, which many military experts and authorities on the
region believe likely, Mr. Bush might soon find himself under the severe public
pressures to win or settle an unpopular, faraway conflict from which Presidents
Truman, Johnson and Nixon suffered during Korea and Vietnam. Those Presidents
had international military support; but Mr. Bush may not be able to persuade
other nations - save Britain - to keep troops for long in a peacekeeping force
in Saudi Arabia.

Meanwhile, tightening oil supplies and rising oil prices might bring both
inflation and recession in the United States, a tough combination to overcome
for a President seeking Congressional majorities and his own re-election. Thus,
the long-term political outlook for Mr. Bush may not be as rosy as his present
standing might indicate.

He and his political advisers are well able to make that calculation for
themselves; apparently, they went ahead, anyway, with a policy they considered
necessary, despite its political hazards. But beyond the line he's drawn in the
sand, perhaps George Bush and the nation now can see that it would make more
sense to regain independence from Middle East oil than to die for it.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              167 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 14, 1990, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1321 words



INTERNATIONAL    A2-11

The embargo on Iraq tightened noticeably when an Iraqi tanker sailed away from a
Red Sea port without taking on any crude oil, and two or three other ships
failed to land Iraqi-bound cargoes in the Middle East, the White House said.
Page A1



Order for blockade isolates U.S. at Security Council    A9



News analysis: U.S. relations with two old allies, Israel and Jordan, are being
recast by the crisis in the Persian Gulf. Jordan and the U.S. are drifting
apart, as the U.S. is asking Israel, which it often embraces publicly, to keep
quiet.    A1



Iraq has seized as much as $4 billion in gold bullion, foreign currencies and
goods from Kuwaiti financial and commercial institutions and transferred them to
Baghdad, considerably increasing its financial reserves, bankers said.    A1



The King of Jordan accused the U.S. of creating an ''explosive situation'' that
threatens the entire Middle East. In a published report, King Hussein appeared
to align his country with Iraq although he did not formally take Baghdad's side.

    A9



Arafat's support of Iraq creates rift in P.L.O.    A9


Japanese leader abruptly puts off Mideast visit    A11


Pakistanis agree to join defense of Saudi Arabia    A11


Military analysis: Hussein's Achilles' heel    A10



The deployment of U.S. forces to Saudi Arabia, the largest American military
operation since the Vietnam

War, has strained the ability of the Pentagon to move thousands of troops and
tons of weapons quickly over great distances.    A10



Every 10 minutes, U.S. planes land at Saudi base    A11



About 500 Americans left Kuwait and more are expected to depart, the State
Department said. The 3,000 Americans among thousands of other foreigners under
Iraqi control are a source of concern to U.S. officials worried about hostage
taking.    A8



Kidnappers in Lebanon release Swiss hostage to Syrians    A6


Pakistan reports clash with India in Kashmir    A7


450 Tibetans slain by police, ex-Chinese reporter reveals    A3


Poland's public schools will begin religious education classes    A2



Millions of squatters in South Africa are a constant reminder that, while Nelson
Mandela is free and talks with President F. W. de Klerk, the cataclysmic change
at society's peak has not trickled down to its troughs.    A2



Liberia rebel agrees to cease-fire talks    A3


Provence fights France's high-speed trains    A3


Tucurui Journal: Underwater logging blooms in Amazon    A4



NATIONAL    A12-18

A pristine section of New Mexico has attracted affluent newcomers who oppose the
construction of a disposal site for waste from a mine that employs many locals.
The dispute has uncovered bitter feelings about class, race and roots.    A1



The President will prod Democrats to come to a ''reasonable'' agreement on the
budget. He is returning from vacation a day early to meet with Administration
officials on the issue and will argue that, with the Gulf crisis, the need for
an agreement is urgent.    A13

The latest cut in the Defense budget hit the Navy's Seawolf attack submarine.
Defense Secretary Dick Cheney has scaled back the program and has trimmed the
purchase of new destroyers.    A14



Mayor Barry left his ''options open'' by leaving the Democratic Party and
declaring himself an independent. Though he did not announce his candidacy, the
move allows him to seek re-election as Mayor or a seat on the District of
Columbia City Council.    A14



News analysis: Black candidates seeking governors' seats in the South will have
trouble duplicating Douglas Wilder's victory in the Virginia governor's race.
The defeat of Andrew Young in Georgia underscores the difficulties, experts say.

    A16



Bishops to view abortion effort from public relations firm    A12


Tentative accord set on G.M. strike    A16


Third oil cleanup is pressed near Houston    A16


Concord Journal: Saving Thoreau's pond: rock stars    A14



A rabies vaccine for wild animals will be tested on raccoons on a barrier island
off Virginia. If tests are successful the new vaccine could become the key to
controlling epidemics of the infection that have broken out among wild animals
around the country.    A17



REGIONAL    B1-5

Power in lower Manhattan went out after a four-alarm fire ignited in an
electrical substation. Skyscrapers went dark, financial markets were disrupted
and subways between Brooklyn and Manhattan were halted for more than five hours.

    A1



Workers take holiday in the midst of a calamity    B4


Some financial exchanges are brought to a halt    B4



A law limiting ''dial a porn'' calls to customers who request access to such
services from the phone company will not go into effect, a Federal judge ruled.
The law sought to prevent children from hearing sexually explicit conversations.

    B1



New York City is noisier than ever. From garbage trucks (85 decibels) to engines
revving in Times Square (97 decibels), everyday noise in the city can send its
citizens (and a sound meter) into the overload zone.    B1



Rikers Island was blocked off by hundreds of correction officers who stood at
the entrance to protest the assault and robbery of another officer by inmates
last week. Only emergency vehicles and a handful of others were permitted to
pass.    B1



A Bronx baby is killed as his father cleans a gun    B3


''Rogue computer'' faulted for bad parking tickets    B3



It's summer in the Catskills. Even after decades of decline, thousands still
come to the lake-studded mountains to vacation, though for a greater variety of
reasons than before.    B1



Rinfret proposes towns bid for waste-site exemptions    B3



BUSINESS DIGEST    D1



SCIENCE TIMES

Huge, super-efficient drift nets like those that ignited international protest
in the Pacific Ocean have been spotted for the first time in the Atlantic near
the Caribbean, raising fears that fisheries important to the eastern United
States could be devastated.    A1



New gallbladder surgery: video cameras and tiny punctures    C1


Arctic ice is shrinking, and scientists wonder why    C1



ARTS/ENTERTAINMENT

Architecture: Ellis Island's Great Hall    C13


An opinion and a message on the endowment    C13


Video event for Central Park    C14


Word and Image: Two books about Chico Mendes    C15



FASHION PAGE    B7



OBITUARIES    B6



Hedley Donovan, former editor in chief of Time Inc.
Ethyl Eichelberger, actor and playwright
B. Kliban, cartoonist

SPORTS

The process of replacing the owner of the Yankees, George Steinbrenner, may be
in disarray. Many of the club's 18 limited partners gathering to chose a
successor are now convinced that Mr. Steinbrenner's son, Hank, will refuse the
position.    A1



Baseball: Steinbrenner drew up accusations against Vincent    B9


Colleges: N.C.A.A. confronts suit on eligibility rule    B10


Columns: Berkow on discrimination    B9


Football: Giants win preseason opener    B9


Golf: Championship marked by more important matters    B12



EDITORIALS/LETTERS/OP-ED

EDITORIALS    A20



Three new Mideast worlds
Expanding democracy
''Boot camps'' for Rikers
Diane Camper: Teachers

LETTERS    A20



William Safire: Unequal justice    A21


Marc Weller: A peace plan for the gulf    A21


Charles B. Rangel: The killer drug we ignore    A21


Hans Koning: Don't celebrate 1492 - mourn it    A21


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              168 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 14, 1990, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

CONFRONTATION IN THE GULF;
Pentagon Faces Daunting Challenge In Rushing Sizable Force to Mideast

BYLINE: By ERIC SCHMITT, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 10, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 935 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 13


The deployment of American forces to Saudi Arabia, the largest United States
military operation since the Vietnam War, has severely strained the ability of
the Pentagon to move thousands of troops and tons of weapons and equipment
quickly over great distances.

The commander of American forces in the gulf region said on Sunday that the
deployment of the initial force of 10,000 troops was running ahead of schedule.
But military transportation planners say privately that the sheer magnitude of
their task - an all-out air and sea lift of United States troops and equipment
to the Middle East, 7,000 miles by air and 12,000 miles by sea from the East
Coast - is proving to be a daunting logistical challenge.

According to reports from Saudi Arabia, huge C-5 and C-141 military transport
planes were pouring into Saudi airfields at 10-minute intervals. But Defense
Department officials said they also had to step up aircraft charters from
Federal Express, Eastern Airlines and at least six other commercial airlines to
carry troops.

Pointing up another logistical problem, the Navy has enough fast transport ships
to move only one mechanized division at a time. That is a fraction of the total
force that the Bush Administration plans to send to the Middle East.

Also, military transportation planners said, the 15-hour flights from the East
Coast are wearing down flight crews, half of whom are Reservists.

A Quick Military Buildup

Unlike the Vietnam War, where there was a slow, steady buildup of forces, the
deployment of forces to Saudi Arabia is rushing forward, spurred by concerns
that a sizable ground force be landed there before Iraq can begin a wide attack.

The movement of forces to Saudi Arabia raises questions about the Government's
commitment to less flashy military programs, which unlike the ''Star Wars''
program or new strategic weapons garner little attention in military spending
debates but are essential to preparedness.

The United States has only eight fast sealift ships capable of carrying heavy
armored equipment to the gulf in about two weeks. It takes eight of these ships
to carry a mechanized division, according to the Military Sealift Command.
Regular freighters would take about twice as much time.

In Savannah, Ga., today, the troopship Capella left port carrying tanks and
other equipment for the 24th Mechanized Infantry Division. Two sister ships, the
Bellatrix and the Altair, continued loading equipment for the 24th.

Last year, the Pentagon rebuffed Congressional efforts to buy four more fast
ships. Congress approved $600 million for the ships, but Defense Secretary Dick
Cheney shifted some money to other programs. So far, none of the remaining $375
million has been spent.

The Army has long complained that the Navy is reluctant to finance sealifts,
preferring instead to spend money on warships. The Navy has maintained that
sealifts are a national responsibility and that the Maritime Administration
should be responsible for encouraging the development of commercial ships that
could be used during wartime to move materiel.

''If you don't have the equipment to do the job, it just takes longer,'' said
Gen. Duane H. Cassidy, who retired last year as head of the United States
Transportation Command, the joint services command responsible for air and sea
lifts.

Two Types of Cargo Planes

The Military Airlift Command is using mainly two types of cargo planes to carry
troops and materiel from the United States: 230 C-141's, each capable of
carrying 200 troops and 34 tons of equipment, and 110 C-5's, each capable of
carrying 340 troops and 130 tons of equipment.

In addition, the military is using smaller C-130's to ferry troops and equipment
inside Saudi Arabia.

At a Saudi air base today, according to a press pool report, Maj. Gen. Don L.
Kaufman, the acting chief of staff for Central Command Forward, the command
operations for American troops, said transport planes were landing about every
10 minutes, carrying troops and equipment. The pool reporters were restricted
from disclosing the location of the base.

The eight civilian-manned fast sealift ships that the Navy has activated carry
the heavy armored tanks, personnel carriers and helicopters. Besides the three
ships already in Savannah, a fourth fast sealift, the Regulus, is steaming
toward the Georgia port from Violet, La. The other four ships are standing by on
the Eastern Seaboard and in the Gulf of Mexico, awaiting orders.

Four Freighters Are Activated

In addition, the Navy has activated four large freighters from its ready-reserve
fleet of 92 vessels. The freighters have been sent to private shipyards in
Norfolk, Va., to prepare them for service. The freighters, which are older and
slower than the sealifts, will also carry the heavier equipment.

''The ready-reserve ships are older, more difficult to load and more prone to
maintenance problems,'' said General Cassidy, who is now a vice president of
logistics technology at the CSX Corporation, a Richmond-based transportation
company.

General Cassidy said the military practiced logistical planning every two years
in an exercise called Bright Star, in which United States troops conducted
maneuvers with Egyptian forces in the Egyptian desert.

Although the exercise typically involves thousands of troops and about two dozen
ships, General Cassidy said, Bright Star is small in comparison to the rapid
buildup in the Middle East.

David Berteau, the principal deputy assistant Secretary of Defense for
production and logistics, said: ''This is not an exercise. This is for real.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Tanks of the 24th Infantry Division being prepared for loading
aboard a transport Sunday in Savannah, Ga., for shipment to the Middle East
(Reuters)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              169 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 14, 1990, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

CONFRONTATION IN THE GULF: HUSSEIN'S ACHILLES' HEEL;
Any Move Toward a Peaceful Settlement Could Precipitate a Military Revolt at
Home

BYLINE: By MALCOLM W. BROWNE

SECTION: Section A; Page 10, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1026 words


As President Saddam Hussein of Iraq confronts the United States and its allies
on the Saudi border, he must also watch his back against potential military
enemies at home, intelligence analysts say.

Any move Mr. Hussein might make toward reaching a peaceful settlement of the
current crisis in the Persian Gulf could precipitate a military coup, Israeli
intelligence officials believe.

Mr. Hussein would be especially vulnerable to military revolt if trouble should
develop in Baghdad in the near future, they say, because relatively few of his
most reliable troops are left in the capital.

''A tightly knit corps of relatively young officers commands Iraq's forces,'' an
Israeli intelligence analyst said. ''These are the division and corps commanders
who won rapid promotion during the eight-year war with Iran. Their fighting
spirit is very high, and we believe that if Saddam Hussein should show signs of
backing down at this point, his own officers might kill him and pick up the
torch.''

An Even Tougher Stand

On Saturday President Bush suggested to reporters that he would be pleased if
Mr. Hussein could be overthrown. But implicit in this idea is the assumption
that the ousted Iraqi leader would be replaced by a more tractable regime.

Israeli analysts believe, however, that if anything, Mr. Hussein's successor
would probably take an even tougher stand against the United States and its
allies.

''Iraq has long been ruled by the military and it will continue to be so,'' an
Israeli expert said. ''The army is now led by young turks, and a change from
Hussein would probably be a change for the worse.''

Of the Iraqi army's 55 divisions, Western experts believe that no more than 12 -
and possibly as few as 7 -are elite units equivalent in training, morale and
equipment to the best troops they might encounter. Most of these troops have
been stationed along the Kuwaiti border with Saudi Arabia, confronting the
forces of the United States and its allies. A large proportion of the rest of
the army is strung out along Iraq's long borders with Iran and Turkey, thus
leaving Baghdad and Mr. Hussein relatively undefended.

For the time being, a military stalemate is in effect. Some analysts suggest
that the power of the Iraqi army has been greatly overrated. But Western experts
believe it would be a serious mistake to make any assumptions about Iraqi
strategy and tactics based merely on Iraq's past performance.

'Iraq Can Always Shift Gears'

''For example,'' a Western analyst said, ''Iraq never conducted any substantial
night operations against Iran during the eight-year war that ended in 1988. And
yet Iraq's attack on Kuwait was conducted at night. Moreover, it was a very
complex operation involving seaborne troops with landing craft, coordinated with
a land operation using tanks and mechanized infantry. The lesson is that Iraq
can always shift gears on us without warning.''

As United States air power in the Persian Gulf mounts by the hour, it becomes an
increasing deterrent to Iraq's huge armored forces, which include some 5,500
heavy tanks, 100 light tanks and about 7,000 armored personnel carriers. Many of
the United States Air Force and Navy attack aircraft moving into the area are
equipped with armor-piercing missiles, some of which can be guided to their
targets by laser beams.

Although Iraq's air force is too small to overcome American air superiority,
experts say, Iraqi armor is by no means defenseless. The Iraqi army is equipped
with some 4,000 air defense guns of calibers ranging up to 130 millimeters.
Baghdad's antiaircraft missiles include about 300 long-range Soviet-made SA-2
and SA-3 missiles of Vietnam-War vintage, and many smaller but newer missiles.

Iraqi infantrymen are also equipped with the shoulder-fired SA-7 antiaircraft
missiles, code-named Strella by NATO. Among the American weapons Iraq captured
in Kuwait, which have presumably been distributed to Iraqi forces, are
American-made shoulder-fired Stinger antiaircraft missiles and six batteries of
Hawk missiles.

No 'Easy Fight'

Shoulder-fired antiaircraft missiles used by guerrilla forces in Afghanistan
took a heavy toll of Soviet combat aircraft during the war in that country, and
experts believe that these missiles were an important factor in Moscow's
decision to withdraw its forces from that country.

''Make no mistake,'' an intelligence analyst said, ''if the United States Air
Force is used against Iraqi armor, there will be United States casualties. It
will not be an easy fight.'' But despite the dangerous confrontation of opposing
armies along the Persian Gulf, analysts yesterday predicted a drawn-out war of
nerves, in which an outbreak of fighting seemed unlikely.

''With this much military muscle in place, mistakes are always possible, and a
mistake could plunge us all into a very ugly war,'' one American expert said.
''It may be that we'll sit on the brink for a very long time until someone
blinks.''

As long as the crisis continues, experts agree, the United States will remain
the dominant counter to Iraqi aggression. Only two Middle Eastern nations have
armed forces comparable in strength to those of Iraq - Iran and Syria. Syria is
sending some units to Saudi Arabia as part of the Arab force that is to help
defend that country, but the Syrians are unlikely to be more than a token force.

Iran is not sending troops to Saudi Arabia. ''Iran might see this as an
opportune moment to strike at Iraq, but we think that is most unlikely,'' an
Israeli analyst said. ''Iran has everything to gain by just sitting this out.''

Israel is also unlikely to play an important role in the confrontation, though
Israeli officials believe Iraq would like to draw Israel in.

''If Baghdad could force our country into a war with Iraq, many Arabs would no
doubt want to join the fight against us,'' one said. ''We have some concern
about the Iraqis' improved Scud B missiles, which have a range of 360 miles and
could reach Israel from their base at the H-3 oil-pumping station at Iraq's
border with Jordan. But for the time being we are just watching the situation
with interest.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Military Analysis

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              170 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 14, 1990, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Workers Take Holiday In Midst of a Calamity

BYLINE: By ALESSANDRA STANLEY

SECTION: Section B; Page 4, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1244 words


Men and women, jackets off and ties askew, streamed out of the emergency exit
doors of the World Financial Center by the hundreds, and Marjorie Greenberg, a
22-year-old recruiter for American Express, was leading the pack. She vaulted
onto the West Side Highway just after 2:30 and hailed the only visible taxi
leaving the downtown maw, looking as elated and thankful as an American
serviceman hauling himself onto the last chopper out of the American Embassy
compound in Saigon.

''I am going to the park to play Frisbee,'' she hollered out the window and over
the noise of traffic and jeers of disappointed taxi-hunters.

There were tales of panic and anxiety yesterday; firefighters overcome by acrid
smoke, people trapped for hours in World Trade Center elevators. There was
disruption on the financial markets. But for Miss Greenberg, and for thousands
of others, the bottom line on the electrical fire that shut down much of the
vast electronic machinery of Wall Street - the computers, the photocopiers, the
fax machines, the telephones, and air-conditioning - was sheepish gratitude for
a surprise afternoon holiday.

''This is probably the best day I've had all summer,'' said Greg Smith, 27, a
recent business school graduate and a new associate at Shearson Lehman Hutton.
He sat, sipping Amstel Light, with 11 fellow associates around a table at
Moran's a crowded outdoor bar on the esplanade of Battery Park City at 3
o'clock. Electricity was down, the ice was melting, but the beers were still
cold and Happy Hour had begun, two hours early.

Josh Jofen and Ed Kaiser made an executive decision. At 1:30, once they had
determined that the lights would not return to their insurance office at 195
Broadway, they left. ''The lights were on at the bar across the street,'' Mr.
Kaiser, a computer programmer said. ''We felt the need for alcohol.''

Two hours later, they were back on the street corner, contemplating their need
for a little more alcohol. ''To be honest with you,'' Mr. Kaiser explained, ''I
was glad to work a half day.''

'I Could Have Left'

On the seventh floor of the Shearson Lehman brokerage house, where the commodity
traders labor, there were captains (of industry) who decided to go down with
their databases. The building manager had given the order to evacuate shortly
after 2 P.M. The corridors emptied, and the offices grew silent, but the
evacuation order went unheeded by almost half the seventh-floor traders.

''I could have left,'' Gregory Weldon, 30, a commodities futures broker, said
uncertainly, as he stared at a blank computer screen, willing it, with his
Svengali gaze, to go back on. ''But I really couldn't just leave - the markets
in Chicago are still open.''

Thanks to an emergency generator, the air-conditioning was working, weakly. The
lights were on, dimly, and half a dozen phone lines out of hundreds were still
working, sometimes. Eric Trujillo, 35, an assistant vice president for New York
institutional futures, was also frozen at his desk, staring gloomily at a
30-line phone bank that was as still and silent as a tomb. ''What if our phones
come back up?'' he said. ''We have to be there to provide that value-added.''

Fred Katzman, chief foreign-exchange dealer, was hunched over his one working
phone, trading pounds sterling for a client who had tried other brokerage firms
downtown and found them closed, due to the power outage.

Mr. Weldon had his mind on the bigger picture. ''The real question is whether
companies who incur major losses, are they going after Con Ed?'' His eyes
brightened at the prospect. ''What if Hussein attacks Saudi Arabia? If gold goes
up $15 and you were short when the power outage happened - that's a pretty big
loss. Hypothetically, of course. Based on these technical difficulties,
ultimately, is Con Ed responsible?''

While some who could have left did not, some who could not were considerably
less cheerful. At 40 Wall Street, one of the buildings not blacked out, four
employees of Manufacturers Hanover Trust stood on the sidewalk, at the end of
their lunch break at 3 P.M. sullenly observing the thousands of other
secretaries, office managers and bankers who were heading home.

''I'm telling you, it never hits our building,'' one woman complained, ''we're
still working.''

Nerves Needed Soothing

Beau Martucci of Brooklyn and another man were trapped for 90 minutes in an
elevator on the 14th floor of a 32-story office building at 127 John Street.
''He was calm, I was calm,'' Mr. Martucci, a facilities manager at RMJ
Securities, said. In an adjacent elevator, he could hear a woman screeching for
nearly an hour before being rescued. His nerves needed soothing. ''I smoked a
cigarette in the elevator,'' he said. Maintenance men manually cranked the
elevator up to the 17th floor, and he walked downstairs from there.

Employees at the 110-floor World Trade Center mainly avoided the elevators.

Anthony Puzio, 47, walked down 33 flights from his office at Korea Associated
Securities, a brokerage concern, and emerged onto the street, breathing heavily,
sweating profusely, but calm. Marveling at the people milling, talking, and just
standing on sidewalks like bystanders at a a parade, he exclaimed, ''Its like a
festival out here.''

At the World Financial Center, on an elevator immobilized between the eighth and
ninth floors, passengers tried to talk to a representative of the building
management over an intercom.

BUILDING REPRESENTATIVE: ''Is anybody hurt?''

ELEVATOR: ''What'd he say?''

REPRESENTATIVE: ''Is everything O.K.?''

ELEVATOR: ''Never mind.''

REPRESENTATIVE: ''Thank you for your patience. We hope to get you out very
soon.''

ELEVATOR: ''What did he say?''

A Nice Day for Chatting

About 250 residents of St. Margaret's House, an apartment building for elderly
and disabled people, were evacuated from their rooms after the blackout. The
building's 23-member staff went door-to-door, bringing people down to the breezy
lobby where residents spent the afternoon chatting with one another.

The staff carried down some of the residents' medications, and pets.

Olga Lentz, a resident since May, was all aplomb. ''There was no panic.
Everybody took it in stride.'' She sat outside the plaza reading a Graham Greene
novel, She said she would have preferred to be inside watching ''General
Hospital.''

The power failure was more alarming for Julie Rozar, a very expectant mother who
arrived from Brooklyn Heights with her husband, William, at the emergency room
of New York Infirmary-Beekman Downtown Hospital, minutes before the power went
out.

''There I was in labor and the hospital lights kept flickering off and on, the
alarms ringing six or seven times, trying to time contractions, worrying about
what was wrong,'' she said, ''And it was so hot.''

She gave birth to a daughter three hours later, at 3:39. The 5-pound, 15-ounce
girl, named Kalyna Maria, was the hospital's third smooth delivery of the day,
thanks to an emergency generator.

The Show Must Go On

Real life may have taken a holiday, but Hollywood has never been a
reality-driven business.

The film, ''Funny About Love,'' directed by Leonard Nimoy and starring Christine
Lahti and Susan Ruttan, serenely carried on. The production had the only working
lights at the Seaport, and actors and crew kept to their script, ignoring the
distractions, despite audio intrusions of ambulances, helicopters and fire
engines.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Firefighters donning oxygen masks yesterday before entering the
electrical substation in lower Manhattan to fight the blaze. (Jim Estrin for The
New York Times)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              171 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 14, 1990, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Hedley Donovan Is Dead at 76; Retired Chief Editor of Time Inc.

BYLINE: By ALEX S. JONES

SECTION: Section B; Page 6, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 967 words


Hedley Donovan, a former editor in chief of Time Inc. who is credited with
greatly enhancing the journalistic stature of Time magazine, died yesterday at
New York Hospital in Manhattan after a long illness. He was 76 years old and
lived in Manhattan and Sands Point, L.I.

He died of an acute infection that complicated a chronic lung condition, the
hospital said.

As editor in chief for 15 years beginning in 1964, Mr. Donovan was responsible
for the content of all Time Inc. publications, including Time, Life, Fortune,
Sports Illustrated, Money, and People.

He retired as editor in chief in 1979 and served one year as a senior adviser to
President Jimmy Carter.

Hand-Picked by Luce

Henry Luce, Time Inc.'s founder and first editor in chief, hand-picked the
quiet-spoken Mr. Donovan to be his successor. Mr. Donovan used the opportunity
to redirect Time from often-polemical coverage that reflected Mr. Luce's very
conservative views on foreign affairs to more balanced reporting. For instance,
while Mr. Luce had used the magazines to advance his hawkish stance on Vietnam,
under Mr. Donovan the war was covered as a news story with far less ideological
bias.

Mr. Donovan also installed what became known as the ''Donovan Charter,'' which
made the editor in chief answerable only to the company's board of directors and
codified the tradition under Mr. Luce of separating news and business
operations. The effect was to grant the managing editors of all Time Inc.
magazines a sense of independence from business considerations, which became a
hallmark of the company's management style.

''He was a man of extraordinary and quite apparent integrity,'' said Richard M.
Clurman, who was chief of correspondents under both Mr. Donovan and Mr. Luce and
is now preparing a book on the merger this year between Time Inc. and Warner
Communications Inc., a move that created Time Warner Inc.

Built on a Vision

Mr. Donovan also presided over a highly successful period of building on Mr.
Luce's original vision in which Money and People magazines were created, Fortune
went from monthly to twice-monthly publication and Life was revived as a monthly
after ceasing publication as a weekly.

Mr. Luce's decision to make Mr. Donovan his successor was perplexing to many
outside the company because he was so unlike the hyperbolic, impatient,
charismatic Mr. Luce.

''I'm not a very fiery fellow,'' Mr. Donovan wrote in his autobiographical book,
''Right Places, Right Times: Forty Years In Journalism Not Counting My Paper
Route,'' which was published last year by Henry Holt & Company.

Henry A. Grunwald, who was made managing editor of Time by Mr. Donovan and later
succeeded him as editor in chief, charaterized Mr. Donovan's manner as ''massive
calm.''

Indeed, at the company his somber manner earned him the nickname ''Deadly
Hedley.''

'A Kind of Anchor'

But it was his resolute, sometimes stubborn character that attracted Mr. Luce,
along with his studious, thoughtful mind.

''Luce thought of him as a kind of anchor,'' Mr. Clurman said.

In an interview yesterday, Mr. Grunwald said Mr. Donovan was very reserved and
''not a stem-winding speaker,'' he was nevertheless ''a man of overarching
intellect.''

''Some thought he was too calm,'' Mr. Grunwald said, ''but having worked for
him, I appreciated that calm.''

To some, Mr. Donovan's imposing 6-foot-1 height and powerful build gave him the
appearance of an athlete. At Mr. Luce's death in 1967, many people outside the
company regarded Mr. Donovan as an enigmatic figure who had yet to put a
personal stamp on the magazines.

Changed News Reporting

But Osborn Elliott, then editor in chief of Newsweek, said Mr. Donovan earned
the industry's respect by changing the way Time reported the news.

''He did bring a balance and straightness and integrity to the operation that
was needed,'' Mr. Elliott said.

A major element of the change was the appointment of Mr. Grunwald as Time's
managing editor.

Mr. Grunwald described the Time he inherited as ''rather stridently conservative
on some issues, especially Vietnam,'' and sometimes ''quite snide.'' He said Mr.
Donovan wanted the magazine to be ''more toward the middle.''

Jason McManus, Time Warner's editor in chief and Mr. Grunwald's successor, said
in a statement yesterday that Mr. Donovan brought ''great integrity and a sense
of citizenship to everything he did.''

Born in Minnesota

Mr. Donovan was born May 24, 1914, in Brainerd, Minn., where his father was a
mining engineer. He grew up in Minneapolis and in 1934 graduated magna cum laude
from the University of Minnesota, where he was a member of Phi Beta Kappa.

He took a second degree in 1936 as a Rhodes Scholar at Hertford College at
Oxford University.

Mr. Donovan joined Fortune magazine in 1945 as a writer after spending five
years as a reporter at The Washington Post and three years as a naval officer
during World War II.

In 1953, Mr. Luce made him managing editor of Fortune, and six years later Mr.
Luce designated him to be his heir apparent, though he did not take the editor
in chief spot until Mr. Luce retired in 1964.

Worked With the Chairman

During most of the succeeding years, Mr. Donovan worked in close and harmonious
partnership with Andrew Heiskell, Time Inc.'s chairman, who headed the business
operation.

In 1985, Harper & Row published his book, ''Roosevelt to Reagan: A Reporter's
Encounters with Nine Presidents.''

Mr. Donovan's wife, Dorothy, died in 1978. He is survived by three children:
Peter, of Darien, Conn.; Mark, of Manhattan, and Helen, of Newton, Mass., and a
sister, Elizabeth Edmonds of Wilmette, Ill. He had two grandchildren.

A memorial service is scheduled for 10:30 A.M. Thursday at the Congregational
Church of Manhasset, L.I..

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Hedley Donovan (Henry Holt & Company, 1989)

TYPE: Obituary

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              172 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 14, 1990, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

The Endowment: A Reflective Defense of It and a Show That Tweaks It;
Sending Helms A Message From Home

BYLINE: By MERVYN ROTHSTEIN, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section C; Page 13, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1236 words

DATELINE: CARRBORO, N.C.


''The homosexuals are in a battle against American values,'' the speaker says.
''Their ultimate aim is to have the American people accept the proposition that
their perverted 'life style' is as worthy of protection as race, creed and
religion. I do not buy that. I say to them, 'Bosh and nausea.' ''

The words are those of Senator Jesse Helms, Republican of North Carolina, taken
directly from The Congressional Record. But the speaker is not Senator Helms,
and the words are not being spoken on the floor of the Senate. They are
performed by an actress, Patricia Esperon; they are heard in the Artscenter
theater in this town next to Chapel Hill, and they are accompanied by a dancer,
Rebecca Hutchins, and 69 photographic images projected on a screen.

The images include Senator Helms, World War II and Vietnam, a Ku Klux Klan
rally, marchers with Confederate flags. They also include some sexually explicit
homoerotic photographs taken by Robert Mapplethorpe, an exhibition of whose work
was supported by a grant from the National Endowment for the Arts. Senator Helms
denounced the exhibition as obscene and attacked the endowment for giving it a
grant.

The work being performed is ''Indecent Materials.'' It is 15 minutes long and
consists entirely of comments by the Senator, all from The Congressional Record,
on homosexuality and the endowment. The dancer and the images do not illustrate
the speeches but are meant to be reactions to the Senator's ideas.

Life in an Epidemic

''Indecent Materials'' is part of a double bill, the second half of which is
called ''Report From the Holocaust,'' based on the book ''Reports From the
Holocaust: The Making of an AIDS Activist,'' a collection of essays by Larry
Kramer, the author of the play ''The Normal Heart.'' The double bill is a
production of the Manbites Dog Theater in Durham, N.C. It was first presented at
the Durham Arts Council in June; it played four performances in Carrboro, and it
is now heading for New York, where it begins a two-and-a-half-week run at Joseph
Papp's Public Theater on Aug. 22. Both works were adapted by Edward Hunt and
Jeff Storer, the co-founders of Manbites Dog Theater, and were directed by Mr.
Storer.

In the 45-minute ''Report From the Holocaust,'' an actor, David Ring, portrays
Mr. Kramer and talks about being a homosexual man during the nine years of the
AIDS epidemic. At the end of the work, he has an encounter with his
sister-in-law over his militancy, his public demands that more attention be paid
to the situation. As the play begins on the sparsely furnished stage, there are,
scattered on the floor, hundreds of blank 3-by-5 index cards; members of the
audience have had to step around or over them as they returned to their seats
after intermission. Soon the audience will realize that each index card
symbolizes 1 of the 500 acquaintances and friends Mr. Kramer says he has lost to
AIDS in the last seven years.

Later, Mr. Ring, portraying Mr. Kramer, will tell of the first man with whom he
has allowed himself to make love and be (safely) intimate in five years. ''When
we hold each other,'' he says, ''there are three people in bed, and one of them
is Death.''

Both works, Mr. Storer says, ''deal with portraits that are made from the words
of two very strong, emotional speakers.''

''I think those words are not being heard by many people,'' he adds, sitting
backstage with Mr. Hunt before the final performance in Carrboro, ''and our hope
was to present both of these men's views in a way that people could hear,
understand and possibly be prompted to action.''

A Company of Artists

Mr. Storer, who is 37 years old, and Mr. Hunt, 42, founded Manbites Dog Theater
three years ago as a vehicle for presenting new and experimental work. Mr.
Storer has been involved in theater for 20 years and was associate director of
theater at Duke University in Durham from 1982 to 1987. Mr. Hunt became involved
with the stage when he met Mr. Storer about five years ago. Among the works they
have presented are ''The Normal Heart,'' ''Hunting Cockroaches'' by Janusz
Glowacki and ''The Day Room'' by Don DeLillo.

''We're a company of visual and performing artists,'' Mr. Storer says. ''We look
to do cross-collaborative works. The Helms piece is an example of a
collaboration between a choreographer, a visual artist and a director.''

The idea of adapting Mr. Kramer's essays came about largely as a result of the
company's production of ''The Normal Heart,'' Mr. Storer says. ''We began to
follow Larry's writings, and when the collection of essays came out about a year
and a half ago, Ed and I read them, and there were some visual images that
struck us immediately. I began to see them onstage, and we began to do a
script.''

They sought Mr. Kramer's permission to work on the piece. ''He was very
supportive,'' Mr. Storer says.

The Helms piece was created because of the Kramer work, Mr. Hunt says. ''We
thought of the Kramer as a 45-minute piece,'' he says, ''and we decided that to
get people into the theater we needed a larger evening. So we looked for a short
opening piece that would have some relevance, as the Kramer does, to
contemporary issues. The National Endowment controversy was bubbling, but it
took us the longest time to make the connection that if you're going to do
something about the endowment, then Senator Helms would be a perfect choice. The
local connection makes him the obvious choice. We started with his views on the
endowment and went from that to other issues he returns to again and again that
connect with the Kramer piece, the AIDS epidemic and the issue of
homosexuality.''

After performances began in June, Mr. Storer says, Mr. Kramer happened to be in
the area attending a wedding, and he saw the production. ''And then,'' Mr.
Storer says, Mr. Kramer got in touch with the Public Theater, which had produced
''The Normal Heart.'' The Public sent a representative to see the production.
Some days later, Mr. Storer and Mr. Hunt received a phone call from Joseph Papp,
the Public Theater's head, who has been very outspoken in his criticism of
Senator Helms's stance on the endowment and refused a $50,000 endowment grant
this year rather than sign a statement concerning the endowment's rules on
obscenity.

''Mr. Papp said he felt our production was a piece of political theater that
should be done in New York,'' Mr. Storer says. ''That thrilled us no end.''

Theater Into Action

After every performance, the company holds a panel discussion involving
representatives from political groups and AIDS service organizations. But so
far, Mr. Storer says, no representative from Senator Helms's organization has
appeared. ''We've contacted the Helms campaign'' - the Senator is running for
re-election this year - ''but we have gotten no response,'' Mr. Storer says.

The public reaction to the performances and the discussions has been extremely
positive. he says. There has been much talk at the panel discussions of activity
involving the AIDS problem in the Durham-Raleigh-Chapel Hill area, as well as of
Senator Helms's re-election battle against Harvey Gantt, a former mayor of
Charlotte. Now the production is moving on to New York, and Mr. Storer and Mr.
Hunt are eager to see what its reception will be there. ''We didn't go into this
thinking it would be something that would capture so many people,'' Mr. Storer
says. ''But it has.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: A dancer in front of a projected image in ''Indecent
Materials.''; Edward Hunt and Jeff Storer, co-founders of Manbites Dog Theater.
(Photographs by Jay Anderson for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              173 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 14, 1990, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Ex-Judge Named to Study Action Under Asbestos Plan

BYLINE: y STEPHEN LABATON

SECTION: Section D; Page 1, Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 800 words


A Federal judge in Brooklyn took the first steps yesterday toward carrying out a
national plan for resolving asbestos personal injury cases. Federal District
Judge Jack B. Weinstein said that he had appointed Marvin E. Frankel, a former
Federal judge, as a special master to conduct hearings on part of the plan.

Vowing that a class action would not take years to resolve as others have
required, Judge Weinstein said Judge Frankel would begin a proceeding tomorrow
that could lead to the national resolution of tens of thousands of asbestos
cases.

Judge Frankel will determine whether a class action would be warranted in
thousands of cases against Eagle-Picher Industries. To recommend approval of a
class action, Judge Frankel must find that Eagle-Picher's assets are so limited
that a verdict in favor of some plaintiffs would hurt others.

He said in an interview following the hearing that he would begin his
examination tomorrow at Federal court in Brooklyn, when he meets with lawyers to
narrow the issues and set up a schedule for hearings and fact-finding about the
financial condition of Eagle-Picher, a Cincinnati-based maker of consumer and
industrial products that made wide use of asbestos. He added that he expected to
complete the task no later than Sept. 10.

A lawyer for the company, Arvin Maskin, told the court yesterday that
Eagle-Picher was now facing 65,000 asbestos cases, with thousands more being
filed monthly, and legal bills of more than $100 million a year.

An order endorsed by 10 Federal judges last Friday consolidates many of the
cases into a series of proposed class actions that would be supervised by Judge
Weinstein and two other judges, Thomas D. Lambros of Cleveland and Robert M.
Parker of Tyler, Tex.

The arrangement was reached after lawyers for many asbestos victims sought a
class action before Judge Parker, who has a reputation among lawyers for
favoring plaintiffs. Judge Weinstein originally called for a nationwide
consolidation that set off the skirmish among judges and lawyers last month for
class actions. Many of the plaintiffs' lawyers, recalling an order by Judge
Weinstein when he supervised the Agent Orange class action brought by Vietnam
veterans, feared that a nationwide consolidation exclusively before him would
result in a huge slashing of their fees.

Several judges and lawyers have said that as much as two-thirds of the money
companies have been spending to resolve asbestos cases had been going for
lawyers' fees and other legal expenses.

The Judges' Plan

Under the judges' plan, Judge Lambros will attempt a nationwide settlement,
while Judge Parker will try cases that do not settle. Judge Weinstein has told
colleagues and friends that he agreed to the arrangement because he is not
convinced that the broader class actions would withstand appellate review.

The judge said that he expects to supervise class actions against a half-dozen
asbestos companies with sharply limited money and pool their resources to cut
down on enormous legal costs. He also said he was considering the appointment of
Bertram Harnett as a special master who would examine the insurance coverage of
Eagle-Picher and other companies that move to have their cases consolidated.
Justice Harnett retired from the New York State Supreme Court in 1977. Judge
Frankel, Justice Harnett and Judge Weinstein have known each other since they
studied together at Columbia Law School, graduating in 1948.

At the hearing yesterday, two plaintiffs' lawyers expressed reservations about
the use of a class action, but stopped short of outright rejection. One of the
lawyers, Gene Locks of Philadelphia, said that a class action would not succeed
in quick relief for asbestos victims but instead would result in more money
being spent ''on needless transaction costs.'' He said it would be more
beneficial if Eagle-Picher went into bankruptcy.

Eagle-Picher Claim Questioned

The other lawyer, Stanley Levy of New York, said he was not convinced that
Eagle-Picher actually had limited resources, an issue that will have to be
determined by Judge Frankel. The two plaintiffs' lawyers met with Judge
Weinstein privately after the hearing.

Judge Weinstein said that more than 250 cases arising partly out of work at the
Brooklyn Navy Yard more than 25 years ago would probably not be tried before
October; he had hoped for trial in early September.

Settlement is expected by early September of 265 Brooklyn Navy Yard cases,
Kenneth R. Feinberg, a Washington lawyer appointed by the court to reach a
settlement, said yesterday. Attempting to persuade the defendants in those cases
to settle, Judge Weinstein said any payments that they made would be taken into
consideration in the class action proceedings before Judge Lambros and Judge
Parker.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              174 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 15, 1990, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Confrontation in the Gulf;
U.S. May Call Up Some Reservists To Ease the Strain on the Military

BYLINE: By MICHAEL R. GORDON, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1082 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 14


The Bush Administration is considering the partial mobilization of reserve
forces to help deter an attack on Saudi Arabia by Iraq, Pentagon officials said
today.

Consideration of a call-up reflects the growing dimensions of the United States
military buildup in Saudi Arabia and the strains it is placing on the military.
It came as Pentagon officials disclosed that the United States had deployed more
than 20,000 troops in Saudi Arabia.

'Heavy Reliance' on Reserves

The Pentagon has declined to say how many troops it plans to deploy there, but
officials have talked about 100,000 while contingency plans provide for a
deployment of as many as a quarter of million.

Appearing at a news conference in Atlanta, where he spoke to a veterans group,
Defense Secretary Dick Cheney noted that President Bush had the authority to
call up as many as 200,000 reservists and suggested that mobilization was under
consideration.

''We have not made any decision yet in terms of an overall call-up,'' he said in
response to a question.

''The fact is we have over the years built a very heavy reliance on reserve
units into our forces,'' the Secretary added, pointing out that reserves are
trained for important logistical support operations and medical care, among
other tasks.

''For example, when you start to look for medical personnel you find an awful
lot of those are reservists,'' he said. ''The way you fill that kind of need in
the midst of a major deployment like this is to call upon those individuals.''

Full Call-Up Discounted

A Pentagon official who asked not to be identified discounted the likelihood of
a full call-up of 200,000 reservists. If a call-up was decided upon, he said, it
would most likely be in the neighborhood of several tens of thousands, but he
emphasized that no firm numbers had been agreed upon.

The last time that reserve units were called up was in 1968 after the beginning
of Tet offensive in Vietnam and the North Korean seizure of the surveillance
ship Pueblo, according to Martin Binkin, an expert on military affairs at the
Brookings Institution. President Johnson was reluctant to mobilize reserves
because he feared a call-up would encourage public opposition to the conflict.
About 34,000 Army, Navy and Air Force reservists were mobilized then.

During the 1961 Berlin crisis, the Army called up more than 100,000 of its
reserves. Reservists served voluntarily in Panama during the military operation
that started last December and others volunteered for minesweeping operations
when the United States escorted Kuwaiti oil tankers in the Persian Gulf two
years ago.

Pentagon officials said that Army officials were suggesting the need to call up
the reserves to help with the demanding logistical requirements of deploying a
large force in Saudi Arabia for an indefinite period. Air Force officials were
said to be expressing similar concerns.

More Troops in Saudi Arabia

As the Bush Administration considers calling up the reserves, American troops
and equipment continued to pour into Saudi Arabia today, and a Pentagon official
who asked not be identified said the United States now had more than 20,000
troops there.

The Pentagon announced today that marines, an Air Force tanker, RC-135
reconnaissance aircraft and additional Awacs radar surveillance planes had
arrived in Saudi Arabia. Pentagon officials have previously said that tanks and
other equipment for 30,000 marines are sailing toward the Persian Gulf. Marines
are being flown to Saudi Arabia, where they will ''marry up'' with their
equipment.

As the deployments continued, the Navy monitored a small number of ships headed
toward Iraq that are said to be carrying weapons or ammunition.

The Navy is poised to begin a blockade but the actual rules of engagement for
interdicting ships are not expected to be issued for a day or two, Mr. Cheney
has said.

One ship headed for Iraq is the Balqees, an Iraqi vessel that is believed to be
carrying tank engines and other military equipment from Poland. The ship left
the Polish port of Gdynia on Aug. 1 before the sanctions were decided upon and
the Poles say that there is nothing they can do about it because it is not their
ship. Its last reported location was in the Mediterranean Sea.

Other Vessels Monitored

An American official said that a handful of other vessels, carrying ammunition
and other supplies but not operating under the Iraqi flag, were also moving
toward Iraq and were being monitored. But the official declined to identify the
vessels.

Discussing the reserves, a Pentagon spokesman said that some reserve and
national guard units had been taking part in the operation but that they were
volunteers who had not been summoned to duty. Another official said that the Air
Force was making extensive use of reservists to fly equipment to Saudi Arabia
but that many of them were already undergoing summer training and volunteered
for the operation.

Richard J. Danzig, a lawyer and a former Pentagon expert on manpower issues,
said that President Bush had the authority to call up as many as 200,000
reservists for 90 days without a declaration of war. The call-up can be
extended.

A Pentagon official said that military commanders had told Gen. Colin L. Powell,
the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, that the Pentagon should start
planning to activate reserve units to ease the strains of conducting an extended
operation in the gulf.

The Army is particularly dependent on reservists to sustain large and extended
military operations, Pentagon officials said.

An Army official said that as a rule of thumb about 25,000 support troops are
needed to sustain a 15,000-man combat division. About 70 percent of the support
troops, the official said, are in the reserves. These include construction
battalions and troops to maintain and transport equipment and supply water.

''You have got to face the fact that at some point in this operation you have to
give consideration to calling up the reserves,'' said the official, who declined
to be more specific.

Mr. Danzig said, ''Following the Vietnam War and the downsizing of the Army, the
tendency was to concentrate combat units in the active duty force and support
units in the reserves. This was done to save money because reserves are cheaper.
The theory was that this would make it easier for the Army to respond to
short-term contingencies while making the Army more dependent on reserve units
for longer-term situations.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Defense Secretary Dick Cheney visiting a unit of 24th
Mechanized Infantry Division, being sent to Saudi Arabia from its base at Fort
Stewart, Ga. (Pool photo via Reuters); Soldiers of the 82d Airborne Division
with their armored vehicles yesterday as they manned defensive positions at a
base in Saudi Arabia. (Pool photo via Associated Press); map of Saudi Arabia.
(pg. A18)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              175 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 15, 1990, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Confrontation in the Gulf;
U.S. Troops' Biggest Fight So Far Is With 115-Degree Desert

BYLINE: By The Associated Press

SECTION: Section A; Page 19, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 705 words



The following report was filed from Saudi Arabia yesterday and was based on the
dispatches of a pool of reporters sent there under Defense Department auspices.
The ground rules for the pool prohibit the reporting of exact numbers of troops
or weapons, their exact locations and the names of enlisted personnel.

With no Iraqis in sight, the biggest problem for American troops deployed in the
desert sands is the 115-degree heat.

Troops at a staging camp said the heat had ''fried'' some radios, rendering them
useless.

Soldiers in full battle dress added a chic touch to their gear - liter bottles
of mineral water. The Americans were told to drink at least six gallons of water
a day.

A 24-year-old medic from Hollywood, Fla., said yesterday that he had treated
numerous dehydration cases, some requiring intravenous injections.

''I'm like their mother,'' the medic told the Scripps Howard News Service.
''It's my job to see that they eat, and if you see a guy with two full canteens,
you know he's not drinking.''

Joining With Saudi Marines

But he said that perhaps such hardships are just as well. ''They could put us up
in air-conditioned buildings,'' he said, ''but then, if we have to fight people
used to this, we're not going to last very long.''

As the American buildup continued, United States forces took up positions
side-by-side with Saudi marines at a Saudi naval base near vital oil terminals.

Transport planes continued landing American troops and materiel at an air base
elsewhere in the country. A British Airways jet was also seen arriving. Already
lined up at the airport were dozens of Saudi fighter jets and a smaller
contingent of Canadian fighters.

American bulldozers, front-end loaders, armored vehicles and jeeps lined the
base roads. Pallet after pallet of munitions, gear, food and other supplies were
stacked along the roads.

Syrians Arrive

In all, the American reporters visited with members of the 82d Airborne at three
sites - the naval base, the air base and a nearby air-defense camp that the
Saudis have given over to the Americans.

The air defense camp bristled with Vietnam-era M551 Sheridan airborne-assault
vehicles - light tanks that can be air-dropped. Also at the site was a multiple
rocket launcher.

With the exception of the Canadian jets, the reporters have not seen forces from
any other nations. Diplomatic sources in Riyadh, the capital, said Syrian units
landed yesterday to join American, British, Egyptian and other forces.

As the troop presence intensifies, many foreign civilians are leaving the area.

Cmdr. Christopher J. Elles, who heads a 20-member Navy training detachment in
Saudi Arabia, said 10,000 foreign nationals, including about 2,000 Americans,
had left the city where he is stationed since the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait on
Aug. 2.

Many of those are relatives of oil workers who have stayed behind.

Asked about the defenses in place at the oil operations, Commander Elles said,
''One bomb in the right place obviously would create a lot of problems.'' He
added, ''That's a personal opinion.'' Yesterday's tour gave the pool reporters
their first chance to see American troops in the field with Saudi forces.

''There's a great deal of working relationships that have to be worked out,''
Commander Elles said of the growing multinational force.

One of those relationships involves respect for the Saudis' Islamic faith.

A small detachment from the 82d took up positions on sand dunes overlooking the
water. Nearby were Saudi forces from the naval base. At one spot, Americans and
Saudis are housed in tents about 50 yards apart.

The Scripps Howard report said that between the tents is an area with two
25-foot-long pieces of canvas. The Saudis asked the Americans not to step there
because that is where they face Mecca and pray five times daily. How do the
soldiers communicate? A 26-year-old Saudi sergeant had this answer, delivered
through an interpreter:

''Some of us speak a little English. Or we use Arabic. But mostly it's sign
language.''

The Saudi sergeant said of his American counterparts: ''God willing, they will
get used to the heat soon.''

His advice to the Americans: ''Keep the flaps of your tent open.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              176 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 15, 1990, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Khmer Rouge Was Not a U.S. Creation

SECTION: Section A; Page 26, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 371 words


To the Editor:

In ''Cambodian Ordeal Began in U.S. Policy'' (letter, July 31), Zachary Lockman
was right in asserting that Cambodia has been bleeding much longer than 15
years. He was wrong, however, in his assertion that United States intervention
in Cambodia before 1975 ''in large measure'' created the conditions by which the
Khmer Rouge could grow into a powerful political and military force in that
country.

From the very outset of the 1970's, the Front Uni National du Kampuchea, an
umbrella group seeking the armed overthrow of the Khmer Republic, was composed
of diverse and often antagonistic elements. Prominent among them were the Khmer
Rouge, which advocated an extremist, agrarian and puritan form of ''primitive
communism.'' Pol Pot emerged as the leader of these forces, which looked toward
China as their main source of support. Indeed, it would probably have been
impossible for the Khmer Rouge to have achieved a victory in 1975 without the
full support of the Chinese.

Furthermore, the mercurial Prince Norodom Sihanouk also helped create the
conditions under which the Khmer Rouge could grow into an effective fighting
force. Following the March 1970 change of government, the Khmer Rouge expanded
their most effective village defense units into territorial forces, which soon
gave way to main force elements.

Prince Sihanouk, who sought refuge in China after being deposed in 1970,
contributed significantly to the Khmer Rouge's growth by lending his popular
support to the Communists. His leadership in the Front Uni, in particular, gave
the anti-republic insurgency greater legitimacy in the eyes of Cambodia's
peasantry.

Today the Khmer Rouge, despite the terrible atrocities they committed,
especially between 1975 and 1979, reportedly command significant popular
support. They maintain it because they are seen as the most effective force
opposing the much-despised Vietnamese. This widespread animosity toward Vietnam
is one reason that if truly free elections are held in the future in Cambodia,
the Khmer Rouge might do much better than some Americans believe they would.

ROGER A. BROOKS
Director, Asian Studies Center
The Heritage Foundation
  Washington, Aug. 3, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              177 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 15, 1990, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Big Oil's Sneak Attack on Public Lands

BYLINE: By Peter A. A. Berle; Peter A. A. Berle is president of the National
Audubon Society.

SECTION: Section A; Page 27, Column 2; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 618 words


A long-cherished goal of the oil industry and its friends in Congress has been
to open protected Federal lands for oil and gas development. For decades, they
have failed, but now they're trying again -this time under the cover of the
Persian Gulf crisis.

Late on the night of Aug. 3, just before the Senate left for its August recess,
Senator Frank Murkowski, Democrat of Alaska, slipped an amendment onto the
Defense Authoritzation bill that would require the Federal Government to open
protected lands to oil and gas development. In the whirlwind of Congressional
concern over Saddam Hussein's intentions, the amendment passed by acclamation
without the kind of scrutiny such an outrageous proposal deserves.

Whenever U.S. oil imports in six of the 12 preceding months exceeded 50 percent
of the country's total consumption, the Murkowski amendment would require the
President to produce an ''Energy Production and Security action plan'' that
would, once approved by Congress, supersede all other Federal and state law.

The action plan, according to Senator Murkowski's bill, must include a
''schedule for leasing'' Federal land tracts, both on land and off shore, which
may contain oil and gas -whether or not these lands are protected from
development under any other law or regulation. Only national parks might be
exempt (the legislation isn't definitive on that point).

The amendment goes on to require, almost as an afterthought, that the
president's plan include such ''energy conservation actions'' as increased auto
fuel efficiency and the development of alternative fuels, but after this brief
nod to conservation it returns to listing steps likely to benefit the oil
industry, such as an oil import fee, incentives for production and tax breaks
for drilling in currently protected lands, such as the Arctic National Wildlife
Refuge. The Administration's recent decision to place a 10-year moratorium on
drilling in the most sensitive off-shore areas of the lower 48 states would be
nullified.

The Murkowski amendment would undo decades of decisions that set aside a small
portion of the public's land for something other than oil and gas development -
for the protection of wildlife, for the conservation of wetlands, watersheds, or
forests, and for the preservation of wilderness. Such lands as the Bob Marshall
Wilderness Area in Montana, or the Georges Bank fishery off the Massachusetts
coast, have been Congressionally protected through the oil crises of the 1970's,
through the troubled reign of President Reagan's pro-development Interior
Secretary, James Watt, and even through the Vietnam War, when the national need
for energy security was certainly as high as it is today.

Do we need to despoil our wilderness and wildlife for energy security? Of course
not. Before we panic, we should first free oil from our Strategic Petroleum
Reserve, which now contains some 600 million barrels. Second, we must recognize
that world oil supplies remain plentiful despite Mr. Hussein. Reserves were
ample before the current crisis, and other countries are increasing production.
Third, we can do more to achieve automobile fuel efficiency. The 1990 model cars
actually decreased in average fuel efficiency from 1989. This is plainly
unacceptable. (A bill that would inaugurate a new national effort at fuel
efficiency has already been approved by the Senate Commerce Committee.

Instead of repealing 20 years of public-lands protection for a few months of
oil, Congress should move in the direction of real long-term energy and
environmental security. We can still afford to take deliberate measures. As much
as the oil companies would like us to, we don't need to push the panic button.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              178 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 17, 1990, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Confrontation in the Gulf: Washington at Work;
Military Chief: Man of Action And of Politics

BYLINE: By ANDREW ROSENTHAL, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 2089 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 16


At 8 o'clock on the morning after Kuwait fell, Gen. Colin L. Powell strode into
the White House crisis meeting. Armed with maps, charts and intelligence
reports, people who were there say, he outlined a massive Iraqi onslaught that
left the President convinced that military response was inevitable.

''It never became fact until the President said 'Go,' '' the chairman of the
Joint Chiefs of Staff said today, scrupulous as always about not upstaging his
boss. ''But in the structuring of options, it was obvious that I anticipated, as
we all did, that it would mean our colleagues going to the Middle East, the
young men and women who serve us so well.''

As he speaks, it is clear General Powell is a product of his generation's
seminal conflict, the Vietnam War, in which he fought as a junior officer. But
his thinking as clearly represents the officer corps' post-Vietnam evolution.

In the 10 months since he took office, General Powell has shown less fear of
using force than perhaps any other senior American officer since the 1960's. His
is a strategy political and military: When engagement is ordered, throw enough
firepower on the ground right away to keep military commanders from being
crippled if a paralysis of civilian will follows. Elevated last Oc-tober to help
Defense Secretary Dick Cheney preside over the shrinking of the Pentagon, the
53-year-old General has overseen six military operations.

''Colin Powell is the first Chairman since the end of the Vietnam War that
doesn't constantly warn us about body bags, a habit that always made me grind my
teeth,'' said Senator John McCain, a Republican of Arizona.

Answering Call for a Cop

General Powell's actions last year in Panama and now in the Middle East closed
the circle between the military of the 1960's, secure in America's role in the
world and willingness to project power, and that of the 1970's and 80's, hobbled
by a deep skepticism about the American public's stomach for war.

''One of the fondest expressions around is that we can't be the world's
policeman,'' General Powell said, stretching his long, broad frame in a
conference chair in his Pentagon office. ''I certainly agree that we should not
go around saying we are the world's policeman. But guess who gets called when
suddenly someone needs a cop?''

General Powell was not entirely certain after the Kuwait invasion that Iraq was
going to move on to Saudi Arabia, Administration officials said, but argued that
the United States had to send a clear warning to President Saddam Hussein in any
case. And in a broader sense, it needed to demonstrate that it was still a
superpower.

''From the start, Powell made the argument that we needed to put United States
forces into Saudi Arabia to let everyone know we had a stake in this,'' said one
official. ''He told the President that there should be a military operation, if
for nothing else, then to show the flag.''

Guarding the Rear

Unlike other military officers, including his predecessor, Adm. William J.
Crowe, who were sometimes accused of avoiding military operations, General
Powell has translated his awareness of the American aversion to military
involvement abroad into a policy meant to contain political repercussions.
Putting an extra dose of firepower on the ground at the start of an operation,
he believes, prepares for the possibility that modern officers dread - a moment
when the battle turns fierce but political support weakens.

''The American people want their interests protected and they want their values
protected and they are willing to help others who are in need and for whom we
may have some responsiblity,'' General Powell said. ''But at the same time,
being very reasonable, practical people, they hope we will do it quickly,
efficiently and successfully. The quicker you can do it, the better off you are.
That means making sure you have clear instructions for what you are being asked
to do and then putting in the necessary force to do it.''

Even before he took his oath as Chairman, General Powell was rewriting
contingency plans for Panama to provide a much larger force than had been
envisioned. Now, officials say, he is trying to insure that the contingent in
the Middle East has more than enough personnel and equipment to be able to move
quickly in the event of war, without having to rely on politicians to send in
more cavalry.

Humble Beginnings

It is hard to find critics of the charming and affable General Powell. But the
acclaim was not entirely unanimous when he was named by President Bush to
succeed Admiral Crowe.

General Powell clearly did not fit the mold. No graduate of West Point, this was
a South Harlem youth, the son of Jamaican immigrants, who got C's and D's at
City College, took 4 1/2 years to graduate and became an Army officer through
the campus Reserve Officer Training Corps. He married Alma Vivian Johnson in his
fourth year at City College; they have a son and two daughters.

But politicians were pleased with the choice. General Powell served in the White
House as deputy national security adviser and then national security adviser
under President Ronald Reagan; he also had stints in the Office of the Secretary
of Defense.

''Since I do have some experience on that side of the house, I have a pretty
good appreciation of what will be going through the mind of a politician, what
kind of questions they need to have answered,'' he said.

Sudden Rise to Top

The General will not say if he is a Republican or a Democrat, and shrugs off
questions about his political ambitions. But Republican operatives have yearned
after him. The most prominent black military officer, with his pristine personal
and professional credentials, he was seen as a potential nominee for Secretary
of Defense last year, after the Senate rejected former Senator John G. Tower,
Mr. Bush's first choice.

Moreover, General Powell has combat experience as well as political savvy. He
moved up the chain of command from a platoon to the Forces Command, which has
responsibility for defending the American mainland.

But he had been in that post only a few months when he became the youngest
Chairman of the Joint Chiefs. That was just a few months after President Reagan
had given him his fourth star. Some military officers, who already mistrusted
his extensive political experience, were rankled by his vault over senior
officers with more operational experience.

''I used to think that it was a drawback for officers to deal in strategy and
politics,'' said Gen. Edward C. Meyer, a former Army Chief of Staff. ''But in
the kind of world we're in today, that's what we need, as long as the
strategist-politician doesn't think he can also run all the tactics and
operations. If he thinks he can do both, he's going to fail.''

Remembering Politics

Some conservatives also worried that General Powell was too much of a
politician, and too loyal an operative, to be counted on to protect projects
like the ''Star Wars'' anti-missile program, if his bosses were willing to
sacrifice them to the budget-cutters.

''But I have not detected any problem on that lately,'' said Kim Holmes, a
senior military analyst with the conservative Heritage Foundation. Though
General Powell keeps a shotgun presented to him by President Mikhail S.
Gorbachev on the wall behind his desk, Mr. Holmes said General Powell has
reassured conservatives by taking a reserved approach to the Soviet military.
Admiral Crowe had seemed keen on developing a personal relationship with his
Soviet counterparts at the end of his career.

General Powell is fond of telling new flag officers that there are now two
realities in their lives - the press and politics. ''The use of the armed forces
of the United States is a political matter, not a military matter,'' he said in
the interview. ''There has to be a political objective when we use the armed
forces. We tend to get in trouble when we forget that.''

Separate Lives

His sense of caution and self-preservation was obvious in the months after the
Iran-contra scandal, when General Powell was deputy national security adviser.

''As soon as we sat down, Powell pulled out a tape recorder,'' said a House aide
sent to the White House at the time to investigate the arms for hostages deal
with Iran. ''He was the only White House official to tape our sessions. I
figured he knew Washington and wanted to get his full reply on the record.''

General Powell is methodical about separating his various public personas into
discrete compartments. Although he takes no prominent role as a black American,
he is sensitive enough to that issue to have given his first interview in office
to a magazine catering to blacks.

At the Pentagon, he is spit and polish. On Capitol Hill, he is the affable
soldier-statesman. In the White House, he is the punctilious military adviser
who also offers political and diplomatic analysis.

''I don't view that as schizophrenia,'' he said. ''I view that as
Clausewitzian.''

Informal Huddles

General Powell still holds staff meetings in the large, eavesdropping-proof
conference rooms. But has infused his job with as much informality as the
Pentagon can bear, officials said, huddling with his inner circle around the
small table he installed in his office. On recent mornings, the table has been
littered with maps and reports as he and two or three of his most trusted aides
meet for an internal briefing after the 7:30 a.m. visit by a Central
Intelligence Agency courier.

The General can often be found in the National Military Command Center, the
top-secret operational heart of the Pentagon, at 6 a.m. Aides said he has a
habit of stabbing at his large telephone console in the office, or a similar one
at home, at all hours to call his generals and his staff.

''But he tends to let the field commanders do what they need to do once they
have their general instructions,'' one Pentagon official said.

General Powell was matter-of-fact about the number of military operations he has
had to oversee. ''The first night, I had a coup,'' he said of an abortive
rebellion against Gen. Manuel Antonio Noriega that American military forces in
Panama tried to support.

In early December, while Mr. Bush was in Malta talking of a new future with Mr.
Gorbachev, American fighter pilots were helping President Corazon Aquino put
down a rebellion in the Philippines.

'Several Cold Showers'

Then, Mr. Bush ordered General Powell to send troops into San Salvador to rescue
a group of Green Berets trapped in the Sheraton Hotel there. In December came
the invasion of Panama, which a senior White House official said ''did a great
deal to show the President that Powell was a man who knew what he was talking
about.'' Just as the Persian Gulf crisis was unfolding, the Pentagon sent
Marines to Monrovia, Liberia, to rescue Americans trapped by the civil war
there.

This morning, General Powell simply smiled at a reporter's suggestion that when
he next appears before a Congressional committee bent on cutting his budget, the
Persian Gulf crisis and the rest of what he calls ''small opportunities to use
the armed forces'' will provide a strong backdrop to his arguments.

But he offered a formulation that many lawmakers are likely to hear: ''I've had
several cold showers in the 10 months that I've been here. From time to time,
when you least expect it, when everyone thinks the world is quiet, someone pulls
on Superman's cape.''

Colin Luther Powell

Born: April 5, 1937

Hometown: New York City

Education: B.S., City College, New York; M.B.A., George Washington University.

Career Highlights: Commissioned Army second lieutenant, 1958; active duty in
Vietnam, December 1962 to November 1963 and June 1968 to July 1969; White House
Fellow, Office of Management and Budget, September 1972 to August 1973;
commander, 2d Brigade, 101st Airborne Division, Fort Campbell, Ky., April 1976
to July 1977; Office of the Deputy Secretary of Defense, July 1977 to June 1981;
military assistant to the Secretary of Defense, July 1983 to June 1986;
commanding general, V Corps, Europe, June to December 1986; deputy assistant to
the President for National Security Affairs, January to December 1987; assistant
to the President for National Security Affairs, December 1987 to January 1989;
commander in chief, Forces Command, Fort McPherson, Ga., April to September
1989; appointed Chairman of the Joint Chiefs, October 1989.

Interests: Restoring Volvos.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Gen. Colin L. Powell, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.
(Paul Hosefros/The New York Times) (pg. A13)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              179 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 17, 1990, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Confrontation in the Gulf;
At Saudi Base, G.I.'s on Move and Others on Edge

BYLINE: By YOUSSEF M. IBRAHIM, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1245 words

DATELINE: DHAHRAN, Saudi Arabia, Aug. 16


Maj. Gen. William G. Pagonis keeps his gas mask and protective clothes in a bag
by his feet as he surveys senior officers inside the Saudi Air Force Base at
Dhahran, where they are directing the largest American troop deployment since
the Vietnam War.

Phones are ringing. The room, a theater converted into a command headquarters
for about 50 Army men and women, is dotted with tables around which the officers
dressed in desert yellow and green fatigues talk quietly.

The general, known as Gus, is directing all logistical operations for tens of
thousands of American troops who are landing around the clock in Eastern
Province of Saudi Arabia, far and away the area most vulnerable to an Iraqi
airplane, missile or land attack.

In the shimmering heat, which rises to 120 degrees in midday, the hazy shape of
giant Galaxy C-5A planes can be seen taking off and landing every 5 or 10
minutes.

Even so, dozens of American and Saudi residents of this town, the nerve center
of the Saudi oil industry, can barely hide their edginess at the thought that
hundreds of Iraqi tanks and maybe as many as 100,000 Iraqi troops are at the
Kuwaiti border, a little less than 200 miles north of here.

''This is the first time since World War II that we have had an operation on
this scale,'' General Pagonis said, as some of his senior officers pored over a
giant map of the Arabian Peninsula, adding stickers that indicate the growing
size of the American forces being deployed northward. A lieutenant colonel said
the first priority was to get the American troops positioned in the desert near
Kuwait.

''They went up there with their weapons and rations, and that was all,'' he said
of the troops that have streamed into Saudi Arabia over the last few days.
''Amenities will have to come later.''

''The Saudi Government is paying for everything we've asked them for,'' General
Pagonis said. ''They are very grateful for our help and extremely supportive. I
haven't seen such cooperation since I was stationed in Berlin.''

Even so, several hundred thousand of the Saudis and expatriates living in the
triangle of Dhahran, Al Khobar and Dammam have left the region. Executives and
workers who have to stay here to work at the Aramco oil company and a dozen
oil-related installations have sent their families out of the country in the 14
days since Iraq invaded Kuwait.

A Shortage of Staff

''Expatriates are resigning in large numbers from their jobs, trying to get
their benefits and bonuses now just in case the situation tips over as in
Kuwait,'' a Saudi business executive said, adding that many of his Asian workers
were asking to leave their jobs as soon as possible.

The pressure is also telling on Saudis who live in this province of Saudi
Arabia, which has benefited hugely from the oil boom of the last two decades.

Showing a guest around his villa, a Saudi businessman said: ''I don't want to
see all this go down the drain. I live here, my mother lives in the villa next
door, and I have a $700,000 investment here that is sinking in value as we
speak.''

The greatest fear here is of Iraq's chemical weapons, and the fear is shared by
military and civilians, Saudis and foreigners.

The anxiety has been compounded by pamphlets that have been distributed telling
people what to do in case of a chemical attack, which basically amounts to very
little. The pamphlets are being faxed across Saudi Arabia and the gulf, and one
of them was published a few days ago by the English-language daily Saudi
Gazette.

Among other things, it counsels people who might face a chemical attack to
''look out of your windows for birds dropping from the trees, cats, dogs and
people dropping and choking, cars crashing, and general panic, which are signs
of a gas attack.''

The dimension of the shock being felt here is amplified in the eyes of the
ordinary Saudi citizen by the stream of refugees from Kuwait arriving here and
in other Arab gulf states.

Saudi drivers stop in the streets to direct cars with Kuwaiti license plates to
the nearest aid center, where the Government has made furnished apartments
available and gives immediate financial and food assistance to the Kuwaitis,
estimated to number tens of thousands in this country alone.

'The Good Life Could Be Gone'

''It's unreal,'' the Saudi business executive said. ''I wake up every morning
and think this could have happened to me. The good life could be gone in a one
blow.''

''All I dream of is to hear a radio announcement saying Saddam Hussein has been
killed or overthrown, and it will be all over with,'' the executive said.

''We have built this country from nothing to what it is today in 20 years,'' he
added. ''My fear is that the Americans are like the fireman who comes to put the
fire out and destroys your house in the process.''

This spreading panic is in the view of many here doing much damage already, even
if the situation does not deteriorate into war.

A Saudi official said his country depended on 3 million expatriates to run much
of the service industry, including water desalination plants, power plants and
banks, and the oil industry. ''What if many of them don't want to come back and
others are frightened away?'' he said. ''Eventually, I think we are going to
have to pay much more for expatriates to work here.''

Much of the worry generated here seems to be largely a result of a general lack
of precise information about the military buildup.

Much of the news about the stream of foreign troops coming in is learned from
foreign radio stations that most Saudis listen to, including the Iraqi radio and
Voice of America as well as the British Broadcasting Corporation. Size of Force
General Pagonis would not discuss the actual number of troops that have landed
in Saudi Arabia.

But other military officials in Bahrain said that in addition to the naval power
being deployed in the Persian Gulf, the Arabian Sea and the Red Sea, consisting
of 17,000 men, 24 ships and 200 aircraft, there are thousands of marines and
Army men and at least 100 F-15 warplanes arriving here.

A Saudi military expert, who asked not to be identified, said the basic military
approach is to defend ''a corridor that runs along the line of Riyadh, Dhahran
and Jidda.''

The expert said the Iraqi President, Saddam Hussein, missed his chance to invade
Saudi Arabia immediately after his army took over Kuwait, when it could have
pushed on along the coastal road leading to Eastern Province. This region, he
said, is now blocked by American and Saudi land forces.

'Too Late' for Invasion Now

''It is too late for Iraq to try to invade Saudi Arabia now,'' he said. ''Saddam
should have done it earlier. Iraqi tanks will be blocked by land forces on the
hard surface roads. If they tried to come in through the desert, they will be
easily hit from the air by a superior air force.''

The major bases being used to launch the combined American and Saudi air force
are Dhahran in Eastern Province, Hafr Al Baten in the northeast and Tebuk near
the Red Sea, experts said.

The military operation is of such a dimension that many military officials
acknowledge that despite the cooperation between American and Saudi officers,
there is apparently some friction over who has overall control.

''We hope the higher authorities will solve the problems of command and
control,'' Brig. Gen. Turki ibn Nasser told a pool of American journalists at a
Saudi air base, a Reuters report said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: American soldiers who had just arrived at an air base in Saudi
Arabia yesterday standing under the wing of a C-5A transport plane. (pg. A1);
United States Air Force technicians working at a base in Saudi Arabia as they
prepared air-to-air missiles to be carried by F-15 fighters.; An Air Force major
recuperating yesterday in a mobile hospital after showing signs of heat
exhaustion while helping erect tents in the 100-degree-plus heat at a site in
Saudi Arabia. (Pool Photo via Reuters); map of Iraq and Saudi Arabia showing
locations of Haft al-Baten; Tabuk & Dhahran (pg. A12)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              180 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 17, 1990, Friday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1377 words



International    A2-12



President Bush and King Hussein of Jordan failed to make significant progress
toward easing the Middle East crisis, and Mr. Bush was apparently unable to win
assurances that the King would halt shipments to Baghdad through a Jordanian
port.

    Page A1



Iraq ordered 6,500 Americans and British citizens trapped in Kuwait to assemble
at two hotels in the Kuwaiti capital and threatened to forcibly remove the
foreign residents from their homes if they refused.    A1



Vietnam shaped Gen. Colin Powell, the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. But
in the way he is willing to use U.S. forces abroad, his thinking clearly
represents the officer corps' post-Vietnam evolution.    A1



The military buildup in Saudi Arabia is taking a toll on the city of Dhahran,
the site of central command. Soldiers and residents alike are edgy, both about
the forces' growing size and the thought that Iraqi troops are only 200 miles
away.    A1



Saddam Hussein of Iraq lashed out at President Bush, calling him ''a liar'' and
warning that thousands of American soldiers could ''go home shrouded in sad
coffins.'' Mr. Hussein's remarks were made during a bitter address on Iraqi
television.

    A11



President Hussein's defiant stance is inspiring a surge of deep, conflicting
emotions and reflections on the old, troubling question of Arab identity. For
many Arabs, he stirs feelings of pride and unity.    A11

Navy begins blockade enforcing Iraq embargo

    A10



U.N. chief argues that the U.S. blockade of Iraq is hasty    A12



Tankers stalled at Gulf as sanctions take hold    A12



News executives see pool hamstrung by rules of coverage    A12



Talks in Liberia were postponed after a rebel leader was injured in a car
accident while traveling to meet West African leaders to discuss a cease-fire in
the country's civil war.    A3



Fighting between rival black groups in South Africa spread to Soweto after three
days of bloodletting east of Johannesburg. President F. W.de Klerk and Nelson
Mandela appealed for a peaceful settlement and urged their followers to support
them.    A3



Ex-leader of Kashmir accuses army of brutality    A6



South Korean police block students seeking to open border    A8



Changes in China offer lessons for East Europe    A2



Solzhenitsyn cool as Moscow confirms offer    A5



Lima Journal: A shantytown in shock    A4



National    A13-17



Signs of inflation persisted as the Consumer Price Index rose by four-tenths of
1 percent last month, a higher-than-expected increase. But in an indication of a
weakening economy, housing construction fell for the sixth straight month, by
2.6 percent.    A1



Cleaning up nuclear weapons plants is a task that is turning the Energy
Department into the Government's largest environmental agency. Damage caused by
pollution from the plants could cost $200 billion to fix.

    A1



Big cities lag in clean air, U.S. says    A16



A sharp jump in teen-age birth rates recently has reversed an 18-year decline.
The findings alarmed health experts who chart the health and economic problems
associated with un-wed teen-age motherhood.    A14



Oakland Journal: For AIDS sufferers, support is all    A14



Lyme disease now linked to stroke in 20-year-old G.I.    A17



The case of three airline pilots who flew a Northwest Airlines jetliner after a
night of heavy drinking went to a jury in Minneapolis. It is the first criminal
trial of pilots charged with flying under the influence.    A14



A scandal over Atlanta's Archbishop grew as a woman said her relationship with
Eugene A. Marino, the head of the city's Roman Catholic Church, was formalized
in a wedding ceremony he performed.    A14



50 hurt as tanker hits housing barge    A15



A number of the country's railroads and railroad related businesses are not
paying large amounts of payroll taxes to finance unemployment and medical
benefits for the industry's workers, an audit indicates.    A16



Carolina lawmaker is casualty of inquiry on corruption    A15



Kentucky law officials are arrested in drug sting    A15



Regional    B1-4



More than a dozen bloodstains covered a corridor in a Rikers Island jailhouse,
witnesses said. The claim may strenghten allegations that correction officers
retaliated against prisoners in the aftermath of Tuesday's melee.    A1



What do police officers really do? Many New Yorkers worried by rising crime are
asking the question. A few hours spent with 15 police units around the city show
that much police work is only tenuously connected to the world of crime.    B4



More than 100 apartments in a co-op in Greenwich Village may be auctioned off
because the sponsor fell far behind in his maintenance payments, a State Supreme
Court judge ruled.

    B1



The jury in the jogger case deliberated for an eighth day without reaching a
verdict yesterday - another day of steadily rising tension, reread testimony and
a confusing flurry of notes to the judge.    B1



''Good Samaritan'' victim said to have fled attack    B3



Possible movement in Etan Patz case    B3



13 are charged in theft of data from computers    B2



Five months later, youth set afire returns home    B3



The Bleecker Street Cinema will shut its doors this month because of a sharp
rent increase. The two-screen theater has shown foreign and avant-garde films
since 1962.    B1



Bubbles and catcalls for Estimate Board    B3



A tax on heavy trucks in New Jersey could be rescinded, officials said, if the
Legislature can find other revenue for the $44 million that the sales tax was
expected to produce.    B1



Business Digest    D1



Weekend



Actors' Equity changed its mind and voted to permit the English actor Jonathan
Pryce to come to Broadway to re-create his prize-winning portrayal of a Eurasian
pimp in the hit London musical ''Miss Saigon.''    A1



Tours of Manhattan    C1



Anti-Helms billboard removed    C3



A series celebrating Brahms

    C12



Germany retrieving more artworks    C19



Weekender Guide    C5



New editor at Esquire    C26



Theater: On Stage    C2



''Richard III'' in the park    C1



Film: At the Movies    C6



''Wild at Heart''    C1



Festival Latino film series    C10



Music: Spivakov and Moscow Virtuosi    C27



Photography: A display at Penn Station    C25



Auctions    C24



Restaurants    C20



Word and Image: ''Natural Selection''    C26



TV Weekend    C28



Law Page    B5



At the Bar

Barry trial judge is focus of a legal debate

Baby's death renews move to end common law rule

Sports

Baseball: Two Yanks partners sue Vincent    A21



Mets beat Dodgers    A21



Steinbrenner planning changes    A22



Column: Vecsey on Upsala    A21



Football: Deadline nearing for Jets' quarterback    A23



Young Giants defenders making good impression    A23



Golf: Rentz wins Met Open    A24



Horse Racing: Notebook    A23



Tennis: A plan to cut airplane noise at U.S. Open    A21



Gomez loses composure and contest    A23



Obituaries    B6



Julius Lipsett, executive

Editorials/Letters/Op-Ed



Editorials    A28



His enemy is the world

Vandals invade the Atlantic

Betrayal in Myanmar

David C. Unger: Hong Kong

Letters    A28



William Safire: Trial by crucible    A29



Richard Dudman: Pol Pot - brutal, but no mass murderer

    A29



Tom Ehrenfeld: An AIDS martyr the media can love    ''A29



Harvey Cox: The Vatican needs a dose of glasnost    A29


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              181 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 17, 1990, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Legion Post Bars a Black Man

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 15, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 247 words

DATELINE: FLORENCE, S.C., Aug. 16


A Vietnam veteran was denied membership in an all-white American Legion post
here last month because he is black, and the incident has led the organization's
national headquarters to call for an investigation.

The episode was first reported today by The Florence Morning News, which said at
least two of the post's officers and one other member had resigned to protest
the application's rejection.

The applicant, Thurmond L. Thompson, who works at a General Electric plant in
Florence, was turned down in a vote on July 3 by the 250 members of Fred H.
Sexton Post 1. Only six members voted against him, but that was four more than
needed for rejection.

Minutes of the meeting, which were obtained by The Morning News, quoted the
post's commander, William D. Leftridge, as saying during the debate over Mr.
Thompson's application: ''I don't want one in here. For 70 years since the post
was chartered, there hasn't been one in here, and I don't want to see it now.''
Mr. Leftridge did not return telephone calls today.

The American Legion's national headquarters, in Indianapolis, has asked the
South Carolina headquarters to begin an inquiry, said Phillip Onderdonk, the
national organization's judge advocate. The Legion has allowed membership to
blacks since it was created in 1919, Mr. Onderdonk said, and the Florence post
could lose its charter as a result of its action.

Efforts to reach officials of the South Carolina headquarters for comment were
unsuccessful.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              182 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 18, 1990, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Two Stage Triumphs

SECTION: Section 1; Page 24, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 331 words


Actors' Equity showed good sense and good grace in admitting that it was wrong
to ban the British star of the musical ''Miss Saigon'' from playing his
mixed-race role on Broadway. All who love theater can rejoice in a victory for
artistic freedom. But protesters who demanded more opportunity for Asian
performers can be satisfied, too; their legitimate complaint has now been heard
worldwide.

Jonathan Pryce, a Welshman, is the star in question. In London he is cast as the
half-French, half-Vietnamese owner of a bar and brothel in Saigon during the
Vietnam War. Actors' Equity found this an ''affront to the Asian community,''
and declared him ineligible to repeat the role in New York. The producer,
Cameron Mackintosh, then canceled the show rather than bow to the union's
attempt to dictate casting. Equity's backdown merits a strong effort to
reinstate the production.

The actor Ron Silver, a member of Equity's governing council, said of the whole
affair, ''There were two very important principles involved, and the greater
principle won out - for absolutely unfettered artistic expression.'' At a time
of growing concern about Federal censorship of the arts, it was important that
Equity's attempted meddling be rebuffed. But as Mr. Silver observed, another
principle was involved. While preserving artistic freedom, the theater also owes
minority performers better opportunity.

Equity's council noted that in nearly 100 shows produced during the past season,
33 had no minority actors and 12 had only one or two. Welcoming debate on the
issue of casting minorities in ''non-traditional'' roles, the council commented
that ''Jews have always been able to play Italians, Italians have always been
able to play Jews, and both . . . play Asians; Asian actors, however, almost
never play either Jews or Italians, and continue to struggle even to play
themselves.''

Two principles collided; one prevailed. The controversy has served the greater
cause of highlighting both.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              183 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 19, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

CONFRONTATION IN THE GULF;
Largest Force Since Vietnam Committed in 15-Day Flurry

BYLINE: By MICHAEL WINES, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 1, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1013 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 17


In only 15 days, while Congress was scattered on summer recess and much of
official Washington was on vacation, senior Bush Administration officials have
committed the United States to its broadest and most hazardous overseas military
venture since the Vietnam War.

Unlike the Vietnam engagement, which was improvised and incremental, the buildup
in the Persian Gulf is guided by long military contingency plans that made
deployment possible virtually overnight.

But to the public and most politicians, the impact of that buildup is only now
taking shape. Military strategists, economists, and politicians say it is
potentially enormous, affecting the economy, politics and international
relations for years.

The Administration has been reluctant to disclose the full extent of its
military commitment, with Pentagon officials declining to tote up exactly how
much armor or how many troops it is sending, or intends to send, or to say how
long it expects they will be there, or to make public assessments of the risks
to American personnel or prestige.

What is publicly known is that 20,000-plus soldiers are in Saudi Arabia, about
35,000 more are on 59 ships ringing the Saudi peninsula or bound there and up to
45,000 Marines are heading for the Persian Gulf.

How long the forces will be in place is something the Bush Administration has
deliberately kept vague. ''Where we'll be a year or two from now, I wouldn't
want to speculate,'' Defense Secretary Dick Cheney said on Friday.

Senator Joseph R. Biden Jr. of Delaware said today he was ''struck by the size
of this.'' Mr. Biden, a Democratic member of the Senate Foreign Relations
Committee, said in a telephone interview from his home state: ''This is a big,
big deal. I think the President has an obligation to put in as many forces as
necessary to take care of the troops we have there.

''But quite frankly, I never contemplated talk of 250,000 troops in Saudi
Arabia, or talk of an American presence there of several years,'' he said.

While not criticizing Mr. Bush's actions, he said the scope of the American
action demands ''not only some consultation, but some extensive debate'' about
the need for allied and Arab involvement in the crisis.

The decision that put in motion the most rapid military buildup in American
history was effectively made by President Bush and a small circle of advisers in
a weekend at Camp David, shortly after Iraq invaded Kuwait on Aug. 2.

Most Congressional leaders were informed of the operation after it was ordered.
Only one influential lawmaker, Senator Sam Nunn, the Georgian who is chairman of
the Senate Armed Services Committee, appears to have been consulted in advance.
So far, no member of Congress has proposed hearings to discuss ramifications of
the action.

Most public figures scrambled to support the President's decision, but a handful
of supporters like Senator John McCain, an Arizona Republican who is on the
Armed Services Committee, have begun raising the first caution flags about the
operations.

''I think we'll stand it for a long period of time, as long as there are not
casualties,'' Mr. McCain said in a telephone interview from Arizona. ''If you
get involved in a major ground war in the Saudi desert, I think support will
erode significantly. Nor should it be supported. We cannot even contemplate, in
my view, trading American blood for Iraqi blood.''

The American public will undoubtedly back Mr. Bush's commitment to Saudi Arabia,
and thus to American access to world oil production, said James Schlesinger, who
was Defense Secretary, Energy Secretary and Director of Central Intelligence in
the 1960's and 1970's.

''But it is not clear that there is strong public support for a rollback in
Kuwait, especially if it will require heavy American casualties,'' he said in a
telephone interview from Ohio. He said it was not clear that Americans had even
considered the question of restoring the ruling family of Kuwait, although that
''has become a major policy objective of the United States.''

Lessons of the 1960's

As the Vietnam experience proved, public debate and Congressional action do not
guarantee wise policymaking, several Bush Administration officials and former
Government officials from the 1960's said in interviews this week. These
officials also noted that President Bush has tried to build public support for
his Persian Gulf decisions, holding several press conferences, making a
televised speech and in general arguing the case that vital national security
interests are at stake.

In the atmosphere of crisis, there is no evidence that extensive debate or
consultations would have changed the American commitment in any way.

But some officials said that in keeping with Mr. Bush's demonstrated penchant
for making decisions in secret, the White House has kept Congress, citizens and
foreign leaders alike in the dark about the ultimate scope of the operation.

The pivotal decisions have been made by Mr. Bush and a handful of his top
advisers, including the national security adviser, Brent Scowcroft; Defense
Secretary Dick Cheney; Secretary of State James A. Baker 3rd and Gen. Colin
Powell, the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.

The Democrat who heads the House Armed Services Committee, Representative Les
Aspin of Wisconsin, said Friday that the United States could easily be forced to
maintain ''a more or less permanent force'' in the gulf, although probably under
United Nations supervision.

Because the troops and supplies have long been paid for, the major costs so far
are for transport and maintenance at wartime readiness. But a prolonged stay
would require other expenses, like building shelter for thousands of soldiers
now living in tents.

The ultimate costs are unknown, said a Congressional budget analyst who is a
military expert.

''But if you have a shooting war,'' he said, ''all bets are off. Then you
consume ammunition, fuel, and hardware. You start to replace tanks and planes
and missiles. You increase your presence, and the cost jumps, depending on how
hot it gets.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: As Iraq threatenedto continue tohold foreign citizens, soldiers
of 82d Airborne Division took part in desert exercises in Saudia Arabia (Pool
Photo via Associated Press)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              184 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 19, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

IDEAS & TRENDS;
What IS Youth Coming To?

BYLINE: By FELICITY BARRINGER

SECTION: Section 4; Page 1, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1584 words


FOR years Americans have been bludgeoned by one report after another documenting
what a mess the new generation is supposed to be. Their grade point averages and
S.A.T. scores are falling while high school dropout rates are rising. They don't
know when the Civil War was or what Lithuania is.

But even the most jaded observers seemed to take notice this spring when a
report by a panel, including Dr. C. Everett Koop, the former Surgeon General,
and Albert Shanker, president of the American Federation of Teachers, came to
the disturbing conclusion that teen-agers are less healthy today than their
parents were when they were the same age. Because of drinking, drugs, unplanned
pregnancies, violence, suicide, venereal disease and emotional problems, many of
today's teen-agers ''are unlikely to attain the high levels of education
achievement required for success in the 21st century,'' according to the
commission, which was formed by the National Association of State Boards of
Education and the American Medical Association.

The implication, it almost seemed, was that America was raising a lost
generation, an army of aging Bart Simpsons, possibly armed and dangerous. Their
Holden Caulfield was Clay, the withdrawn California freshman wandering through a
suburban wasteland of drugs and anomie in Bret Easton Ellis's 1985 novel ''Less
Than Zero.'' Instead of Woodstock, they had MTV.

Is there anything to these fears, beyond the ritual anxiety each generation
feels about its successors? Have a significant number of post-boom babies really
inherited serious handicaps, perhaps from the social revolutions of the 1960's
and early 70's? Given all the choices they have, why do these young people seem
so confused?

These questions are being asked by social scientists, who are doggedly tracking
the lives and times of nearly 37 million people between the ages of 15 and 25.
The answers, as far as they exist, are inconsistent enough to make demographers
wonder if there's a ''they'' out there after all.

A few things are clear. The people born in the late 1960's and early 70's have
sex earlier than their parents did and marry later. They buy more condoms than
their older brothers and sisters did, but the youngest of them, the 15- to
19-year-olds, have more babies. In surveys, they say they care about poverty and
the environment, but they vote less often than their predecessors did and pay
less attention to the news. They spend more time in school but they learn less.
Overall, they take fewer drugs than their older brothers and sisters did. But
more of them kill themselves, and each other, than was true for the generations
that went before.

Many linger longer on the threshold of adulthood, hanging around college and
their parents' homes the way they used to hang around the mall. Gingerly
threading their way through a landscape littered with choices, they have an
acute sense of what each choice may cost.

Andrew Cherlin, a sociologist at Johns Hopkins University, explained the
squeamishness this way: ''Half of these children spent some time in
single-parent families growing up. This is the first generation to feel the full
impact of the great rise in divorce.''

Some psychologists and sociologists contend that the divorces of the 60's and
70's have had long-term pernicious effects on children's emotional health and on
their ability to make commitments; but others argue that parental love and
involvement are the deciding factors - not marital arrangements.

It is important to keep in mind that some ills afflicting young adults afflict
the rest of society as well. Teen suicide, for instance, is near a record high -
but so are overall suicide rates.

''For anyone to say it's a lost generation is pretty extreme,'' said Andrew
Kohut, director of surveys for the Times-Mirror Company of Los Angeles, whose
June study of young people's tendency to stay away from the ballot box and tune
out the news was called ''The Age of Indifference.''

''This is a generation that hasn't been touched by any larger thing,'' he said.
''It hasn't been challenged. It may be now coming head to head with its
challenge,'' he added, in a rueful reference to the crisis in the Persian Gulf.
Reynolds Farley, a demographer at the University of Michigan, said: ''Since the
end of the Vietnam War, we have had nothing cataclysmic that would be
threatening to young people in the sense that World War I, World War II or the
Depression were threatening to people. To some degree that widens your choices
-you're not threatened with military service, not threatened with very high
rates of unemployment. There's a wider array of choices, and that may be
disconcerting, or troubling.''

But the range of options depends on your parents' economic situation. According
to economists, two decades of factory closings have left little semi-skilled or
unskilled work to go around, unless young people want to contemplate a lifetime
of flipping hamburgers. The uniting theme for this generation may be life in an
age of limits. But while people near the top of the economic scale are plagued
by too many choices, the people near the bottom have too few. ''Maybe you can't
make a general statement about this generation because the prospects for the
haves are so much different than the prospects for the have-nots,'' said Mr.
Cherlin.

At the lower end of the economic scale, the problem is lack of skills and
growing competition, from immigrants as well as native-born Americans. Leonard
Gordon, an Arizona State University sociologist, says one consequence is a sharp
increase in hostility among the races. A small but growing group of white
students are ready to accept and endorse racial stereotypes, he said.

''When we ask students what their aspirations are, there is no difference
between black and white students,'' Dr. Gordon said. ''But there's an enormous
difference on their expectation of achieving their aspirations. A smaller
percentage of black and Hispanic students think they can.''

And even several of those who were more sanguine told researchers in follow-up
interviews that they had become pessimistic. ''They had a zero-sum perception of
the future,'' Dr. Gordon said. ''If someone gains, someone has to lose. The
traditional American view of the future is that if one person gains, someone
else gains as well.''

If a sense of shrinking horizons afflicts one end of the economic ladder, the
people on the other end seem to suffer a kind of vertigo at the huge expanse of
choices laid out before them, particularly if they have had an emotional
buffeting in their home life. They are taking their time about reaching the
traditional demarcations of American adulthood.

They marry later. The average age was 23 for women and 25 for men in 1987; their
counterparts in 1970 tended to marry three years earlier. Increasingly, they
take five years to complete college. And more of them live on and off with their
parents when college is over.

Some of the explanation is economic: in the late 1980's, about a quarter of all
college students had student loans, which build up at about $2,500 annually,
according to the Department of Education. Housing inflation has pushed all but
group rentals beyond the reach of many.

''In the 1950's a high school education bought you a reasonable job,'' said
Frank F. Furstenberg Jr., a sociologist at the University of Pennsylvania.
''Today that's not the case.'' Also, he said, in an era when women expect to go
to work - and may have to - ''there's no question there's been a change in the
centrality of marriage as a defining life event.''

But the reasons for hovering on the threshold of maturity seem more than simply
economic. For many young people their parents' homes seem emotional as well as
economic havens.

''A lot of the choices they are making now they are unmaking,'' said Martha
Farnsworth Riche, an economist for American Demographics magazine. ''There's
much more stopping out of college. When they unmake a choice'' - schooling,
jobs, relationships - ''they go home,'' she said. ''When they choose again, they
leave.''

But the sense of aimlessness - whether caused by too many options or too few -
is not always translated into cynicism. Surveys of high school seniors and
college freshmen by the University of Michigan and the University of California
at Los Angeles show more interest in changing society than at any time since the
early 1970's. Sociology departments are reporting increased enrollments.

And some choices are being made. Marijuana use, which peaked in the late 1970's,
has been going down slowly but steadily. Cocaine use began to drop in 1985. But
there is still far more drug use among adolescents and young adults than 20
years ago.

And there is far more sexual activity at younger ages. In 1988, 27 percent of
15-year-old and half of 17-year-old women had had sex, according to the Federal
Government's National Survey of Family Growth. One result is ''the decision to
marry has clearly become independent of the onset of sexual experience for the
great majority of women,'' said Dr. William Pratt of the National Survey.

''There are just fewer societal norms about what ought to be done,'' said Dr.
Farley. ''Those stabilizing forces that society once defined as important have
disappeared.''

''They are making choices. They will make choices,'' said Ms. Riche. ''But given
the changes in the world around them, they can't make definite choices at the
same age people did before.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Cartoons (pgs. 1 & 5); Graphic: ''Measures of a Generation'' show
median age at which men and women in U.S. first married, 1970-87 (Source:
National Center for Health Statistics); age at which women had first sexual
intercourse, 1959-1988 (Source: National Center for Health Statistics);
percentage of 18-year-olds who have used drugs or alcohol at least once, 1975-89
(Source: National Institute on Drug Abuse); suicide rates for 15- to
19-year-olds and 20- to 24-year-olds, 1960-1987 (Source: National Center for
Health Statistics); homicide rates for 10- to 18-year-olds, 1980-1989 (Source:
Crime Control Institute); percentage of high school graduates among 17-year-old
population, 1955-1988 (Source: National Center for Education Statistics); mean
scores for Scholastic Aptitude Test, 1967-

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              185 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 19, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THE WORLD: The Gulf;
Key Points of the Week

SECTION: Section 4; Page 3, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 256 words


AS rhetorical salvos intensified in the Middle East last week, the United States
sent some of its most sophisticated offensive weapons to the potential
battlefront with Iraq. Putting a Vietnam-size troop lift on fast forward, the
Pentagon poured in tens of thousands more troops, commandeering commercial
airliners to fly them there. President Bush decided to call up doctors, cargo
handlers and other non-combat forces from the reserves. A fourth aircraft
carrier set sail to the region and radar-evading Stealth fighters were
dispatched. Mr. Bush ratcheted up the pressure by ordering the Navy to enforce a
blockade of Iraqi shipping. For now, orders were minimal force, like shots
across the bows of blockade runners.

Mr. Bush said hopes for a diplomatic solution were dimming fast. Saddam Hussein
fumed at Mr. Bush for calling him a liar and called him a liar right back. Then
he turned to the east to make peace with Iran, hoping to upset the delicate
balance of the alliance against him. King Hussein of Jordan, on an increasingly
wobbly fence, flew to Washington with much fanfare. But he had no message from
President Hussein and Mr. Bush could not even get his assurances that Jordan
would honor the embargo against Iraq.

Weighing heavily on officials' minds was the fate of 3,000 Americans trapped in
Kuwait and Iraq. Iraq said they were to be held for the duration, and would
suffer first from the deprivations of the embargo. Thirty-five Americans held in
a Baghdad hotel were moved and cut off from American diplomats.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              186 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 19, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

PUBLIC & PRIVATE;
The Invasion Vacation

BYLINE: By Anna Quindlen

SECTION: Section 4; Page 19, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 770 words


We didn't want to take this vacation. It was the President's idea. I figured we
should just call August on account of invasion, hunker down, and wait for the
price of gasoline to reach the foie gras mark. The President would have none of
this. ''The American people want to see life go on,'' he said.

This was not as easy as it sounded. As a patriotic gesture, we bought charcoal
briquets and went to the middle of nowhere. The middle of nowhere was in the
middle of a Middle East mania. News followed us to the outdoor art show and the
Farmer's Market.

The Village Grocery became Democracy Central. First thing in the morning, the
bread delivery man, the milk delivery man and the man who runs the place would
be clustered around the cash register, trashing King Hussein and tracking troop
deployments. ''I think the President is right on the money,'' they said. This is
the kind of place where the President is usually right on the money.

The gas station was raucous with gas-line lore, much of it macho and apocryphal.
Testosterone filled the air. War will do that. You know the drill: ''Remember in
'79 when you punched out that guy who tried to cut in line to put air in his
tires, Phil?'' someone says. ''Hell,'' says Phil, ''I never punched him out. I
ran over his foot. And it was '73.''

At the mall teen-agers in heavy-metal T-shirts sullenly absorbed current events.
''Saddam Hussein, man,'' they would say, if they could talk. ''He's toast.''
America has rallied round, and it is something to see. There's a local angle, no
matter what the locality -American kids in khaki, folks like us held hostage and
empty gas tanks. The story is writ large: friends, foes, a big bad guy with the
sinister mustache of a James Bond villain. The Iraqis have replaced the Soviets
in the evil empire role, much missed since we began playing ''I'm O.K., you're
O.K.'' with the Russians. Polls show that Americans are more possessed by this
story than by any in years.

People say it's hard to get away from it all because of the magic of cable
television, fax machines, computer modems. But this time around it's democracy
that's doing us in. Now that election campaigns bear more of a resemblance to
MTV than to statesmanship, we've got two ways to reaffirm what this country
stands for. One is the jury room, with its miraculous ability to turn 12
bumbling United States citizens into paragons of diplomacy, objectivity and
thoughtfulness.

The other is crisis management. Iraq invades Kuwait and - Bingo! -all Americans
become experts on the Middle East, dependence on foreign oil, and chemical
warfare. It's one of the enduring strengths of this country that the average guy
at the corner store believes he has some small influence, and some great
responsibility.

''That Iraq fella is going to get what's coming to him,'' said the man waiting
in the barbershop to get his short hair cut shorter. ''That's my prediction.''

There's something for everyone here. The word Vietnam, which keeps cropping up
in discussions about troop strength and American involvement, speaks to the
collective memory of one generation of Americans. The word Hitler, which has
been used profligately in discussions of the Iraqi leader, speaks to another.
(The public-opinion mavens who've been asking people how Hussein compares to
Hitler should be prosecuted for carrying a loaded question.) The angle for kids:
Saddam Hussein is Bart Simpson cubed. Bad attitude, dude.

Life goes on, but not on its usual track. Even the President couldn't keep up
the illusion of normalcy. He vacates well, but he has to watch appearances.
People still remember that he went hunting at the tail end of the Panama
invasion.

He told the rest of us to go on with our lives, and then instead of staying put
in Kennebunkport, with the phone in his golf cart and his cigarette boat, he
took a short trip back to Washington. It was a Daddy vacation. A couple of days
in a business suit, a couple of days in a vest with lots of little pockets and
hooks and feathers all over it. Takes me back.  This all takes me back. Gas
shortages, double-digit inflation, trouble in the Middle East - these are the
things that shaped my formative years. I thought someday we'd gather around the
Weber kettle and pass them along to our children in stories and song. Now
they're experiencing them firsthand. All they hear about is the Middle East, and
Lyme disease. ''Are we having a war?'' one asked, and in the fashion of my
times, I answered, ''Sort of.'' Then we toss a Frisbee around, and wait to hear
the news from around the world at the roadside produce stand.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-ed

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              187 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 19, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

A Polar Bear's Picnic

BYLINE: By Katie Kelly; Katie Kelly, formerly the on-air television critic for
WNBC-TV's ''Live at Five,'' teaches English to Amerasian children in Vietnam.

SECTION: Section 5; Page 14, Column 2; Travel Desk

LENGTH: 1686 words


Below the small plane the results of the brief Arctic summer could be seen:
inlets of clear water covered with broken patches of melting ice that looked
like white lace tossed over the bright blue water. The landscape itself was
austere and barren, covered with bare stone scoured out of the earth by ancient
glaciers. The rocks heave up out of the landscape, then roll off as far as the
eye can see. And what the eye can see is the very definition of earth tones:
browns, tans, greens.

Accustomed to thinking of polar bears in a snow-blown, wind-swept atmosphere,
this seemed an unlikely spot to go looking for them. But that is exactly what we
were up to. Our base for this midsummer caper was Sila Lodge, a remote
wilderness camp in Canada's Northwest Territories. Situated on Wager Bay, a
pristine inlet in the far northern reaches of Hudson Bay, the lodge is just 30
miles from the Arctic Circle. In planes that get increasingly smaller, guests
fly to Winnipeg and beyond, finally ending up on a 10-passenger charter plane
that takes them the final leg of the journey to Wager Bay.

Wager Bay can also be combined with a stopover in Churchill, Manitoba, to see
thousands of sweet-faced Beluga whales who come to the lower portion of the Bay
to mate and to calve from late June through July and August.

Sila Lodge is a nearly-new camp set on the edge of the water with the main lodge
and five neat cabins stretching alongside. It is run by three Eskimo partners -
John Hickes, John Tatty and Louis Pilakapsi - and their families. In Inuit, Sila
simply means ''outdoors'' and indeed it was: remote, quiet, wild and brimming
with fresh air, sunshine and wildlife. With hardly another living soul around,
the tundra was still completely in the hands of its wildlife. There were big,
fluffy Arctic hares, who rise up and run on their hind feet. Herds of caribou
trot past, the magnificent racks of the males standing out like ultramodern
sculptures against the clear blue sky. Tundra wolves, Arctic ground squirrels
and wolverines also share the scene.

Wildflowers - delicate lavender moss campion, brilliant yellow Arctic poppies,
pure white Arctic bell heather - washed across the tundra creating an inland sea
of color. It is a tribute to the variety of this vast landscape that it
sometimes takes days for people to realize that there are absolutely no trees.
At least no traditional trees. Due to the harshness of the climate and the
ferocity of the winter winds that rake the unprotected landscape, anything that
grows here must hug the earth, never raising its head any farther than three
inches or so off the ground. But underfoot are two or three species of
industrial-strength trees growing almost flat along the ground.

The lodge itself is a relaxed, no-nonsense affair with large windows and a
wraparound porch for sunning and wildlife watching. Inside, a few tables and
chairs are provided to accommodate card games and cribbage matches, but it is
mostly dining room with meals served cafeteria-style. The kitchen is presided
over by Emma Tatty, John's wife, who serves up hearty, home-cooked meals often
centering around the local fare: freshwater brook trout or sea-run Arctic char,
a delicious salmon-like fish that abounds in the icy waters around Sila Lodge
and attracts fishing enthusiasts. And, for our ice-floe picnics, Emma always
sent guests off with delicate fresh-baked bran muffins.

The cabins are modern, carpeted three-bedroom affairs, each with its own sitting
room and indoor bathroom (high-tech French toilets that used natural gas to burn
the waste material daily at ultrahigh temperatures). Generators provided
electricity and heated water for the modern showers in the main lodge.

Guests at Sila included a group of Canadian fishermen up for the Arctic char and
an assortment of amateur photographers and nature enthusiasts from the United
States, all of whom were drawn to Sila by the chance to see and photograph polar
bears on the ice.

The area around Sila Lodge is also home to an astonishing array of birds:
red-throated loons, king eider, sandpipers, gulls and falcons. A semi-palmated
plover had nested right below the lodge, so a bird blind was quickly put in
place to watch the chicks peck their way out of their eggs. Within a day, these
independent little fledglings were out and about on the tundra.

Transportation, other than foot power for all those nature hikes, consisted of
sturdy aluminum work boats generally used by Eskimos for fishing. One day, John
Tatty said he had a surprise for us and headed off for Guillemot Island, a huge
rocky fist sticking up out of the bay. Black and white guillemots circled the
air around their island, then dropped down to snatch lunch out of the water. On
shore there were dozens of eider duck nests on the ground, large comfortable
things made out of the soft feathers of the eider duck. Each nest contained five
or six big olive-green eggs.

But it was straight up the face of a cliff that John's surprise could be found:
two newly-hatched peregrine falcons, all white and fluffy and vulnerable. Their
eyes were barely open and under the fluff little bits of pinkish skin showed
through. Overhead, the mother wheeled nervously in the blue sky, screaming her
head off. It was hard to look at that magnificent creature up there - with a
wing-span of some 43 inches, a flying speed of 180 miles an hour and a voice
like a baseball manager - and imagine that those two little balls of fluff would
ever make the biological leap that would turn them into such an astonishing
airborne phenomenon.

Lunches were generally picnics on sandy beaches sometimes surrounded by curious
caribou who would wander by, then stop and stare. One young female who
encountered a lunch bunch was so astonished at the sight she actually did a
double-take worthy of Lucille Ball, then ran off across the rocks. She returned
in a few minutes with her offspring as if to show off her weird find: six humans
eating chicken sandwiches. If a sandy beach didn't present itself in time for
lunch, John Tatty would simply haul the boat up onto an ice floe for a picnic,
complete with hot tea and homemade muffins.

But all of this - caribou, wolves, wildflowers, peregrine falcons, picnics on
the ice - was just the opening act to the main event, an event that had a small
window of opportunity entirely dependent on the melting of the pack ice that
surrounded us: the sighting of polar bears. For the first few days of our visit
the pack ice remained solid, a crystal wall sealing us off from the polar bears
that were surely all around us. But one crisp clear morning we stood on the deck
of the lodge like polar explorers, pointing to the ice that had moved in and
broken up during the night. Quick as a shot, we packed into the work boats and
set off to maneuver between those massive chunks of ice that had floated down
into the bay while we slept. Temperatures on land might have been a comfortable
60 to 70 degrees, but out on the open water the wind chill quickly hit 15 or so.
We sped through the water, our reflection cutting the surface of the crystal
water as surely as a knife cuts glass.

And suddenly, there he was, an adult male polar bear swimming effortlessly just
a few feet off the side of the boat. He turned his massive head and stared
straight at us. His wet black nose seemed to be the size of a fist. The bear
swam silently for a while, then came to an ice floe and effortlessly hauled his
massive body onto it. Water poured off his thick coat and when he shook it was
as if shards of glass were flying through the air. He padded across the ice on
feet the size of oven mitts, periodically checking us out, then did an ungainly
belly flop back into the water.

Polar bears are the largest land carnivores in the world, with adult males
hitting 800 to 1,000 pounds. They are big and impressive, striding through that
ice world of theirs. Over the next few days upwards of 30 or 40 bears were
spotted, most at quite a distance. But two or three times each day, a
magnificent bear would quietly materialize, swimming strong and silent. It was
primeval, this solitary bear passing through his territory.

On the last day of our stay at Sila, when we thought we had achieved a sort of
Polar Bear Nirvana, the unexpected happened. We had been out all day in the work
boats, had seen some terrific big bears and were headed back to the lodge,
understandably exhilarated over the bears we had seen both that day and all the
other days. And then, suddenly, we saw three heads moving noiselessly through
the water. It was almost too good to be true: a large female polar bear with two
cubs, swimming in a silent line. Both cubs - probably about two years old and
almost ready to leave her protective custody - hugged in close to their mother
as they mounted an ice floe.

But, as often happens in families, one of the kids was constantly lagging
behind. So Mom and Sis would patiently wait for Junior to haul himself out of
the water and slowly pad up to join them. Then they all strolled along,
languidly looking at us. From time to time they would all flop into the water,
sending waves of spray into the air. Then, slowly, they began moving away from
us, out across the ice floes. Periodically, they would turn and look back at us.
Then, ever so slowly, they retreated into their ice wilderness, growing smaller
and smaller until they were finally swallowed up by the silence.

ON THE SEARCH

Dan Guravich, a polar bear photographer (Post Office Box 891; Greenville, Miss.
38701; 601-335-2444), plans three tours to Wager Bay in July and August next
year. Schedules and prices are subject to change, but this year the 10-day
trips, leaving from Winnipeg, were $3,750 including accommodations at Sila
Lodge.

Merv and Lynda Gunter of Frontiers North (774 Bronx Avenue; Winnipeg, Manitoba,
Canada R2K 4E9; 204-663-1411) also plan a 7-day to 10-day tour next July. The
price of the tour, starting from Baker Lake, Manitoba, has not yet been fixed,
but will be less than $4,000. That also includes accommodations at Sila Lodge.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: A polar bear leaps from a block of ice in the Northwest Territories.
(Fred Treul); John Tatty, guide and a co-owner of Sila Lodge, a wilderness camp.
(Katie Kelly); Map of Canada showing location of Wager Bay.

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              188 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 19, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Talking Back to the Screen

BYLINE: By MICHAEL COVINO; Michael Covino's most recent book is the short story
collection ''The Off-Season.'' He is the chief film critic for The East Bay
Express in Berkeley, Calif.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 21, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 839 words



SEEING THROUGH MOVIES
Edited by Mark Crispin Miller.
266 pp. New York:
Pantheon. Cloth, $24.95.
Paper, $11.95.

THE SCREENING OF AMERICA
Movies and Values From ''Rocky'' to ''Rain Man.''
By Tom O'Brien.
219 pp. New York:
A Frederick Ungar Book/
Continuum. $21.95.

Our movies have gone downhill. Our movie theaters have gone downhill. Television
has hastened the decline. The studios have been taken over by huge corporations
whose executives care only about the bottom line. Morality has fled through the
exit door. Everything is worse (and it was never that good). These are the
messages of the bracing six-essay anthology ''Seeing Through Movies,'' edited by
Mark Crispin Miller, and Tom O'Brien's well-meaning but enervating ''Screening
of America.''

In his introduction Mr. Miller, the head of the film study program at Johns
Hopkins University, lays out the terrain of his book: the increasing
commercialization of American movies in the 1980's as the result of structural
changes in the business. The question his anthology poses and its contributors
try to answer is: ''What about those movies? How has the new monopoly affected
cinema?''

The essayists go at it from differing angles. Todd Gitlin analyzes ''how the
movies have been affected and afflicted by television,'' how the medium of
television itself has insidiously influenced movies - through faster cutting,
for example, and the tendency toward serialization, not to mention through
dwindling theater attendance, starting in the late 1940's. Douglas Gomery takes
the tack of tracing the rise and fall not of movies but of movie theaters - from
the palaces of the 1920's to today's suburban multiplexes - and concludes: ''Our
cinematic interiors are subject to the same inhuman forces that have changed the
movies.'' He also notes that by 1953 moviegoing had declined sharply even in
places like Green Bay, Wis., where television had not yet made inroads, because
of the postwar recession and suburbanization.

The next piece is a tour of duty of Vietnam War movies of the 1980's by Pat
Aufderheide - and it does feel dutiful - followed by Peter Biskind's examination
of the blockbuster mentality propagated by George Lucas and Steven Spielberg.
Mr. Biskind convincingly demonstrates that while Mr. Lucas saw himself as an
enemy of the studio system with his ''Star Wars'' movies (which sowed, in Mr.
Lucas's eyes, 60's countercultural values), in fact they played right into the
Reagan 80's: ''One vehicle for [the decline in values from the 60's to the
80's], however unwitting, were Lucas's and Spielberg's films. . . . The kids
prevailed, but the ideals they stood for had been drained of content.''

The detractors of colorization get roughed up by Stuart Klawans in his
provocative essay, while Mr. Miller himself concludes the book with its
strongest piece, on the increasing commercialization of movies. At times Mr.
Miller comes on a bit too much like a one-man neo-Marxist rating board. Whereas
the Motion Picture Association of America relentlessly tabulates instances of
frontal nudity and obscenity to arrive at a rating for a film, Mr. Miller just
as relentlessly tabulates product endorsements and assigns his own X, R, PG and
G ratings: ''Even before the opening credits are over [for ''Over the Top,''
starring Sylvester Stallone], the movie has already plugged Budweiser, Colgate
shaving cream, and Michelin tires. . . . The movie also plugs not only Hilton
Hotels, TWA, Nintendo, Leaseway Corp., Alpine car stereos - and Pepsi - but both
Volvo and Toyota, both Nike and Adidas, as well as Valvoline, Duracell,
Soloflex, and Alka-Seltzer.'' Mr. Miller does more than just list product names,
however; he trenchantly analyzes the triumph of the false happy ending in the
movies of the 1980's and what this means for our society: ''The epoch of
revision, with its perfect comebacks, dancin' populations, kindly aliens, lovers
marrying, athletes scoring, winners winning, has in fact reflected an intense
and widespread fear of loss.'' By the time he is done, you stand convinced that
the loss is not just the cinema's, but one of confidence in ourselves and in our
culture.

''THE SCREENING OF AMERICA'' gets off instantly on the wrong foot. The preface
by the author, who until recently was the film critic for Commonweal magazine,
begins with this ominous disclaimer: ''This book is not intended for film
critics, cineasts, or film historians. . . . The book is intended for the common
reader.'' Tom O'Brien says he wants to ''encourage thinking about the social
implications of movies,'' but you do not encourage thinking with sentences like:
''One of the most provocative American moviemakers concerned with value issues,
John Sayles, can't quite solve the aesthetic problems his depth of vision
entails.'' Mr. O'Brien writes that his book is ''for people who see movies for
fun, escape, or enlightenment, and possibly more.'' But people who see movies
for fun and escape aren't going to look twice at his book.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              189 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 19, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

They Were Not Broken

BYLINE: By HARRY G. SUMMERS JR.; Harry G. Summers Jr. is the editor of Vietnam
magazine. His books include ''On Strategy'' and ''Vietnam War Almanac.''

SECTION: Section 7; Page 14, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 698 words



BOUNCING BACK
How a Heroic Band of POWs Survived Vietnam.
By Geoffrey Norman.
248 pp. Boston: Houghton Mifflin Company. $19.95.

''Time is on our side.'' That was a message tapped frequently through the walls
of North Vietnam's infamous prisons by American prisoners of war. It was meant
then as an ironic response to the many frustrations of prison-camp life, but
now, more than 17 years after their release, it stands not only as a commentary
on the readjustment of the former P.O.W.'s to freedom but also as a judgment on
the war itself.

At the time, many well-meaning Americans believed that the North Vietnamese were
on the right side of history and that time was on the Communists' side. But
history has now rendered its verdict. As Pham Xuan An, the former Time magazine
correspondent who turned out to be a Hanoi spy, told CBS News's Morley Safer in
his recent book, ''Flashbacks'': ''All that talk about 'liberation' twenty,
thirty, forty years ago, all the plotting, and all the bodies produced this,
this impoverished, broken-down country led by a gang of cruel and paternalistic
half-educated theorists.''

Pham Xuan An's despair is in stark contrast to the optimistic outlook that
Geoffrey Norman found among the American P.O.W.'s who survived years of North
Vietnamese mistreatment and torture. For most of them, the simple words of
former Senator Jeremiah Denton when he finally reached freedom in February 1973
after eight years' imprisonment, ''God bless America,'' still ring true.

In ''Bouncing Back,'' Mr. Norman, a former editor at Esquire and a Vietnam
veteran, chronicles the barbaric conditions the P.O.W.'s endured. But he also
relates the ingenious ways they managed to outwit their captors and retain their
sanity. For example, they devised the tap code: a series of knocks on a wall
represented the letters of the alphabet. That code ''broke the wall of
isolation.'' As Mr. Norman explains, it was used not only to ''talk'' back and
forth but also to hold poetry readings, to exchange plot summaries of novels and
movies and to give ''classes'' on such subjects as existentialism and wine
appreciation.

In his conclusion, Mr. Norman cites a 15-year study conducted by Capt. Robert
Mitchell, a Navy flight surgeon. The prisoners of war, Mr. Norman writes, ''were
in surprisingly good health. . . . More remarkably, the POWs generally showed an
increase in their IQ scores. The classes they had held and the games of
concentration that they had played had paid off beyond keeping them diverted. .
. . Furthermore, the POWs did not seem to suffer from any lingering emotional
problems that could be traced to their captivity. . . . There were no long-term
psychiatric problems. . . . The experience, grim as it had been, had not ruined
these men.''

Mr. Norman reports that Captain Mitchell ''believes that their spirit of
teamwork and resistance, their ingenuity, is behind this remarkable outcome.
'They were well-trained, well-motivated men who believed in something,' he
said.''

Using a now-retired Navy pilot as his point of reference, Mr. Norman tells us
what captivity was like for a small group of P.O.W.'s. While flying an attack
bomber in 1967, Lieut. Comdr. Al Stafford was shot down by a surface-to-air
missile. He lived and joined the more than 200 other American aviators then
being held by the North Vietnamese. Commander Stafford and most of his fellow
P.O.W.'s - the total number grew to some 590 - would remain in North Vietnam
until their release in 1973 after the signing of the Paris peace accords.

After the Korean War, many Americans feared that brainwashing - Communist
group-think and thought control - was so insidious that it could permanently
warp men's minds. By contrast, the lesson learned in Vietnam, and one reinforced
by the recent events in Eastern Europe, is that minds are not nearly so
malleable. Instead of being brainwashed, our P.O.W.'s truly ''bounced back.''
This is a lesson that, Mr. Norman notes, ''the services incorporated . . . into
their doctrine and now teach . . . at their survival schools.'' It is good to
know that we got at least one thing right out of our unfortunate Vietnam
travail.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              190 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 19, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

New & Noteworthy

BYLINE: By GEORGE JOHNSON

SECTION: Section 7; Page 28, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 962 words


UTRILLO'S MOTHER, by Sarah Baylis. (Fawcett Columbine, $8.95.) Suzanne Valadon,
the mother of the artist Maurice Utrillo, worked as a model for the likes of
Degas and Renoir; but she was an artist herself, forgotten, in no small part,
because she was female. This imagined autobiography often comes off like ''an
antimale polemic,'' Richard Goodman said here last year, but the author, who
died in 1987, ''was very good indeed at re-creating the ambiance of life in the
rural France of 100 years ago. She was a writer of all the senses; smells,
sounds and tastes are a fundamental part of her vision, and are rendered with
great verve.''

AN INVISIBLE SPECTATOR: A Biography of Paul Bowles, by Christopher
Sawyer-Laucanno. (Ecco, $14.95.) This life story of the man who wrote ''The
Sheltering Sky'' tells how a dentist's son from Queens moved to Tangier,
discovered alienation and became the patron saint of the beat generation. '' 'An
Invisible Spectator' is fascinating, even important reading,'' Anatole Broyard
said in The Book Review last year. ''In his impenetrable way, [Paul Bowles] is
probably a hero or saint of some peculiarly modern kind. Against all odds he
wrote some good books, and against much greater odds Mr. Sawyer-Laucanno has
written a good one about him.''

THE HISTORY OF LUMINOUS MOTION, by Scott Bradfield. (Vintage, $8.95.) A
precocious and possibly psychotic 8-year-old boy finds his life pushed and
pulled between polar extremes: his manic depressive mother, who represents
light, motion, life on the run, and his father, who stands for stability,
darkness, the confining stuffiness of home. Last year our reviewer, Francesca
Lia Block, said the language in the novel is ''both spiritual and visceral,
horrifying and humorous, always potent with the repressed energy of a brilliant,
disturbed consciousness trapped in a child's body. . . . 'The History of
Luminous Motion' is both a gripping tale of a haunted young mind and a
penetrating, frightening symbolic look at the state of childhood in America.''

RUNNING IN PLACE: Scenes From the South of France, by Nicholas Delbanco.
(Atlantic Monthly, $9.95.) The novelist tells why he, like van Gogh, Cezanne and
Camus, finds himself drawn to the light of Provencal France. Last year our
reviewer, Diane Manuel, said the book ''ranks with the richest of the genre,
standing up strong and tall to inevitable comparisons with Jan Morris's
tart-sweet observations of her beloved Venice.'' Carroll & Graf has republished
Nicholas Delbanco's book GROUP PORTRAIT: Joseph Conrad, Stephen Crane, Ford
Madox Ford, Henry James and H. G. Wells ($10.95), in which he tells how a group
of writers with some very different ideas about the literary arts found
themselves part of a loosely knit community in Kent and East Sussex. In 1982 The
Times's John Leonard said the book has ''a firm sense of place and a graceful
offhand style.''

IN THE PALOMAR ARMS, by Hilma Wolitzer. (Ivy, $3.95.) Stuck in an affair with a
married man, Daphne seeks wisdom and solace among the residents of a nursing
home where she works part time. ''While there's no shortage of novels about
adultery,'' Anatole Broyard said here in 1983, ''Hilma Wolitzer's fourth book
makes you feel that most of the others are mere romances and this, only this, is
the homely truth.''

CLEAR PICTURES: First Loves, First Guides, by Reynolds Price. (Ballantine,
$12.95.) The author of ''Kate Vaiden'' and ''A Long and Happy Life'' tells how,
growing up in rural North Carolina, he learned to love solitude. ''This is a
seductive book,'' Robb Forman Dew said here in 1989. Reynolds Price ''wrestles
with the peculiar need of the artist to create, with the thirst of humanity for
some sort of spirituality, with the definition of a life well lived.''
Ballantine has also republished PERMANENT ERRORS ($4.95), a collection of Mr.
Price's early short stories.

THE MEDUSA FREQUENCY, by Russell Hoban. (Atlantic Monthly, $8.95.) A blocked
author who supports himself by writing comic books finds his muse: the head of
Orpheus, which appears just in time to provide material for his third novel. In
1987 our reviewer, Steve Erickson, said Russell Hoban's voice ''seems incapable
of speaking without integrity and intelligence even as it's half-resigned to a
sense of life as a series of deaths - the death of each moment, with the death
longer than the moment itself.''

A COUNTRY MADE BY WAR: From the Revolution to Vietnam - The Story of America's
Rise to Power, by Geoffrey Perret. (Vintage, $14.95.) Since the United States
began, nine generations have been involved in nine wars, each of which has
shaped and reflected the changing nature of American society. ''Blessed with a
particularly lucid writing style, Mr. Perret accomplishes the difficult task of
writing a readable and entertaining book that does not sacrifice historical
accuracy,'' Harry G. Summers Jr. said here in 1989.

CAUSE FOR ALARM, by Eric Ambler. (Carroll & Graf, $3.95.) Before World War II, a
British munitions expert becomes the target of an Axis conspiracy. ''This is the
best spy story that has come our way in a long, long time,'' Isaac Anderson said
here in 1939.

THE LITERARY GUIDE TO THE BIBLE, edited by Robert Alter and Frank Kermode.
(Belknap/Harvard University, $14.95.) In a collection of essays, contemporary
biblical scholars examine the Bible not as religion or history but as
literature, uncovering the techniques its authors used to get their messages
across. In 1987 our reviewer, Elizabeth Struthers Malbon, said this book ''marks
an important moment in the history of Bible studies. [It] invites the general
reader, religious or not, to join in [the] discussion, to experience how new
questions are opening up understandings of an old book.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Paul Bowles.

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              191 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 21, 1990, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1279 words



International    A2-17



U.S.-Iraqi relations are worsening, as President Bush for the first time
conceded that those trapped in Iraq are hostages, but vowed that ''America will
not be intimidated.''    A1



News analysis: President Bush is running out of time before he must make several
important policy decisions - about the trade embargo and hostages - that will
determine if the conflict will be settled peacefully or through war.    A1



Families of Iraq's U.S. hostages said they were shocked when they first heard
the President use the word ''hostage,'' but said it confirmed what they already
knew.    A13



U.S. citizens being moved are just some of the trapped    A13



Critics of the U.S. troop deployment have been few and relatively soft-spoken,
as they watch developments in the confrontation with Iraq, particularly how long
it will last.    A16



The U.S. widened its array of bases by winning the permission of the United Arab
Emirates to station forces on its territory to back up the large U.S. troop
deployment in Saudi Arabia.    A1



U.N. talks on Iraq continue    A12



U.S. warships continue pursuit of Iraqi tankers    A14



Libya condemns Iraq's decision to take Westerners hostages    A14



A few Westerners flee from Iraq to Jordan    A15



200,000 Kuwaitis, a third of the nation, are refugees    A16



Western Europe's response to Iraq could become more coherent because of the
efforts of a little-known defense organization, the Western European Union,
whose mandate is to respond to threats to global peace.    A17



Ex-general, a Soviet maverick, claims victory    A5



Violence by bands of racist skinheads stalks East Germany    A8



Accused Nazi war criminal indicted in deaths of 3,400    A9



The drug trade in Panama persists despite the U.S. invasion last December.
Instead of ending the cocaine smuggling reportedly tolerated and even promoted
by Gen. Manuel Noriega, the invasion has given smugglers new opportunities.
A1



Talks aimed at ending El Salvador's civil war fail    A3



Controls on supercomputers, imposed by Japan and the U.S. to stop their
exportation, are being evaded by engineers around the world who build the
machines by linking computer chips that are easy to buy.    A1



Siberian prisoners hijack an airliner to Pakistan    A3



Pakistan said to have fired on Indian troops    A7



Ten die and 25 are hurt as Muslims fight in Beirut    A6



Talks in Liberia's civil war stalled, amid indications that President Samuel K.
Doe is unwilling to yield power in order to gain a cease-fire.    A11



Some Liberians accuse the U.S. of betrayal    A10



Buenos Aires Journal: Where Horatio Algers pack it up    A4



National    A18-25



Three drunken flying convictions were returned by a Federal jury against three
former pilots for Northwestern Airlines, the first such verdicts against
professional pilots.    A1



National parks do not escape crime, officials say. Park rangers are being urged
to wear bulletproof vests in response to an alarming number of violent
incidents.    A1



The expansion of the welfare rolls has been particularly noticeable in New
Hampshire, where rising unemployment and slowing wage growth help explain the
trend.    A22

A pledge to appoint more women has caused a ruckus in the Calfornia governor's
race. The promise by Dianne Feinstein to appoint women to half the posts in her
administration, if she is elected, has been criticized for embracing a quota.
    A18



Jury misconduct charged in case of agent's death    A21



Design sought for monument honoring women in Vietnam    A25



Man indicted in killing tied to 9 deaths in Massachusetts    A18



Messy research monkeys vex Florida keys    A23



Design sought for Vietnam monument    A25



Regional    B1-6



A Correction Department shake-up last month led to the dismissal of the woman
who headed the office that disciplines officers. In light of the Rikers Island
melee, some critics wonder if her removal sent a signal of relaxed discipline.
    B1



Gunman in livery cab shoots officer in Harlem    B3



New models of subway turnstiles are being heated and chilled, stained, smashed
and vibrated, all in anticipation of their next users - New York City subway
riders.    A1



Subway improvements will be delayed    B2



Rep. Floyd Flake pleaded not guilty to charges that he had embezzled Federal
funds and cheated on his income taxes. The Queens Congressman entered his plea
in a courtroom packed with supporters.    B1



New York City's recycling program is behind schedule, stalling its drive to
recycle 25 percent of the city's garbage by 1994.    B1



Board of Estimate approves Rockaway housing complex    B3



News analysis: Gov. Jim Florio won a victory for his auto insurance plan when
one company backed down from its threat to leave New Jersey, but the battle over
the plan is certain to be a long one.    B1



In the second jogger trial, lawyers for three defendants are promising a more
aggressive approach. One of the lawyers said he would give the rape victim a
grueling cross-examination.    B3



New York State cattle were praised as the rival of any in the West at a beef
field day where ranchers heard how to lower costs and crossbreed their animals
to raise lean beef.    B4



Wearing their hearts under their sleeves    B3



Business Digest    D1



Science Times



Even among animals, infidelity is rife    C1



New method of analyzing health data is stirring debate    C1



Physics taking a new direction - back in time    C1



Horse vaccine in China raises hope in fight against AIDS    C3

Arts/Entertainment



Payola trial opening in California    C13



Theater: Statement imminent on ''Miss Saigon''    C14



Music: Bernstein at Tanglewood    C13



Dance: Reviving Tharp's works    C16



Word and Image: ''Bitter Harvest'' by James Corcoran    C15



Fashion Page    B10



Obituaries



Richard L. Strout, the political columnist    B11



Kenneth J. Germeshausen, nuclear pioneer    B11



Maurice Gendron, the French cellist and conductor    B12



Sports



Baseball: Steinbrenner says he signed resignation letter    D23



Michael is named 17th Steinbrenner general manager    D23



Yankee partners loose court battle    D26



Yankees edge Blue Jays    D27



Padres beat Mets    D27



Column: Berkow on Steinbrenner    D23



On Horse Racing: Crist    D25



Football: Confusing options confront college players    D23



Jets wait and wonder on Thomas    D25



Taylor a 'Not too happy' Giant    D25



Editorials/Letters/Op-Ed



Editorials    A26



Time squeezes Iraq

Parochial politics on oil

West Side landmark challenge

Topics: Whistle-blower ruling

Letters    A26



Flora Lewis: Steady against Saddam    A27



Lawrence J. Korb: We can afford to fight Iraq    A27



Lynn S. Baker: Are we safe in our own skins?    A27



Richard Spielman: The emerging unipolar world    A27


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              192 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 21, 1990, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Confrontation in the Gulf;
Few From Left or Right Protest Bush's Big Stick

BYLINE: By ANDREW H. MALCOLM

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1193 words


So far, the critics of American military involvement in Saudi Arabia have been
few and relatively soft-spoken, pending further developments in the
confrontation with Iraq, notably its duration.

Only a few people and a handful of peace and anti-nuclear groups have voiced
firm opposition. ''We were quick, too quick, to move to a military solution,''
said Nick Carter, executive director of SANE/Freeze, one of the largest peace
groups, claiming 150,000 members.

Ramsey Clark, the former Attorney General who has long been a critic of American
military interventions, also opposed the military moves. ''I think it's a
serious mistake for the United States to place its military in Saudi Arabia and
the Persian Gulf,'' he said. ''We can't police the world.''

But over the last few days, even as military transport planes continued to lift
off United States runways bound for Saudi Arabia, few American politicians,
officials or commentators were sharply critical of President Bush's decision.
And polls showed broad support among the public.

Conservatives Worried

Some of the strongest reservations come from conservatives who question the
President's tactics or whether he should make such a large military commitment
to aiding the royal families of Kuwait or Saudi Arabia.

Patrick J. Buchanan, the syndicated columnist who was Ronald Reagan's director
of communications, said Mr. Bush had acted brilliantly in diplomatic terms, but
added, ''I'm concerned with the extent of rhetorical commitment he's making.''
In his column on Saturday, he wrote of Mr. Bush's statement comparing Iraq to
Nazi Germany. ''By using the Hitler analogy, Bush is virtually ruling out any
negotiated settlement,'' he wrote.

And Charles Oliver, assistant editor of Reason, a monthly libertarian magazine,
expressed little fondness for the Kuwaiti leader displaced by the Iraqi
invasion. ''I don't see the point of intervening because the emir may be a nicer
thug than Saddam Hussein,'' he said.

Many Democrats said they backed American involvement in the gulf but thought
more effort should be made to enlist the support of other nations.

Getting Caught Alone

Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan, Democrat of New York, said he was worried that
the United States seemed to be paying less and less attention to operating under
the umbrella of the United Nations. At first, he noted, President Bush referred
to the United Nations Charter and international law in responding to Saudi
Arabia's request for help against an Iraqi invasion.

Then came the naval blockade of Iraqi ports. ''And for reasons I can't
understand we haven't wanted to get U.N. sanction,'' the Senator said.
''Something has faltered.'' He added, ''The Americans would be mad to be caught
alone.''

Coretta Scott King said the danger faced by Americans stranded in Kuwait and
Iraq would be reduced by a stronger commitment to United Nations sanctions.
''With this commitment, a little patience and restraint could go a long way to
resolving this crisis without endangering the lives of American hostages and
soldiers,'' said Mrs. King, the widow of the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr.
Even many people once vocal in their opposition to United States military
involvement overseas, whether in Vietnam or Grenada, expressed at least general
support for Administration actions, while speculating that criticism would
quickly mount if the confrontation became a long stalemate.

Defense, Not Offense

The Rev. William Sloane Coffin Jr., the former Yale University chaplain who rose
to national prominence as an organizer of Vietnam War protests, said he
supported the President's troop decision, as long as the force remained
defensive and multilateral. ''Deterrence, yes,'' he said. ''Intervention, no.''
Deterrence, he went on, was bolstering Saudi Arabia; intervention was trying to
push Iraqi troops from Kuwait.

''The world is still a dangerous and savage place,'' Mr. Coffin added, ''and we
need actions to contain it. But they need to be the proper kind of actions.''

George S. McGovern, the Democratic candidate for President in 1972 who had
opposed the Vietnam War, said, ''I support President Bush's decision to take a
stand in Saudi Arabia.'' The former South Dakota Senator, who now travels on the
international lecture circuit and owns a hotel in Stratford, Conn., added: ''I
hope we keep the diplomatic option open. No really important problem facing the
U.S. today would be resolved by war in the Middle East.''

Walter F. Mondale, the former Vice President who headed the Democratic
Presidential ticket in 1984, said he also ''basically supports'' United States
actions so far but thinks the Administration should use the United Nations more
energetically.

Spin Into Recession

''The more isolated Saddam Hussein becomes,'' Mr. Mondale said, ''and the more
this becomes a world effort and not just a Western effort, the better.''

The Rev. Jesse Jackson endorsed the troop deployments but warned, ''The longer
we stay there, sand has a way of sinking.''

He said the United States created considerable Middle Eastern animosity with its
selective involvement, stepping in to deter an invasion of Saudi Arabia's
oilfields while remaining silent about Israeli occupations of Lebanon and the
West Bank.

''Our interests should be higher than just energy,'' he said. ''They should be
humanity and self-determination as well.''

The Rev. Joseph Lowery, president of the Southern Christian Leadership
Conference, condemned Iraq's invasion of Kuwait. But he said the situation
should have been an excellent opportunity to support the United Nations ''rather
than mobilizing armed forces and considering hasty, impetuous military action.''

Dr. Lowery also cited petroleum as the driving force behind the confrontation.
''I do not think that we ought to be on the brink of war over the issue of
oil,'' he said. ''And that's what this is about, not the rights of Kuwaitis.''

In a recent New York Times Poll, 76 percent of Americans approved of the trade
embargo against Iraq, and 66 percent approved of sending troops to Saudi Arabia.
But 40 percent said the Administration was too quick to send in the military and
only 48 percent felt the Government had tried hard enough to reach a diplomatic
solution. The telephone poll of 670 people was conducted Aug. 9 and 10 and had a
margin of sampling error of plus or minus four percentage points.

Deborah Huber, a 21-year-old housewife in Wichita, Kan., was among those in the
poll with doubts. ''This is really hitting home for us,'' she said in a
subsequent interview. ''My husband's brother, David, is being shipped over on
the 24th this month. It's a very personal issue. We would disapprove no matter
what country was involved. It's their war.''

Dennis Morganbesser, a 35-year-old New York City sanitation worker, said the
troop deployment actually worsened the situation. ''By sending troops over,'' he
said, ''it's like it's being blown out of proportion. They're a bunch of
fanatics over there.''

He added, ''We should stay in the back and then move in, not go to the forefront
right away like we always seem to do.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Heading for the Persian Gulf, F117A stealth fighters taxied into
position for take-off yesterday at Langley Air Force Base in Virginia. (Agence
France-Presse)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              193 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 21, 1990, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Randolph Journal;
Asian Refugee Sends Voters a Signal

BYLINE: Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 715 words

DATELINE: RANDOLPH, Mass.


Doorstep after doorstep, night after night, Daniel Lam weaves his way through
this mostly white working-class town south of Boston, announcing his campaign
for state representative to bewildered-looking voters.

Door-to-door politicking is nothing new in Massachusetts, where Samuel Adams,
John F. Kennedy and James Michael Curley, the colorful Boston Mayor, stumped for
office. But Mr. Lam is not just another hometown favorite. He is a Cambodian
refugee.

Mr. Lam, a 45-year-old educator and community worker who fled Cambodia in 1973,
describes himself as the first Asian-American to seek election to the
Massachusetts Legislature and the first Cambodian immigrant in the nation to run
for a state office. His campaign for the Democratic nomination illustrates a
growing breach in a political silence that has long characterized many
Asian-Americans.

''What we are seeing now and will continue to see is a much more aggressive push
by Asian-Americans into American politics,'' said Peter Kiang, a lecturer at the
University of Massachusetts in Boston, who studies Asian immigrant and refugee
communities.

Participation in government is often looked on with suspicion by Asian
immigrants who fled repressive governments. For them, government at its best has
meant taxation and military service, and at its worst, oppression, persecution
or death.

Even for Asian-Americans who have lived in this country for generations,
anti-Asian sentiments fostered by language barriers, a history of laws barring
citizenship and World War II internment camps have discouraged many from
entering electoral politics, said Representative Robert T. Matsui, a California
Democrat who is one of a handful of Asian-American elected officials at the
state or national level.

Asian-Americans around the nation have begun to mobilize in recent years,
mounting voter registration drives, moving into appointed government positions
and raising money for candidates.

''We have reached this critical mass where Asians feel they should have more
representation,'' said Michael Lui, director of the Asian-American Resource
Workshop in Boston, a local civil rights organization. He said Asian-Americans,
including ethnic Chinese, Japanese, Koreans and Southeast Asians, were joining
forces for the first time to address specific issues like anti-Asian violence
and affirmative action.

But while political inroads are being made, Mr. Lam's candidacy comes at a time
of growing resentment in Massachusetts about the stream of refugees from Vietnam
and Cambodia who are settling here. Residents complain that the newcomers are
draining already shrinking state and Federal resources.

This year, John R. Silber, who is seeking the Democratic nomination for
governor, called Lowell, another city in the Boston area, a ''welfare magnet''
for Cambodian refugees and other immigrants. And in Lowell itself, where 15
percent of the nation's estimated 200,000 Cambodians live, voters approved a
nonbinding proposal last November to declare English the city's official
language, a move perceived as hostile by non-English speakers.

In his own district, which is about 5 percent Asian-American, Mr. Lam has had
strong support from a coalition of minority and civil rights leaders, but he has
ruffled feathers.

Earlier this summer, Mr. Lam suggested that some signatures were forged on the
nomination papers of another Democratic candidate, Paul J. Connors. The state
courts and ballot commission upheld Mr. Lam's challenge, and Mr. Connors left
the race, leaving only two other candidates to face Mr. Lam in the September
primary.

Mr. Lam says the challenge showed his commitment to speaking out against
injustice and upholding the integrity of electoral politics.

''When I was growing up in Cambodia, I didn't even realize I had the right to
think differently,'' said Mr. Lam, who grew up in the slums of war-torn Phnom
Penh. He has lived in Randolph since being granted citizenship in 1980.

''Many newcomers take the attitude that they don't even have the courage to
participate,'' he said. ''But I truly believe that we can't just throw our hands
up and say, 'This is a lousy government.' You have to become a part of a
society. Not to vote and make your voice heard when you can - well, it is
unconscionable.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              194 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 21, 1990, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Messy Research Monkeys Vex Florida Keys

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 23, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 528 words

DATELINE: KEY LOIS, Fla., Aug. 20


More than a decade ago Bausch & Lomb in a business venture put thousands of
rhesus monkeys on two small deserted islands to breed. For the State of Florida
and residents of nearby keys, however, the breeding has been far too successful.

While the vision-care company's venture was designed to offer a steady supply of
laboratory animals to biomedical researchers, people who live near the two
islands where the monkeys have been allowed to run free object to what they call
needless environmental destruction.

''It looks like a war zone right now, just like Vietnam,'' said James McElroy,
who is part of a grass-roots anti-monkey campaign.

The rhesus monkeys have been good business since they were first brought from
India 18 years ago. Handlers regularly dispense monkey chow and capture more
than a thousand each year, generating more than $1.5 million in annual sales.

The breeding colonies became more important to American researchers after India,
Pakistan and Bangladesh banned monkey exports in the late 1970's, said Dr.
Joseph Held, vice president for primate research at Charles River Laboratories,
the division of Bausch & Lomb that runs the islands.

And because they are untainted by infections from the outside world, they are
much more valuable than other primates destined for the nation's laboratories,
Dr. Held said.

Used in Neurological Research

Bausch & Lomb, based in Rochester, said that most of the animals were sold to
laboratories doing advanced neurological research and that none are used for
eye-care tests.

More than 1,900 breeding animals and several thousand offspring roam on 300
acres of partly submerged wetlands on Key Lois and Raccoon Key. Even the
company, which has consented to replace damaged trees and reduce the monkey
population, agrees that the monkeys have made a mess of things.

The monkeys stripped the leaves from thousands of red mangroves, a protected
species, and now struggle to find shade. Their waste has fouled the waters,
leaving a band of yellowish-brown algae that chokes out marine life.

''They weren't too noticeable until the vegetation began disappearing,'' Mr.
McElroy said. ''That's when people became alarmed.''

The state owns everything below the high-water line, and environmental officials
ordered Bausch & Lomb to clean up those grounds years ago.

Charles River Laboratories fenced in and replanted some trees, but disputed the
boundary and sued the state in 1986. Little changed until the two sides quietly
agreed to a settlement in May that would allow the company to phase out the
monkeys over 20 to 30 years.

When opponents complained, Gov. Bob Martinez scuttled the agreement and decided
to go after Charles River instead.

''They just stripped all the state land and left it bare,'' Governor Martinez
said at the Cabinet meeting on June 26. ''I'd like to see if we can prosecute.''
Ken Plante, general counsel for the Florida Department of Environmental
Resources, said the title dispute must be resolved first. A hearing has been
scheduled for Aug. 30.

The department is trying to find surveyors willing to brave the monkeys and
measure the property, Mr. Plante said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              195 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 21, 1990, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Design Sought for New Vietnam Monument

BYLINE: By BARBARA GAMAREKIAN, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 25, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 502 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 20


A competition to design a monument honoring women who served in Vietnam was
announced today by officials of the Vietnam Women's Memorial Project.

The memorial ''will mark an historic milestone,'' said Diane Carlson Evans, the
founder of the project. ''It will be the first monument honoring women in the
Armed Forces of the United States to be placed on the Mall of the nation's
capital.''

In 1989 President Bush signed a Congressional resolution authorizing the
memorial. Last April the Commission of Fine Arts voted to place the memorial
just south of the Vietnam Veteran's Memorial beyond a grove of trees. In a drive
that has gone on since 1984, the Vietnam Women's Memorial Project has raised
$1.5 million of its $3.5 million goal.

The idea of a memorial to women who served in Vietnam was conceived in 1983 by
Ms. Evans, a former Army nurse who served there. She and her colleagues
initially faced opposition from some who felt that the purity of the design of
the Vietnam Memorial's V-shaped black granite wall had already been sullied with
the addition of Frederick Hart's statue of three soldiers after protests from
some veterans that the men who served were not realistically represented. But
approval to commemorate the estimated 11,000 military women who served in
Vietnam came from Congress, and today the memorial has the support of every
major veterans group in the country, including the Vietnam Veterans Memorial
Fund.

The design competition is limited to Americans over 18 years old. The deadline
for entries is Oct. 31. The winner, to be announced Nov. 11, will receive a
$20,000 prize. An award of $10,000 will go to the second-place entry.

Diana Hellinger, executive director of the project, said there were no
preconceived criteria on the design. ''The memorial may be composed of any
appropriate combination of artistic design elements - sculpture, landscape and
architecture,'' she said. ''We feel the design must complement the wall and the
statues of the three fighting men, but not compete in grandeur, scale or message
with the wall.''

Entry kits, including program, design standards and rules and procedures, may be
obtained from Michael John Pittas, competition adviser, Vietnam Memorial Project
Inc., 2001 S Street, NW, Suite 302, Washington D.C. 20009. A registration fee of
$50, payable to the Vietnam Women's Memorial Project, must accompany entries.

Following are members of the panel of jurors who will select the winners:

Lita Albuquerque, artist, Los Angeles.
James Freed, architect, New York.
Craig Hodgetts, architect, Santa Monica, Calif.
Raquel Ramati, urban designer, New York.
Martha Schwartz, environmental artist, San Francisco.
Rear Adm. Frances Shea Buckley, U.S.N., retired, San Diego.
Adm. William J. Crowe Jr., U.S.N., retired, former Chairman of the Joint Chiefs
of Staff, Alexandria, Va.
Diane Carlson Evans, former captain, U.S.

Army Nurse Corps, Northfield, Minn.
Brig. Gen. George B. Price, U.S.A., retired, Columbia, Md.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              196 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 21, 1990, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

We Can Afford to Fight Iraq

BYLINE: By Lawrence J. Korb; Lawrence J. Korb directs the Center for Public
Policy Education at the Brookings Institution.

SECTION: Section A; Page 27, Column 2; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 751 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


While the cost of Operation Desert Shield will be high, it's nothing the U.S.
can't bear. And we can do this without placing a substantial additional burden
on taxpayers and while still paring down the military. But it will require some
creative thinking about deployments as well as financial contributions from our
allies.

What will Operation Desert Shield cost? Just placing l00,000 people on the
ground in Saudi Arabia and operating four carrier task forces in the surrounding
waters will cost at least $20 million a day more than the $50 billion the
Department of Defense had budgeted for routine military operations in this
fiscal year. If these forces should become involved in large scale combat with
the armed forces of Iraq, the incremental costs - those above and beyond the
expense of peacetime operations -could rise to more than billion a day.

By comparison, the incremental cost of the Vietnam War was nearly $200 million
daily, while the recent invasion of Panama - which consisted of sending in
''only'' 25,000 troops for a few days of combat against a glorified police force
- cost about $400 million beyond normal expenditures.

Currently the Pentagon spends about 60 billion, or more than half of its entire
budget, on payroll and operating costs. These funds allow us to keep about
500,000 soldiers, air force personnel and marines deployed throughout the world
and four carrier battle groups operating continuously in three oceans. The
Defense Department also maintains several divisions, air wings and carrier
groups in the U.S. ready to deploy at a moment's notice.

Moreover, the Pentagon has spent about trillion in the last decade to stockpile
planes, ships, tanks, missiles, bombs, bullets and bandages. This force has been
structured and equipped to resist a Warsaw Pact attack on Western Europe while
simultaneously handling a Soviet thrust into the Persian Gulf.

To hold down the incremental cost of the Persian Gulf operation, the Pentagon
can easily reduce its activities in other parts of the world and live off its
enormous investment in materiel - without jeopardizing national security.

For example, the Navy should reduce sharply its activities in the Western
Pacific while the Army and Air Force should cut back on their operations in
Europe, Japan and Korea. Right now, our policy is to maintain these operations
at current levels. If actual hostilities should break out, the services should
dip into supplies stockpiled for possible European combat.

In Europe, for instance, the Army has stockpiled enough equipment for the six
divisions that would have been sent as reinforcements - at least $10 billion
worth. This equipment should be sent to the Persian Gulf immediately. And if it
is used up, it should not be replaced: It's no longer needed in Europe.

Moreover, when reserves are called up, the size of the active force should be
reduced concurrently. The reserves are needed not because the active force is
too small but because it lacks certain mundane skills -handling cargo and water,
or sweeping mines.

Finally, the services should begin to implement their planned reductions of
about l00,000 people, or 5 percent of the active force, in the upcoming fiscal
year. Even if we should pour 250,000 people into the Persian Gulf area, that
would amount to only l2 percent of our current active forces.

Indeed, if the troop cuts proposed by President Bush were already in effect the
U.S. would still possess 22 ground divisions, 25 air force fighter wings and 455
ships - a total force of 2.5 million people. This is more than enough to handle
Iraq's million man army, even without the support of other nations.

Even with all these steps, the Pentagon will not be able to offset all of the
incremental costs of Operation Desert Shield. Most of these additional costs
should be borne by the Saudis, West Europeans, Japanese and South Koreans.

The Saudis should pay for transporting our forces to the Middle East (primarily
fuel costs). One way our allies could contribute - without our appearing to be
mercenaries - is by increasing support for American troops on their soil. These
nations are much more dependent on Persian Gulf oil than the U.S. and are not
even close to matching our contribution.

The U.S. has spent about $8 trillion (in 1990 dollars) over the past four
decades to maintain peace and stability in the world. We deserve a significant
peace dividend. We should not be cheated out of it by the Pentagon or our
allies.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              197 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 21, 1990, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

FOREIGN AFFAIRS;
Steady Against Saddam

BYLINE: By Flora Lewis

SECTION: Section A; Page 27, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 749 words

DATELINE: MINORCA, Spain


Early in the Persian Gulf crisis, Secretary of State James Baker retorted to the
suggestion that the invasion of Kuwait was an Arab issue, for the Arab states to
settle. ''No,'' he said, ''it is a world issue.'' So it remains.

It is about power and domination. It isn't essentially about the legitimacy of
Kuwaiti emirs nor their country's right to independence. Nor is it about the
price of oil. The price of oil was going up anyway, because of OPEC's agreement
and mostly because the U.S. and others have grown sloppy about applying the
1970's lessons of excessive dependence.

True, there would probably have been little world reaction had it not been for
the oil and wealth at stake. But it is straightforward realism, not hypocrisy,
to see that the oil and wealth concerned make the difference between another
nasty aggression in an unstable region and the future of the world.

No country would be unaffected, no economy would be reliable, no development
plans sustainable if President Saddam Hussein of Iraq could achieve his ambition
of becoming master of the gulf. The Arab regimes in the area are in imminent
danger, which is why they welcome Western protective force. But the U.S. would
lose not only its world power status but its ability to govern its own destiny
if it were unwilling to confront the menace.

This central issue must be clearly understood before the temptation grows to bog
down in arguments about cost, strategic options and Arab history. The choice is
not whether to confront President Hussein or to seek a tolerable compromise; it
is whether to accept the challenge now or later, in much worse circumstances.

The enormous military buildup being established against him is not an
extravagance. In strictly military terms, it is sound. The Soviets displayed in
their invasions of Czechoslovakia in 1968 and Afghanistan in 1979 the military
truism that force has the best chance of rapid success if it's overwhelming.
That still holds. The opposite approach of sidling into battle, as the U.S. did
in Vietnam, is the most dangerous.

But the Soviet campaigns also showed that brilliant military operations aren't
enough. The political objectives must be evident and widely acceptable. This is
the case in the gulf as long as the United States keeps its cool resolve and its
determination to rally international support.

Saddam Hussein's craven use of hostages does not change the stakes. It is right
to denounce him for that and to do all possible to extricate the hapless
foreigners caught in his adventure.

But we must not repeat the grave mistake of the American Embassy hostage crisis
in Teheran. The hostages' ordeal was enormously prolonged by the frenzied
American reaction, proving to hostage-takers that they had stumbled on a much
more potent weapon against the U.S. than they had imagined.

The hostages' value to President Hussein should not be enhanced by public
wailing and media hysterics.

This is not to say that the United States can only counterattack. America and
the rest of the world do not want to go to war. President Bush should continue
to make that very clear, despite the shouts of Rambos like the editorialist of
The Orange County Daily Pilot, in California, who wrote: ''America has spent
$300 billion a year to build up its military. Let's put it to use.'' The limit
on the capacity of firmly enforced sanctions and international isolation to wear
Saddam Hussein down and prove his mistake depends on us, not on him. It is
already a form of surrender to say that democracies haven't the stamina to keep
up the pressure and must strike or quit.

Steadfastness is also the answer to emotional Arab populations that are cheering
the Iraqi dictator. They are applauding him for bravura, for giving vent to
their frustrations, but they don't applaud losers. He can only count on them as
long as they think he will win.

The turmoil of the Arab world is deep and intricate. Saving kings and sheiks
won't stabilize it. In any case, their era is hastening to a close. But the Arab
dreams of renewing past glory can only be approached now by working with others
for mutual benefit. It was the culture of Islamic civilization when Europe was
backward that brought it pre-eminence. Arab intellectuals should remind their
people of the real strength of their roots.

It isn't too early for the West to start thinking of post-Saddam relations with
the Arabs on a higher, less cynical plane. Meanwhile, it must make sure Saddam
fails.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              198 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 21, 1990, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Critic's Notebook;
How Network Reporters Cover The Gulf, or at Least Some of It

BYLINE: By WALTER GOODMAN

SECTION: Section C; Page 13, Column 4; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1275 words


Since the beginning of the confrontation between Iraq and the United States,
network correspondents have been trying to break through interdictions on
coverage by both sides. All the big guns have been deployed: Dan Rather and Ted
Koppel in Baghdad; Tom Brokaw and Sam Donaldson in Saudi Arabia; others in
Cairo, Riyadh, Amman, Damascus, Dubai, Ankara, Aqaba, Jerusalem and other points
east, moving as close as they can to the action, or at least the activity.

The effort and the cost of getting them all in place could have paid for a third
world war, yet through no fault of the correspondents, who deserve medals for
enterprise, they and viewers have remained largely on the periphery of events.
Since the hard news was mostly coming through the State Department, the White
House and the Pentagon, the stars have been performing with thin scripts.

The main objective of the network forces was Baghdad. Reporting from an enemy
country has its hazards. The possibility of being kicked out, or worse, by one's
hosts may inhibit a reporter's zeal. On the other hand, dispatches from abroad
that do not suit the mood at home may bring accusations of abetting the foe.
Some people, for example, still accuse the television reporters in Hanoi of
favoring the North Vietnamese and undermining public support for the Vietnam
War.

Perhaps some such considerations accounted for the unwonted deference that ABC's
Ted Koppel, first to be invited into the enemy capital, showed in the early part
of his ''Nightline'' coup, an on-camera interview with Tariq Aziz, the Iraqi
Foreign Minister.

Viewers who have seen interviews conducted across thousands of miles may wonder
why, in the age of the communications satellite, it was necessary for Mr. Koppel
to make such a trip for such a result. (On Sunday, for example, CBS's ''Face the
Nation'' carried an interesting Washington-Teheran satellite interview with Dr.
Ali Akbar Velayati, the Iranian Foreign Minister, who affirmed his country's
opposition both to the Iraqi action in Kuwait and the American response.) Still,
there is something to be said for face-to-face encounters, which evidently were
desired by both Iraq and ABC.

From the Iraqi point of view, the 45 minutes gave Dr. Aziz, an
unferocious-looking fellow with a good command of American English, an
opportunity to lay out his country's case: Kuwait, which has ''historically''
been part of Iraq, had committed aggression against the motherland, in collusion
with the United States, by not abiding by oil-production quotas; the entrance of
American forces in Saudi Arabia was a further act of aggression and an attempt
to dominate the region.

Listening to one's enemy is only sensible, and in letting him have his say
without drawing attention to Iraq's record of truculence against its neighbors,
Mr. Koppel may have been compensating for the easy time American officials have
generally had on programs like his own. In the second half of the interview,
however, Mr. Koppel stiffened, particularly in regard to the predicament of
Americans being held against their will in Baghdad. (They are safe, asserted Dr.
Aziz.) Mr. Koppel pressed especially for a guarantee, which was not quite
forthcoming, that an American family with two young children would be released.

When next heard from, Mr. Koppel was in Amman, where he explained that he had
been invited to Baghdad for the purpose of interviewing Dr. Aziz. Then he was
back in Washington, where on Friday night he shed all remnants of Middle Eastern
courtesy and joined with Barbara Walters in a combative exchange with Iraq's
Ambassador to the United States, Mohammed al-Mashat. Again tempers rose over the
fate of the Americans, whom Mr. Koppel now flatly called ''hostages.'' The
Ambassador preferred to discuss Israel. The customary politesse was scratched
away, and it was quite a slugfest. The Ambassador incited a similar contretemps
Sunday on ABC's ''This Week With David Brinkley.''

Toward the end, Ms. Walters interviewed Mr. Koppel himself, who leaning into the
camera like a studio photograph of Dynamic Young Executive and prefacing his
responses with ''I must tell you. . . .,'' showed symptoms of incipient
punditry.

Their conversation assumed the justice of the American cause. Throughout the
week on all channels much more attention was given to tactics and logistics than
to the principles underlying American policy and their implications. The
interview programs on Sunday, however, especially the questioning of Secretary
of Defense Dick Cheney on ''This Week With David Brinkley,'' evidenced more
skepticism about America's plans, not that much was elicited from Mr. Cheney's
answers in Pentagonese.

By the weekend, CBS's Dan Rather was the sole network star left in Baghdad.
Evidently not encouraged by his hosts to chat with dissidents, he delivered
portentous opinions on the state of things Iraqi, with a mosque for background,
and engaged in unremarkable telephone conversations with colleagues back in New
York City. He did break the story of Iraq's decision to move Americans to the
vicinity of possible attacks. Most of his appearances, however, were less
rewarding. Presumably, the fact that it was Mr. Rather in person in Baghdad who
was grimly relaying information that might have come from the excellent CBS
Washington bureau carried special weight for his fans.

Mr. Rather's main project, like Mr. Koppel's, was an interview with the benign
Dr. Aziz, Baghdad's favored face to the West, who promised that Iraq would not
use chemical weapons unless the United States used nuclear weapons and, in a
change of tone from a few days earlier, now said that the foreign guests in Iraq
and Kuwait should be proud of being used as deterrents to aggression. Like Mr.
Koppel and Ms. Walters, Mr. Rather displayed indignation at what he called
Iraq's ''human hostage shield operation.''

The threat to the American civilians dominated the weekend coverage; here was a
flesh-and-blood made-for-television story. Forrest Sawyer, while in Baghdad for
ABC, had managed to slip out a brief interview with one American being confined
to a hotel, and Mr. Rather telephoned in a recorded exchange with others.

Once again, as in Jimmy Carter's time, this question presents itself: To what
degree may the audience-stirring attention given to hostages by television (Ms.
Walters, typically, spoke of the babies and old people among them, and Mr.
Rather concentrated on a pregnant woman) influence Washington's actions in a
world crisis?

Now, with Baghdad closed to foreign reporters at least for a time, NBC's Tom
Brokaw and ABC's Sam Donaldson were stuck in Saudi Arabia. They took off their
neckties, just like Mr. Rather. CNN's Bernard Shaw remained in necktie and in
Washington, which did no evident harm to his network's useful day-and-night
dispatches and analyses.

In so wide-ranging a story, it is only natural for journalists to want to get in
close and for viewers to want to see them there. The Governments involved,
however, are united against them, and so far Washington and Baghdad have
prevailed. Television watchers have had to make do mostly with unexciting pooled
reports from their own side and with official statements from both sides,
lightened by pictures of President Bush jogging and putting.

As in other conflicts, from Vietnam to Grenada to Panama, the journalists' main
adversaries are national security and political considerations. There is no
choice except to keep pushing, since most of the nation continues to count on
television reporters to test the premises of both Washington and Baghdad in
addition to merely occupying them.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Ted Koppel was the first broadcast journalist invited into
Baghdad. (ABC News); Dan Rather broke the story of Iraq's decision to move
Americans to the vicinity of possible attacks. (CBS News) (pg.C13); Sam
Donaldson of ABc was reporting from Saudi Arabia. (ABC News) (pg. C16)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              199 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 21, 1990, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Announcement On 'Miss Saigon' Expected Today

SECTION: Section C; Page 14, Column 6; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 256 words


Cameron Mackintosh, the producer of ''Miss Saigon,'' said in London yesterday
that he had been meeting with his aides all day and expected to make an
announcement today on his decision whether to reinstate the Broadway production
of the hit London musical.

Mr. Mackintosh had canceled the show on Aug. 8, the day after the Actors' Equity
Association denied permission for the British actor Jonathan Pryce to re-create
his award-winning protrayal of a Eurasian pimp in the show. Equity said it could
not ''appear to condone the casting of a Caucasian in the role of a Eurasian.''
But lat Thursday Equity reversed its decision, saying it had ''applied an honest
and moral principle in an inappropriate manner.''

Equity's change of mind was made by a vote of 38 to 15, said someone who was
present at the meeting. The vote on Aug. 7 to bar Mr. Pryce was reportedly
either 22 or 23 to 18, with only about half of the union's 79-member council
taking part.

Mr. Mackintosh had said after Thursday's reversal that he was encouraged by the
decision. After the original vote, he said he would consider bringing the show
to New York City only ''if the climate was right.''

The New York production of the musical about a Vietnamese woman and her G.I.
lover in Saigon at the end of the Vietnam War was budgeted at $10 million, which
would make it the most expensive show in Broadway history, and had a record
advance sale of more than $25 million. It was scheduled ot begin performances in
March and open in April at the Broadway Theater.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              200 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 22, 1990, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

CONFRONTATION IN THE GULF;
U.S. TO CALL 40,000 RESERVES TO SUPPORT SAUDI TROOPLIFT; REJECTS IRAQI OFFER TO
TALK

BYLINE: By ANDREW ROSENTHAL, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1127 words

DATELINE: KENNEBUNKPORT, Me., Aug. 21


To fill gaps in the United States military buildup in the Persian Gulf region,
President Bush on Wednesday is expected to order a mobilization of reserves that
will initially place about 40,000 Americans on active duty, Administration
officials said today.

The call-up, which officials said could eventually be expanded beyond 40,000
reservists, is the first since the Tet offensive of 1968 in Vietnam and adds a
new dimension to the military operation in Saudi Arabia and other countries in
the gulf area. Most Will Stay in U.S.  Officials said it will involve noncombat
personnel, mostly from the Army Reserve, and will focus on specialists in cargo
loading and transportation. Navy Reserve doctors and medical technicians will
also be called, along with some Air Force Reserve pilots.

The step carries some political risk for Mr. Bush, despite apparently strong
public support for the dispatch of forces to the Middle East, since it will pull
tens of thousands of Americans away from their jobs and families. The bulk of
the reservists mobilized will remain in the United States, officials said, but
some could be sent to the Middle East, where the threat of fighting remains
real.

In the gulf today, Navy ships shadowing two loaded Iraqi oil tankers bound for
Yemen held in abeyance a threat to stop the ships by force after Yemen announced
that it would not unload the oil. [Page A12.] Nothing Is Ruled Out Marlin
Fitzwater, the White House spokesman, said here today that the Navy would
continue to watch those ships and others, and kept the threat of military action
alive.

Richard A. Boucher, a spokesman for the State Department, said in Washington
that an American citizen and eight Britons had been forced from their homes in
Kuwait by Iraqi soldiers and taken to hotels. The American was later seen by a
United States consular officer at the Meridien Hotel and was ''O.K.,'' Mr.
Boucher said. He said the United States had credible reports that the Iraqis
were moving foreigners to industrial sites in hopes of shielding those places
from attack.

Word that Mr. Bush would issue the executive order mobilizing the reserves came
as the sheer magnitude of the deployment took sharper focus. Gen. Hansford T.
Johnson, the Air Force officer who heads the Pentagon's Transportation Command,
told reporters today that the military had moved by air and sea the equivalent
of Jefferson City, Mo., a city of 36,000, along with the population's ''cars,
trucks, foodstuffs, stocks, household goods and water supply.''

General Johnson said that amounted to about 1 billion pounds, or 500,000 tons,
of materiel either en route or already in Saudi Arabia. Reinforcing the idea
that the United States is preparing for a long stay there, the general said the
Pentagon could not sustain the airlift for more than 45 days without calling in
help from the reserves.

Administration officials said the call-up, which had been in the works for more
than a week, was part of the original plan for the Saudi Arabian operation and
did not signal an increasing concern about the military situation there.

They said Mr. Bush would announce the mobilization on Wednesday at Walker's
Point, his vacation home here, after meeting with Defense Secretary Dick Cheney
and Gen. Colin L. Powell, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. Mr. Cheney
was returning from a four-day trip to the Middle East, where he visited American
troops and arranged for access to a number of military bases in gulf countries
from which American forces could operate during the crisis.

At Mr. Cheney's request, Mr. Bush's order will give the Pentagon broad authority
to bring the reserves to active duty and will not specify any particular number,
the officials said. They said the Pentagon's initial plans called for about
40,000 reservists, but that could increase.

Under Federal law, Mr. Bush may call as many as 200,000 members of the reserves
to active duty for 90 days at a time without declaring a state of war or a
national emergency, two acts that the White House has so far avoided.

Richard J. Danzig, a former Pentagon manpower official, noted that a reserve
call-up is a highly sensitive political issue; President Lyndon B. Johnson
avoided doing it for a long time during the Vietnam War out of fear of sparking
public opposition to the conflict.

But Mr. Danzig said Mr. Bush can ''mitigate the pain'' by keeping the overall
number fairly small and bringing new reservists to duty every three months, and
by using most of them in the United States. ''Because of the 90-day time limit
on the call, sending a large number to Saudia Arabia would be less productive
militarily as well,'' he said.

A Pentagon official said 25,000 to 30,000 Army reservists would be called,
mainly cargo handlers, quartermasters, weapons technicians, ammunition handlers
and communications specialists. #54 Americans Unaccounted For The Navy will call
4,000 to 6,000 reservists, the bulk of whom will be doctors, nurses and
technicians to reinforce the badly depleted Bethesda Naval Hospital in Maryland
and Oakland Naval Hospital in California, where half of the medical staffs have
been taken away by the gulf crisis.

The Air Force needs pilots as well as cargo handlers and will account for 8,000
to 10,000 of those called to active duty, the official said.

Speaking to reporters here, Mr. Fitzwater said the United States was continuing
to press for the release of the Americans held in Iraq and Kuwait, but was not
willing to negotiate with Iraq for their release.

He said there were 54 Americans -13 in Kuwait and 41 in Iraq - who have not been
accounted for. ''We obviously are trying to get as much information as we can on
their whereabouts,'' he said. Another official said it was not known whether the
54 were among those that Iraq was moving to military and industrial sites.

Mr. Boucher, the State Department spokesman, said that 18 United States
diplomats and dependents had driven across the border from Iraq into Jordan
early today, leaving about 10 Americans at the stripped-down embassy in Baghdad.


Pull Back, a Senator Urges

As he spoke, Senator Terry Sanford, Democrat of North Carolina, warned the Bush
Administration against initiating combat and called for a reduction in the
American military presence in Saudi Arabia.

''We have accomplished our mission of stopping Iraq's drive to take over Saudi
Arabia and the rest of the Middle East,'' Mr. Sanford said in Charlotte, N.C..
''We should begin to reduce our forces in Saudi Arabia, ever so slowly, and look
to a more multinational force to keep the peace.''

In a prepared statement, Mr. Sanford also said, ''Certainly I would not risk a
single life to restore the Kuwaiti royal family to the throne.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Foreign Minister Tariq Aziz of Iraq offered to negotiate, but
President Bush, in Maine, said Iraq must leave Kuwait first. (Reuters & Agence
France-Presse); Graph: Poll results on whether U.S. should have sent troops to
Saudi Arabia

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              201 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 22, 1990, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1323 words



INTERNATIONAL    A3-15

President Bush will call up reserves, Administration officials said. He is
expected to order 40,000 Americans placed on active duty in the first call-up
since the Vietnam War.    Page A1



Iraq held out peace or world disaster, as Saddam Hussein almost simultaneously
sent his Foreign Minister to Jordan to propose peace talks and delivered another
slashing attack on President Bush.    A9



News analysis: Iraqi overtures have been met with cold silence by the
Administration because it fears that negotiating Iraq's exit from Kuwait might
cause Arab allies to give Iraq token gains to end the crisis.    A1



Public approval for President Bush returned to record high levels, according to
the latest New York Times/CBS News poll, as support for his stand against Iraq
propelled him to the peak of popularity he reached after the Panama invasion.
    A13



Reporter's Notebook: The Saudi base that has no name, as it is required to be
known under U.S. military rules for press coverage, reflects the Saudis' unease
about opening their borders to large numbers of foreign correspondents.    A12



A U.S. plan for a blockade by force conducted by the U.N. has been denied the
necessary unaminous support of the Security Council by the Soviet Union.    A1



Europe strengthened its response to the events in the Persian Gulf as Italy,
Belgium, the Netherlands and Spain said their warships would join those already
in the gulf.    A10



Embargo turns Aqaba into port of little import    A9


Yemen agrees to block Iraqi oil; missiles to Kuwait reported    A12



Egyptian workers fleeing Kuwait are tired, dirty, thirsty and broke. After
improvising a way out, these workers have deep hatred for the Iraqis who
plundered their homes and stole even the money out of their pockets.    A12



Soviets ask Iraqis to help foreigners    A8


Thatcher opposes deal on hostages    A11



Freeing Americans held hostage has been an elusive foreign policy goal that has
burdened U.S. officials since even before George Washington became President.
    A8



East Germans seek October date for unification    A3


Bucharest Journal: A dash of initiative and verve    A4


With talks at an impasse, West African force heads to Liberia    A3


In South Africa, a joint and biracial plea to end black strife    A7


India sends troops to turbulent Kashmir border with Pakistan    A5


Affirmative action has India's students astir    A14


Pakistan plans to try Soviet hijackers, but Moscow disagrees    A6


Pakistanis race to save Indus Valley ruins    A15



NATIONAL    A16-23, B4

A Georgia convict who was to die received a stay of execution from the Supreme
Court and hours later had his sentence commuted to life imprisonment by the
state's parole board, which cited his model behavior since a religious
conversion in prison.    A1



Conservative coalition calls for confirmation of Souter    A20



Mexican sewage entering the U.S. has been an irritant between the two countries.
But after six decades of discussions, there is an agreement to treat the 10
million gallons of waste carried by the Tijuana River.    A18



Allegations of racism at the F.B.I. will be investigated by the highest-ranking
black field agent who will be in charge of a team of eight investigators, F.B.I.
officials said.    A18



A Federal advisory panel on AIDS assailed the medical response to the disease,
faulting the Government's drug testing program, rural heath care and the number
of medical professionals who are unwilling to treat people with the disease.
B4



Medicare delays predicted if budget impasses causes cuts    A23



Official denies interference in Agent Orange study    A16



The Magellan space probe is performing better than expected after a radio
blackout last week. The probe has provided pictures of Venus that show a rubbled
surface apparently scarred by volcanic action.    B4



Scientists back smaller, simpler climate satellites    B4


Four honored with Fields Medal in Mathematics    A17


Wild horse plan called costly    A20


Philadelphia Mayor says city can avoid deficit    A18


Tillicum Journal: This music is intended to make youths walk    A18



REGIONAL    B1-3

In another melee at Rikers Island, at least 50 prison inmates and 30 guards
suffered minor injures after prisoners barricaded themselves inside a dormitory
and set fires, a prison spokeswoman said.    A1



New York City's Board of Estimate, in one of its final acts before being
dissolved, approved the creation of a biomedical research center on the site of
the Audubon Ballroom in Washington Heights.    B1



Hartford's business boom has passed and the expanded skyline and ample office
space downtown appear to have only masked a continuing decline in the heart of
Connecticut's capital.    A1



An organized-crime informer in New Jersey recorded almost 400 conversations,
including his own induction into an organized-crime family, that are the basis
of racketeering charges against 41 people.    B1



Early results from the 1990 census indicate that New Jersey and Connecticut
could lose seats in the House of Representatives because their population growth
was below expectations.    B1



New and increased fees at SUNY will go into effect this fall. The increases
could exceed proposed rises in tuition that students have fended off in the last
few years.    B1



A life's work stolen: A professor tries to cope    B3


Rinfret, stalking Governor, gets lecture but no debate    B3



BUSINESS DIGEST    D1



EDUCATION PAGES

An education plan in Oregon that would give parents a choice of schools for
their children is the most ambitious proposal of its kind. If approved by
voters, the plan would likely face a court challenge.    A1



The diagnosis of reading disorders has tended to find dyslexia in boys instead
of girls, reseachers say, to the point that too many boys are in special
education class and many girls struggle in silence.    A1



An experiment that pioneered the school-choice idea    B6


Target of paper's barbs resigns at Dartmouth    B7



THE LIVING SECTION

FOOD

A land of ancient vineyards takes on the giants    C1


Tired of eating out? Send for your personal chef    C1


60-Minute Gourmet    C2


Wine Talk    C9



LIVING

For gay travelers, more places to go    C1


Metropolitan Diary    C2



OBITUARIES    D21

John M. Stalnaker, a psychologist
Viktor Tsoi, singer

ARTS/ENTERTAINMENT

''Miss Saigon'' producer demands casting freedom    C11


Theater: ''Light Up the Sky''    C10


Music: Philharmonic's new shell    C11


Art: Berlin, hottest seat in museum world    C11


Word and Image: Donald Trump's new book    C15


''A Question of Color,'' on Channel 5    C16



SPORTS

Baseball: Atmosphere altered at Stadium    D23


Yanks top Jays again    D25


Padres shut out Mets    D23


Colleges: Scrutiny for new TV deal    D23


Columns: Vecsey on Steinbrenner    D23


Football: Giant holdouts create suspense    D23



EDITORIALS/LETTERS/OP-ED

Editorials    A24



Mr. Bush and the hasty hawks
How the U.S. can vote in Haiti
Revolt in New Jersey
Topics: Dick Strout's two lives

LETTERS    A24



Russell Baker: Slaves to oil    A25


Peter Schweizer: Is Moscow playing cute on Kuwait?    A25


Spike Lee: I am not an anti-Semite    A25


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              202 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 22, 1990, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

CONFRONTATION IN THE GULF;
Bush Regains Record Rating in Crisis

BYLINE: By MICHAEL ORESKES

SECTION: Section A; Page 13, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1487 words


The Persian Gulf crisis has propelled public approval of President Bush back to
its highest level, with support for his stand against Iraq's invasion of Kuwait
overwhelming misgivings about his handling of domestic problems, the latest New
York Times/CBS News Poll has found.

Seventy-six percent of the respondents said they approved of the job Mr. Bush
was doing as President, the same figure he reached after the invasion of Panama
last December. Only 15 percent of the 1,422 Americans reached by telephone
Thursday through Sunday disapproved of Mr. Bush's job performance. The margin of
sampling error was plus or minus three percentage points.

While Presidents Lyndon B. Johnson and Jimmy Carter had similar levels of
support soon after taking office, the last President to attain this level of
popularity so far into his term was John F. Kennedy, who won approval from 76
percent of the public in a Gallup Poll after the Cuban missile crisis in 1962.

Sharp Climb in Rating

This upsurge in support for Mr. Bush, with its beginnings visible in a New York
Times Poll on Aug. 9 and 10, came just in time, from the perspective of
Republican Party officials, to reverse a precipitous decline in the President's
standing since Panama, just as Kennedy's showdown with the Soviets pulled
Kennedy and the Democrats out of a tailspin as the midterm election approached
in 1962.

In less than three weeks, Mr. Bush's public approval has climbed nearly 20
percentage points. In a poll completed almost entirely before Iraq seized
Kuwait, 58 percent of the public approved of Mr. Bush's handling of his job and
33 percent expressed disapproval.

That poll, conducted by Market Opinion Research, a firm with many Republican
clients, said Mr. Bush was being dragged down by doubts about his handling of
the economy and the savings and loan scandal. These doubts made Republicans
increasingly nervous, and Democrats increasingly hopeful about the fall
campaign, when Iraqi forces suddenly crashed across the Kuwaiti border.

Misgivings Persist

Those doubts persist, acccording to the latest New York Times/CBS News Poll. The
public is evenly divided over Mr. Bush's handling of the economy. and majorities
give him poor marks on the savings and loan scandal and taxes.

But after another week of images of American troops crossing the desert sands,
attention has shifted from domestic problems and the public, as it usually does
at the outset of a foriegn crisis, has thrown its support to the President.

Misgivings and reservations about the American commitment in Saudi Arabia,
apparent in the New York Times Poll 10 days ago, persisted at significant levels
even as Americans learned more about the reasons for the United States
deployment and the extent of it.

Three-quarters of the public expressed overall approval for Mr. Bush's handling
of the Persian Gulf situation, equal to the level he reached in the earlier New
York Times Poll immediately after he addressed the nation to announce the
deployment of forces to Saudia Arabia.

Yet 4 out of 10 also said he was too quick to involve the military. That is the
same number who felt that way when the troops were first sent 10 days ago, and
none of the events since seems to have shaken their view.

This seeming contradiction illustrates a phenomenon so well documented by
students of public opinion that it has a name: ''the rally round the flag
effect.''

This is the tendency of the public to set aside doubts in a foreign crisis,
particularly the early stages of one, and support the nation and its leader, the
President.

Support for Deployment

Now that American troops, planes and ships have been deployed in Saudi Arabia
and the gulf, 77 percent of the public says they support the decision to send
them, a level of support far higher than was ever given to military deployments
during the fighting in Vietnam.

Of those who support troop deployment in the gulf, half do so with the
expectation that the conflict will be resolved peacefully. That is one example
of how the public is divided in its readiness, or willingness, to shoulder the
sacrifices that President Bush said on Monday would be required.

In another example, 43 percent of the respondents said they would be willing to
pay higher taxes to protect Saudia Arabia, while 53 percent said they would not.

That division could be seen as evidence of resolve only when compared with the
willingness to pay taxes to reduce the deficit. Only 31 percent of the public
said in the same poll that they approved of tax increases to reduce the deficit,
while 65 percent said they disapproved.

Richard Sobel, a Princeton University expert on public opinion about foreign
policy, said that based on the history of the conflicts in Vietnam and Korea,
support for American military action in the gulf would weaken in direct relation
to expense and casualties.

In the early months of American involvement in Korea, 75 to 80 percent of the
public in various polls said they supported President Harry S. Truman's decision
to send troops. But as casualties mounted and Chinese forces overwhelmed
American positions, support weakened. A year after the United States intervened
in Korea, several national polls showed declines of 20 percentage points in the
view that it had been the right thing to do.

The latest New York Times/CBS News survey was conducted just as President Saddam
Hussein of Iraq was announcing that Americans and other Westerners would be held
and moved to potential military targets as a shield against attack.

Most foreign policy experts have painted America's intervention in the Persian
Gulf as a 20th-century spice war, motivated by the need to protect access to
vital resources, in this case oil. But the more familiar justification for use
of American power - deterring aggression and protecting friends -has greater
political potency and is the one President Bush stressed in his speech to the
Veterans of Foriegn Wars on Monday.

Just short of half the public, 46 percent, says American troops have been sent
mainly because the price of oil will increase too much if Iraqis control the oil
fields, while some 30 percent say the United States is there mainly to protect
our friends. Both explanations were offered by 16 percent.

All three groups overwhelmingly support the decision to deploy American military
forces, but among those who say the forces are there primarily to protect
oilfields, 24 percent oppose the use of military forces. Among those who say
they are there primarily to protect America's friends, only 11 percent are
opposed.

In Washington, critics say Mr. Bush has not given an adequate explanation of the
American purpose in the gulf. But 6 out of 10 Americans in the latest survey,
completed before his speech on Monday, said they thought he had clearly
explained why the United States sent troops. One in three said he had not.

Mr. Bush's decision to go ahead with a vacation despite the gulf conflict split
the public, as it has divided his staff. Half the public thinks the President
should have stayed in Washington, but 44 percent approve of his decision to go.
Higher-income and better-educated people, who most strongly support American
intervention in the gulf, are also most supportive of Mr. Bush's taking his
vacation.

How the Survey Was Conducted

The New York Times/CBS News Poll was based on telephone interviews conducted
Aug. 16 to 19 with 1,422 adults around the United States, excluding Alaska and
Hawaii.

The sample of telephone exchanges called was selected by a computer from a
complete list of exchanges in the country. The exchanges were chosen so as to
assure that each region of the country was represented in proportion to its
population. For each exchange, the telephone numbers were formed by random
digits, thus permitting access to both listed and unlisted numbers. The numbers
were then screened to limit calls to residences.

The results have been weighted to take account of household size and number of
residential telephone lines and to adjust for variations in the sample relating
to region, race, sex, age and education.

In theory, in 19 cases out of 20 the results based on such samples will differ
by no more than three percentage points in either direction from what would have
been obtained by seeking out all American adults.

The percentages reported are the particular results most likely to match what
would be obtained by seeking out all adult Americans. Other possible percentages
are progressively less likely the more they differ from the reported results.

The potential sampling error for smaller subgroups is larger. For example, for
either Republicans or Democrats or independents it is plus or minus five
percentage points.

In addition to sampling error, the practical difficulties of conducting any
survey of public opinion may introduce other sources of error into the poll.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Graphs: Poll results on President Bush's handling of foreign and
domestic problems and overall approval rating

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              203 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 22, 1990, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Official Denies Interference in Agent Orange Study

BYLINE: By PHILIP J. HILTS, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 402 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 21


A top Federal health officer today denied a Congressional charge that the Reagan
White House had interfered with a study of the chemical Agent Orange's effects
on soldiers in Vietnam.

The official, Dr. James O. Mason, Assistant Secretary for Health at the
Department of Health and Human Services, said the Congressional report that
included the charge, issued Aug. 9 by the House Government Operations
Subcommittee on Human Resources and Intergovernmental Relations, ''is for the
most part factually incorrect'' and biased against the Reagan Administration.

The report charged that the Reagan Administration's obstruction of an Agent
Orange study caused the cancellation of the Congressionally mandated project. A
panel of Federal officials and scientists halted the study in 1987, saying the
records were not sufficient to establish the levels of exposure for individual
veterans.

Records Termed Adequate

The subcommittee said it reviewed the evidence and disagreed with that
conclusion. It said the military records were adequate to identify some veterans
who were exposed to the chemical, an herbicide used to strip away jungle that
covered Communist guerrillas. The report suggested that at least one reason the
study was not finished was that the White House's Office of Management and
Budget had made it clear that its findings could prompt lawsuits against the
Government.

Dr. Mason replied today that ''there was no White House or any other
interference in these studies.'' He said Administration officials ''were not
privy to the scientific results of any of these studies until shortly before
release,'' and added, ''It is not possible to interfere with content if one is
not aware of its prior to public release.''

He said military records were not adequate to list soldiers by their degree of
exposure to Agent Orange and thus reach scientifically valid conclusions. He
said studies by the Congressional Office of Technology Assessment supported his
conclusion.

Many Methods Tried

At the time of the study, Dr. Mason was head of the National Centers for Disease
Control in Atlanta, where the work was done. He said many methods of sorting out
degrees of exposure were tried but none proved accurate enough for valid
conclusions.

A component of Agent Orange, dioxin, has been linked to cancer and birth defects
in animals, but scientists disagree about its effects on humans.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              204 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 22, 1990, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

The President and the Hasty Hawks

SECTION: Section A; Page 24, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 554 words


A cynical theory making the rounds in Washington holds that Americans will soon
tire of President Bush's intervention in the Persian Gulf. Therefore, the theory
goes, Mr. Bush should quickly exploit his high standing at home and abroad by
undertaking, in Henry Kissinger's words, the ''surgical and progressive
destruction of Iraq's military assets.'' Yet there's no evidence that Americans
are as fickle as the Hasty Hawks contend.

That could change, if casualties occur or Saddam Hussein seeks to ransom the
hostages. But so far, in growing numbers, Americans support a strategy based on
strength, patience and a carefully woven international consensus.

A New York Times/CBS News Poll shows that support for Mr. Bush is high, and
climbing. His popularity has now reached 76 percent, equaling his previous high,
after the Panama invasion. Fully 75 percent approve his handling of the crisis,
a jump from 64 percent in early August.

Those findings reflect patriotism; Americans always rally around the Commander
in Chief early in a crisis. But there's no reason to presume that this resolve
is as fragile as the hawks seem to believe. Mr. Bush has explained the stakes,
and most people appear to understand them.

Mr. Bush also profits handsomely from a resurgence of American pride. Having
been told repeatedly that their country is in decline, many Americans are
probably pleased to find that the U.S. alone possesses the global reach and the
political mechanisms to offer prompt leadership.

Mr. Bush has made one big misstep - moving unilaterally to block shipping to
Iraq without waiting for U.N. consent. And his oratory has been anything but
Churchillian. Otherwise he has faultlessly positioned his pieces, orchestrating
almost overnight two formidable policies - a military force to protect Saudi
Arabia, and economic sanctions to force Iraq from Kuwait. Indeed, so smoothly
has his strategy fallen into place that it's easy to underestimate how much he's
accomplished.

Immediately after Iraq's invasion, for example, it could not be taken for
granted that the cautious Saudis would risk inviting American protection. Or
that Turkey would close Iraq's pipeline. Or that the U.N. Security Council would
unanimously approve sanctions. Adroit diplomacy has since enlisted allies,
neutrals and the moderate Arabs in a common cause.

Support for President Bush sends an important signal to Saddam Hussein. So, too,
does Mr. Bush's willingness to spend his popularity by mobilizing reservists -
the first such call-up since the Tet offensive in 1968 - and, on a less dramatic
level, by commandeering 38 jets from 16 domestic airlines. His almost comical
insistence on finishing out his vacation in Maine bothers many people; half the
poll's respondents think he should have stayed in Washington. But even that
stubbornness sends a calculated message to Baghdad: He will not allow foreign
tyranny to imprison him in the White House.

The crisis is still in its early stages; much could happen to test and even
weaken public resolve. But for now, Americans in great numbers accept Mr. Bush's
definition of the stakes and his goals. Having worked so hard to build a global
consensus against Iraq, one that includes even Arab states, the President would
be foolish to risk its destruction by heeding the Hasty Hawks.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              205 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 22, 1990, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Producer Demands A Free Hand to Cast 'Miss Saigon' Roles

BYLINE: By MERVYN ROTHSTEIN

SECTION: Section C; Page 11, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1175 words


Even though he has finally won approval for the British actor Jonathan Pryce to
repeat his role as a Eurasian pimp in ''Miss Saigon,'' Cameron Mackintosh said
yesterday that Actors' Equity would have to give him a free hand on other
casting decisions before he would bring his hit London musical to Broadway.

In a statement issued by the producer on behalf of himself and the show's
creative team, Mr. Mackintosh said that while they all wanted to stage the show
in New York, they could not ''in good conscience reschedule the production in
the absence of a positive working environment and an understanding, agreed to
without reservation by all, that artistic freedom of choice cannot be
compromised.'' He added that he did not want to become a victim of ''an
inflexible casting process.''

The statement indicates that Mr. Mackintosh wants an understanding with Equity
that would preclude more controversy about the casting of the other roles in
show, of which there are almost 50. Twenty-seven of those jobs are specifically
intended for Asian actors, including the leading role of Kim, a Vietnamese woman
who falls in love with an American G.I. in Saigon just before the end of the
Vietnam War.

Another Role in Question

Mr. Mackintosh is said to be concerned about the role of Kim, which has been
played in London by Lea Salonga, a Filipino actress. Miss Salonga's understudy,
Monique Wilson, who has played the role often, is also from the Philippines. The
producer is believed to want Equity to allow him the option of bringing Miss
Salonga to New York, should he decide to do so, or to cast an Asian actress who
is not a member of American Equity.

Equity is generally reluctant to allow foreigners who are not acknowledged stars
to play such roles, though it has an agreement with British Equity for an
exchange program in such instances. The English actress Sarah Brightman, for
example, was allowed to appear on Broadway in ''The Phantom of the Opera'' in
exchange for an American performer who was not an established star getting a
leading role on the London stage and reprising that role in New York if the show
came to Broadway.

Expressing one concern, Mr. Mackintosh said that ''it is our understanding that
of Equity's membership of 40,000 actors, only approximately 400 are of Asian
background.''

''Clearly,'' he added, ''we will need to work together with Equity and the Asian
community to increase this talent pool. We have announced our commitment to
assist in the vocal training of those Asian actors who may be considered for
these jobs.''

Mr. Mackintosh also extended an olive branch to David Henry Hwang, the author of
''M. Butterfly,'' and B. D. Wong, who received a Tony Award for his performance
in that play, for ''making us aware of all the past and present discrimination
and injustice that the Asian acting community, and all actors of color, have
suffered and continue to suffer.'' Letters to Equity from Mr. Hwang and Mr. Wong
objecting to the casting of Mr. Pryce were early elements of the dispute.

'I Apologize'

''I absolutely accept that they have acted sincerely and passionately to bring
this issue to light,'' Mr. Mackintosh said of the playwright and the actor. ''If
I was initially skeptical of their motives, I apologize.''

Mr. Mackintosh said he sent a letter yesterday to Equity detailing his concerns.
A spokeswoman for the union said that Alan Eisenberg, Equity's executive
secretary, had received Mr. Mackintosh's letter before a council meeting
yesterday, but she added that the union would not have a statement before today.

Mr. Mackintosh had canceled the $10 million Broadway production, which had a
record advance ticket sale of $25 million, on Aug. 8, the day after Actors'
Equity denied permission for Mr. Pryce to re-create his prize-winning portrayal
of the Engineer. Equity said it could not ''appear to condone the casting of a
Caucasian in the role of a Eurasian.''

The union's Committee on Racial Equality and others in the theater, including
Mr. Hwang and Mr. Wong, had objected to the casting, citing among other things
the lack of employment opportunities for ethnic minority actors.

But on Thursday, after receiving petitions from many members asking it to
reconsider its stand, Equity reversed itself, saying it had ''applied an honest
and moral principle in an inappropriate manner.'' The union added that it
welcomed Mr. Mackintosh and Mr. Pryce to Broadway.

Of Race and Acting

Mr. Mackintosh said yesterday that ''from our perspective, the fundamental issue
of this controversy is that the artistic integrity of the authors and the
creative team has been questioned, and our right to cast whomever we consider to
be the most suitable talent in any role, regardless of race or ethnic
background, has been undermined.''

''Our position continues to be that the role of the Engineer must be available
to actors of any racial background, with the ultimate casting criterion being
talent,'' he said. ''If 'Miss Saigon' is to be performed successfully, I would
be absolutely delighted to find and cast an Asian actor for the role of the
Engineer, but I would be equally delighted to find and cast a black, Hispanic,
Caucasian or Native American actor with the talent, experience and charisma
necessary to play the role.''

Mr. Mackintosh and his creative team (the writers Alain Boublil, Claude-Michel
Schonberg and Richard Maltby Jr., the director Nicholas Hytner and the
choreographer Bob Avian) said there was a need to ''forge a constructive
relationship'' with the Asian community as well as with Equity.

''Because of the unique challenges which must be addressed in casting this
production, we believe that such relationships are essential, but do not yet
exist,'' the statement read.

''The controversy which has arisen has had the important effect of focusing
public attention upon the many injustices, both past and present, which have
been endured by Asian and other artists of color in the American theater,'' they
said. ''This is long overdue.''

A Definition of Stardom

The show was to have begun performances in March at the Broadway Theater. Mr.
Mackintosh, in canceling the production, said Equity had no legal basis to bar
Mr. Pryce, that the only issue Equity had the right to consider was whether the
actor was a star and that it had declared him one in the past. Mr. Eisenberg
said at the time that the union had not dealt with the issue of whether Mr.
Pryce was a star but had made a moral decision about creating equal casting
opportunities for its minority members.

Last week, Equity said in a statement announcing its reversal that ''indeed, Mr.
Pryce qualifies as a star in accordance with the criteria established in the
agreement between Equity and the League of American Theaters and Producers.''

Mr. Mackintosh said yesterday that ''it is also essential that the profoundly
unpleasant atmosphere currently surrounding the production be dispelled.''

''This,'' he added, ''can only be achieved with Equity's leadership.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Cameron Mackintosh (Michael LePoer Trench)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              206 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 22, 1990, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

A Bank Expert's Plan for Change

BYLINE: By MICHAEL QUINT

SECTION: Section D; Page 1, Column 3; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1486 words


When Lowell L. Bryan, head of the banking group at McKinsey & Company, the
management consulting firm, ponders the future of the banking system, he recalls
his father's explanation of how the failure of four banks in Oklahoma during the
early 1930's carried away the family fortune.

''It was dust bowl Oklahoma and the fortune was not that big,'' Mr. Bryan said,
''but I remember my father telling me at an early age that bank failures were
not good.''

That bit of family lore, plus the evidence from the Great Depression, when a
loss of deposits contributed to the downward economic spiral, has made the
44-year-old Mr. Bryan a believer in the Government safety net for depositors.
But he has warned of serious problems with the way the safety net is used in the
American banking system.

An Influential Voice

At a time when Congress and bank regulators are intent on preventing a repeat of
the savings and loan debacle among banks, Mr. Bryan has emerged as an
influential voice on regulatory issues. He has an insider's knowledge of
banking, without the vested interests of a banker. His recommendations -
particularly that banks should not be able to use Government-insured deposits
for risky loans and that the Government should not pay the costs when those
loans go bad and the bank fails - are part of the dialogue whenever regulators
and legislators discuss reform of the banking system.

''Even if you see problems with his proposals, as I do, he is a thinker, and
that is something you don't see enough of in banking,'' said H. Rodgin Cohen, a
lawyer specializing in banks at the law firm of Sullivan & Cromwell..

While Mr. Bryan does not expect a rapid collapse of the banking industry, he
warned the Senate Banking Committee recently that the problems of banks ''are
distressingly similar'' to those of the savings and loans. The banks' $200
billion capital cushion for absorbing losses may allow the industry ''to muddle
through'' for several years, he said. But unless the system is changed, he
added, the capital cushion could be eroded, increasing the chances that banks
would eventually need the same kind of taxpayer support now being provided to
the savings and loans.

Bankers' problems stem from their increasing losses from the kinds of risky
loans that were rare a decade ago. As banks tried to replace the profits lost to
competitors like money market mutual funds and securities firms, Mr. Bryan said,
risky lending by banks for commercial real estate and corporate takeovers grew
until, by 1989, it accounted for nearly half of the industry's pretax profits.

With riskier loans has come a rise in loan losses and a fear that if the economy
slides into a recession, bank losses would rise sharply on a wider variety of
loans. ''We have a greatly weakened banking system,'' Mr. Bryan said, noting
that history shows that in a recession most of the loan losses are concentrated
at 20 percent of the banks, making those banks more vulnerable to failure, which
in turn could drain the Government's bank insurance fund.

The son of a Washington lobbyist for the American Institute of Certified Public
Accountants, Mr. Bryan has seen enough of Washington to recognize that
taxpayers' outrage at the cost of the savings and loan collapse ''makes this the
right time for banking reform.''

His efforts, which include four appearances before Congressional committees,
take about a quarter of his working hours. Other partners at the firm are
sympathetic, leaving him enough leisure time to coach the basketball and
baseball teams of his 12-year- old son, the only one of his three children still
young enough to live at home in New Canaan, Conn., with him and his wife,
Deborah.

The essence of Mr. Bryan's program is to divide the banking system into two
types of firms.

One type, which he calls a core bank, would accept Government-insured deposits,
much as banks do today. But its activities would be limited to what he calls
low-risk businesses like investments in Government securities, consumer loans
and loans to small- and medium-sized businesses. ''These are not the customers
that are putting banks out of business,'' he said. ''They don't have access to
the securities markets and banks are still the best way of delivering service to
them.''

Consumer Banking Risks

While some analysts, like Mr. Cohen, warn that even consumer banking can be made
risky by poor management, Mr. Bryan notes that regulators would still have a
role in making sure that core banks follow sound business procedures.

A second type of firm, called a wholesale or commercial finance bank, would be
financed by investors whose funds would not be insured. It could do as much
risky trading and lending, like loans for corporate takeovers and commercial
real estate, as its financial performance and investors would allow.

''Protect the depositors and let investors take their chances,'' is Mr. Bryan's
theme.

But for his system to work, depositors and investors would have to accept
changes in the benefits and risks of the current system.

''Depositors in the core bank, in return for eliminating the risk of loss, would
have to accept lower interest rates than they now earn,'' he said. And investors
in the commercial finance company must accept the risk that ''if the company
gets in trouble, the Government will prevent a panic, but will allow the company
to go down, just as they did with Drexel Burnham.''

The success of companies like American Express and General Electric Financial
Services Inc. is proof, he said, that a deposit guarantee is not needed to
operate a financial company. Large financial companies would probably own a core
bank and a commercial finance company, he said, adding that there should be
strict controls on money transfers between them, but no limits on the sharing of
information.

Mr. Bryan is modest enough to acknowledge that many others, including Robert
Litan at the Brookings Institution, have proposals similar to his. But he does
not shirk from criticism of other proposals that he sees ''as too narrow to
solve the problem.''

Fed Proposal Criticized

For example, the Federal Reserve's recent suggestion that banks be required to
increase the capital they have available to absorb losses might temporarily
protect the Government insurance fund from loss but is not a long-term solution
to the industry's problems, Mr Bryan said. In his 1988 book, ''Breaking Up the
Bank,'' he said that higher capital requirements would encourage banks to make
high-risk loans because ''only these will yield spreads high enough to generate
a satisfactory return'' on the increased capital required by regulators. The
alternative for banks - to cut back lending until their size is reduced to a
level considered more appropriate for their capital - would starve many
businesses of needed financing and hurt the economy.

Suggestions that the Government limit its risk of loss by sharply reducing the
amount of deposit insurance available to bank customers ''are a lot riskier than
people realize,'' Mr. Bryan said. ''There could be a real flight of capital''
from banks if large depositors are told they face a loss in the event of
failure.

Backers of the ''universal bank'' structure, which is used in Europe and allows
a wide range of insurance, securities, lending and deposit taking under the roof
of a single banking company, should beware of weaknesses that will be disclosed
as European countries drop trade barriers in 1992, Mr. Bryan warned.

''Competitors will emerge who will go after the most profitable parts of the
universal banks' business,'' he said. ''If a Swiss company can successfully
offer money market funds in Germany, they will take some market share and the
German banks will lose some of their ability to cross-subsidize other
activities,'' Mr. Bryan said. In the past, he noted, universal banks have used
their large share of their home country's retail banking business to subsidize
other activities and keep competitors out.

Research in Vietnam

Mr. Bryan's interest in the banking system started long before the savings and
loan crisis. After graduating in 1970 from the Harvard Business School, ''where
I got my Eastern Establishment credentials,'' he went to Vietnam and completed a
research report on how banks set prices for different services.

He described the job of training Vietnamese to operate the country's
communications system after American forces left as ''one of the safest
positions over there, because the North Vietnamese did not want to destroy the
system they knew they would be taking over.''

Now, with the once unthinkable collapse of the banking system becoming at least
a possibility, Mr. Bryan is again in a position to observe the fray. Whatever
measures for change are supported by Government regulators, it seems certain
that the services of management consultants will be in strong demand.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Lowell L. Bryan of McKinsey & Company's bank consulting group.
(William E. Sauro/The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              207 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 23, 1990, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Confrontation in the Gulf;
U.S. KEEPS KUWAIT MISSION OPEN, JOINING OTHERS IN DEFYING IRAQ; TOKYO FUNDS TO
BACK EMBARGO

BYLINE: By R. W. APPLE Jr., Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1520 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 22


The United States announced today that it would defy Iraqi orders to close its
embassy in Kuwait by Friday, and President Bush signed an order that is expected
to put 40,000 reservists on active duty by the end of the month, supplementing
and replacing forces involved in the Persian Gulf crisis.

By vowing to keep the embassy open to serve the 2,500 Americans still in
Iraqi-controlled Kuwait, the Bush Administration took the risk of having
American diplomats taken hostage. For that reason nonessential staff members and
families, more than half of the total of 120, are to be evacuated if Iraq
permits them to leave as promised.

Asked what he would do if Iraq tries to take over the embassy by force when the
deadline arrives on Friday, Mr. Bush said at a news conference, ''Let's wait and
see.''

Jordan Closes Its Borders

Speaking with reporters at his summer home in Kennebunkport, Me., the President
raised the prospect that United States diplomats in Kuwait might try to shelter
many of the trapped Americans. If American citizens ''came to the embassy
seeking support and help, clearly we would do that,'' he said.

Jordan, which has been overwhelmed by a flood of refugees, announced the closing
of its borders to them, which will make escape far more difficult for tens of
thousands of people, mostly Arabs and Asians who have been seeking to flee by
road from Iraq and Kuwait, and several European countries said Baghdad had
reneged on its promise to let their nationals leave.

The President said he was inclined to give the United Nations a bit more time to
work out some means by which the international organization could sanction a
naval blockade on Iraqi commerce. The Soviet Union has been holding up such an
agreement, and Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d talked by telephone this
morning with Eduard A. Shevardnadze, the Soviet Foreign Minister, Mr. Bush
disclosed, in an effort to break the diplomatic deadlock.

Soviet Advisers in Iraq

A further strain appeared in the previously solid Moscow-Washington front with
the disclosure by Soviet officials that 193 Soviet military advisers are
continuing to train Iraqi troops in the use of Soviet-built weapons, even though
Moscow cut weapons shipments three weeks ago. They were said to be avoiding all
Iraqi military operations.

Reflecting the war of nerves in the region, Iraq asserted that two aircraft from
Saudi Arabia had violated its airspace. The official Iraqi press agency said the
planes, which it did not further identify, had penetrated Iraq to a depth of
three miles.

American ships, together with British and French vessels, have stopped and
inspected suspected blockade runners, and United States Navy ships fired shots
across the bows of two Iraqi tankers earlier this week. But when the tankers
refused to stop, continuing toward Yemen, the American ships took no action to
prevent them from doing so.

Call for 40,000 Reservists

One of the two, the 36,397-ton Baba Gurgur, was reported to be lying off Aden
tonight. An Iraqi tanker that docked on Tuesday, the 36,330-ton Ain Zalah, began
unloading its cargo of 20,000 tons of crude oil but five hours later was ordered
by Yemeni officials to close its valves.

Even the partial unloading of the cargo appeared to violate the sanctions
against Iraq by the United Nations. Reuters quoted a senior Yemeni official in
Sanaa, the capital of the dusty, hilly country at the southwestern tip of
Arabia, as promising that no further Iraqi ships would be unloaded ''until after
consultations with the United Nations.''

''We've made clear to the shipping that they can be stopped, and that we have
the forces to stop them right now,'' Mr. Bush said. ''I'm not prepared to say
whether we're going to insist on U.N. action before we go further.''

The President is authorized by law to call up 200,000 members of the reserves,
but his order, which had been pending for almost a week, specified no units or
numbers. Pentagon officials said those would be decided on Thursday, but
indicated that the initial total would be about 40,000, with emphasis on
transportation, logistical and medical specialists. #1,000 Iraqi Battle Tanks
More could be called later, and Mr. Bush also authorized Defense Secretary Dick
Cheney to extend terms of enlistment when necessary. The mobilization was the
first in connection with potential hostile action since President Lyndon B.
Johnson called up more than 35,000 reservists during the Vietnam War in January
1968.

The order came as military officials said that American strength in Saudi Arabia
and on board ships in and near the Persian Gulf was approaching 100,000. The
aircraft carrier Saratoga sailed through the Suez Canal today with its battle
group, on the way to join the carriers Eisenhower and Independence in the crisis
region. A fourth carrier, the Kennedy, is currently crossing the Atlantic, also
on its way to the Middle East.

Giving some notion of the force arrayed against the Americans, Mr. Cheney said
the Iraqis had moved 1,000 main battle tanks into Kuwait.

There were signs that Iraq was trying to drive a wedge between members of the
international coalition that has been brought into being in the three weeks
since it overran Kuwait.

Convoy of 130 Detained

Sadi Mahdi Saleh, speaker of the Iraqi Parliament, announced that Japan and
France would be allowed to evacuate some of their nationals - 731 Japanese and
560 French citizens remain in Iraq and Kuwait - ''as a good-will gesture.''
Earlier, newspapers in Baghdad had pointedly warned Japan and European countries
not to ''walk in the steps of Washington.''

On Tuesday, Iraqi authorities told Western ambassadors that citizens of seven
European Community nations would be permitted to leave Kuwait. But Dutch and
Irish officials cast doubt on that today, and Iraq detained a convoy of 130
Swedes, Finns and Austrians who reached the Turkish border after an 800-mile
trip across the desert from Kuwait.

Uffe Ellemann-Jensen, the Danish Foreign Minister, warned that Baghdad might be
trying to sow disunity.

Although senior Israeli military officials suggested that war within the next
day or so was likely, no major incidents were reported on land or at sea, and
there were a number of sparks of diplomatic activity.

'The World Gone Mad'

Prince Bandar bin Sultan bin Abdul Aziz, the Saudi Ambassador to Washington, was
in Moscow for consultations. Mr. Bush said the Turks and the Greeks were
involved in what the President called ''an awful lot of diplomatic activity
behind the scenes,'' and he also said that Japan was planning to subsidize
countries like Jordan and Yemen that would suffer by the enforcement of
sanctions.

In Amman, the Jordanian capital, King Hussein, who is still attempting to
reconcile his ties with the United States and Iraq, said at a news conference
that he intended to leave later this week on a new round of visits to Arab
capitals, including Baghdad.

The King said that 185,000 refugees had crossed into Jordan since Aug. 2, and
only 67,000 have moved on. No fewer than 42,000 poured in today, and the ruler
conceded that ''we are finding enormous difficulties in meeting the needs of
these people.''

''We are almost facing a crisis of the world gone mad,'' he said in a packed
room in his palace.

'We Are Not in This Alone'

King Hussein also suggested that the United States had moved too precipitously
into Saudi Arabia. An hour or so later, Mr. Bush expressed some irritation with
the King - commenting, for example, ''I have no feelings about that'' when asked
whether the mission to Baghdad would be useful.

Above all, the President sought in his remarks to reporters, which he made
outside his house at Walker's Point, to convey two ideas: that whatever
President Saddam Hussein of Iraq might propose or threaten, the United States
was uninterested in negotiations until Iraq has pulled out of Kuwait, and that
the United States was acting as part of a large international coalition, not as
Mr. Hussein's sole opponent.

''It's crucial that everyone understand that we are not in this alone,'' Mr.
Bush said. ''We stand shoulder to shoulder right there in the Middle East with
the armed forces of 22 other nations, from the Middle East, from Europe and
around the world.''

The White House said the countries contributing to the international force
included Kuwait, Saudi Arabia, Bahrain, Oman, Qatar, the United Arab Emirates,
Egypt, Syria, Britain, France, the Soviet Union, Morocco, Greece, Spain,
Belgium, the Netherlands, Luxembourg, Italy, Portugal, Denmark, Canada and
Australia.

After a reporter prompted him, the President said that he urged Americans to
conserve gasoline to make the United States less dependent on crude oil from the
Middle East.

But he didn't seem very enthusiastic about it. He said the United States had
''an ample supply of petroleum,'' insisted that conservation ''doesn't mean that
life screeches to a halt,'' said he intended to keep using his big power boat
Fidelity and expressed the hope that ''the rest of America will prudently
recreate.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: President Bush meeting yesterday with advisers in
Kennebunkport, Me. From his right were Gen. Colin L. Powell, Chairman of the
Joint Chiefs of Staff; Robert M. Gates, deputy national security adviser; Brent
Scowcroft, national security adviser; Lawrence S. Eagleburger, Deputy Secretary
of State; Dick Cheney, Defense Secretary; and John H. Sununu, the White House
chief of staff. (White House Photo via Agence France-Presse) (pg. A1); President
Bush announced yesterday that the United States would defy Iraqi orders to close
its embassy in Kuwait by Friday. With him at his Kennebunkport, Me., home were
Defense Secretary Dick Cheney, left, and Gen. Colin L. Powell, chairman of the
Joing Chiefs of Staff. (Associated Press) (pg. A17)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              208 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 24, 1990, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Confrontation in the Gulf;
Reservists to Learn Today if a Call-Up Changes Their Lives

BYLINE: By PETER APPLEBOME

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 1270 words


After more than a week of uncertainty, thousands of military reservists
throughout the country will begin hearing today whether they are among the more
than 40,000 ordered to leave their jobs and homes and report for active duty.

The Pentagon announced yesterday that most of the reservists, including doctors,
cargo handlers, truck drivers and flight crews, would be sent to the Middle East
and Europe, while others would fill support positions in the United States.

Although the call-up will start today, the Pentagon said it would not make
public the names of individual reserve units until their members were notified
by telephone. The units will be called up gradually, with the full complement to
be in place by Oct. 1.

But a few reservists, particularly doctors, say they have already been notified
and been ordered to report for duty. And some have already been sent to Saudi
Arabia, where the United States is massing troops to counter Iraqi forces in
Kuwait.

Robin Pomerantz, a 46-year-old Vietnam veteran who is an infantry captain and
diver in the Army Reserves, and a lieutenant with the Dade County Fire
Department in Florida in civilian life, said he had received orders to report to
Fort Bragg in North Carolina on Saturday.

His wife of three weeks, an Air Force surgeon, had been sent to Abu Dhabi on
Aug. 10, he said, less than a month after she went on a regular tour of active
duty.

''She has almost no military training,'' he said. ''She doesn't know how to use
a sidearm, an M-16, she's totally incapable for defending herself.''

In Houston, Dr. John Haynes, an emergency room physician at Hermann Hospital and
a major in the Army Reserves, said he was notified to call an 800 telephone
number for his assignment. Dr. Haynes said he was given the option of where he
would like to serve. He said that he wanted to stay in Texas and that, to his
surprise, the Army agreed.

A Choice About When

He asked that he not be ordered to report until mid-September because of a
medical conference he wanted to attend, another condition that he said the Army
agreed to.

''At this time they gave me a choice, which surprised me, frankly,'' he said.

In Marietta, Ga., calls to James Earl Hale, superintendent of a detention center
for probation violators, are met with the following message: ''I'm sorry. He's
in Saudi Arabia.''

Mr. Hale, a reserve technical sergeant with the 94th Consolidated Aircraft
Maintenance Squadron at Dobbins Air Force Base outside Atlanta, left a week ago
for Saudi Arabia after receiving an unexpected call from his squadron.

''We'd been kidding him about learning how to ride camels and all that, and all
of a sudden it was a reality,'' said Mr. Hale's secretary, Barbara Adams. ''He
was just in shock about it.'' Lives Put on Hold But for every one who knows that
he has been called, there are thousands of other part-time soldiers - doctors
and prison guards, sales clerks and pilots, dentists and police officers -
waiting for an order that most thought would never come: a call-up to military
action.

Under Defense Secretary Dick Cheney's directive, the Army would be allowed to
call up 24,734 reservists; the Navy 6,243; the Air Force 14,476; the Marines
3,000, and the Coast Guard 1,250.

In Newburgh, N.Y., members of the 137th Military Airlift Squadron based at
Stewart International Airport learned quickly that they would be activated. Late
Thursday the squadron's 150 men and women were telephoned and told to report for
duty no later than midnight Friday, said Lieut. Col. John Perez, deputy
commander of the squadron.

In other communities across the country, the reservists are grappling with
issues as mundane as how to pay the rent or where to keep the cats, and as
profound as drafting wills and getting married.

Col. Blynn Shideler, a surgeon in Monterey, Calif., is wondering if his practice
can survive if he is called to spend months on active duty. Dr. Fred M. Ussery,
an ophthalmologist in Houston, wonders who would care for his patients,
particularly those in the large part of his practice involved in treating AIDS
patients for retinal disease linked to AIDS.

Willie C. Fair, a home improvement consultant for Sears, Roebuck & Company, said
his worry about what would happen to his homelife was compounded by the chemical
warfare masks and body gear he was unloading on weekends as a reservist.

'Scared to Death'

''The mechanical part of war doesn't bother me,'' he said. ''But chemical
-because it's an unknown - that bothers me.''

Sue Barry, a trauma nurse at the University of Chicago Hospitals, admits she is
''scared to death'' by the prospect of possible combat duty.

At a time when the nation does not have a draft, the men and women being called
to active duty were vulnerable to call-up because they chose to be, because they
joined the reserves. But that fact did not eliminate any of the fear and
frustration.

''A lot of people went in the reserves with the attitude they would make a few
extra bucks to help pay for the car payments or pay for a fishing boat,'' said
Louis Bottoms an Atlanta letter carrier and sergeant in the Georgia Air National
Guard, who specializes in parachute repairs. ''Not many expected something like
this.''

When not called to active duty, reservists are required to commit one weekend a
month and two full weeks a year to training.

They are paid for the training sessions they attend. A lieutenant colonel or an
officer of an equivalent rank with 18 years' experience, for example, would earn
about $7,500 a year for attending his obligatory stints. Once on active duty,
that same officer would earn what any other active-duty lieutenant colonel
makes, which on an annual basis is about five to six times the $7,500.

Jobs Are Called Secure

When reservists leave their civilian jobs for military duty, they must, under
Federal law, be treated by employers as workers on unpaid leave who are entitled
to return to their old job or a comparable one upon their return. The only
exception is if an employer can show that he would have eliminated the job for
reasons unrelated to the reservist's call-up.

Reservists are not entitled to pay from their civilian employers while on
military duty. But when a reservist returns, an employer must pay him wages that
reflect any raises the reservist would have received had he been on the job.

Many companies and government agencies are scrambling to gauge the effects the
call-up could have on their operations. Although the number of those called up
is now expected to be 40,000 to 50,000, most of whom are specialists, businesses
and agencies worry what would happen to them if the call-up was extended to
thousands more.

Many Policemen in Reserve

At the Los Angeles Police Department, about 472 officers in a force of 8,400 are
in the reserves. In Philadelphia, there are 200 reservists on the 6,300-member
police force and 208 reservists among 13,000 postal employees.

But for now, the big effect is in homes, not businesses. Angela Lee-Olsen, a
24-year-old helicopter pilot in Houston who is eight weeks into the Harris
County Sheriff's Academy training progam, and Barbara Delisi, a sales
representative for a company that markets safes, who is also the operations
officer for a military cargo handling unit, say that life at home these days is
subdued.

The women have not been called up, but their husbands are worried that they soon
will be.

''He doesn't want me to go, but he knows that this is my job,'' Mrs. Delisi said
of her husband. ''He's quiet, but he said this morning that he hasn't been
sleeping well.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Sue Barry, a trauma nurse at the University of Chicago Hospital
and an Air Force Reserve captain, admits she is ''scared to death'' by the
prospect of combat duty. ''I'm not very good at being hurt,'' she said.
(Jonathan Kirn for The New York Times); Robin Pomerantz, an Army Reserve
captain, on his boat in Miami yesterday. He has been ordered to report for
active duty on Saturdy. His wife, an Air Force surgeon, has already been sent to
Abu Dhabi. (Susan Greenwood for The New York Times); map of Kuwait showing
location of Kuwait City. (pg. A9)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              209 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 24, 1990, Friday, Late Edition - Final

DIALOGUE: Next Step in the Gulf
Should the U.S. Attack Iraq?;
No, U.N. Pressure Will Work Best

BYLINE: By Terry Sanford; Terry Sanford, Democrat of North Carolina, is a member
of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee.

SECTION: Section A; Page 29, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 652 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


The U.S. has accomplished its original military objective in the Middle East: We
stepped in with a strong presence in Saudi Arabia and stopped Saddam Hussein's
march south to control the Middle East oilfields. That was a bold and proper
action. It was a brilliant performance.

Now, however, there is a real danger that we will be tempted to go on the
offensive. Success is heady stuff. My fear is that commitments or threats will
lead us into a war that would be bloody, costly and hard to conclude.

By continuing to add troops and planes, and by threatening to act in advance of
the United Nations to enforce a shipping blockade, the Bush Administration is
playing into Mr. Hussein's desperate effort to depict his naked aggression as a
confrontation between Iraq and the ''imperialist'' U.S.

We do not want the nations of the world to feel that they are helping the U.S.
against Iraq. We want the rest of the world to see this confrontation as an
obligation of the United Nations, of which the U.S. is a strong supporter.

Thus, we must rapidly shift the primary burden to the U.N. It will take the
civilized world's concerted and sustained efforts to enforce an effective
embargo of Iraq. It will take the U.N. to protect thousands of foreign nationals
held as hostages. These are U.N. responsibilities.

I understand patriotic fervor, the urge to back the President when we are
confronting a foreign foe. But I also remember the plunge toward combat
involvement in Vietnam.

That is why there is an urgent need to calm down and remind ourselves that our
presence in the Persian Gulf cannot become America's war. Although we may, and
should, seek to guide and shape international consensus through the U.N., we
cannot dictate it. Nor should we march ahead unilaterally, arrogantly assuming
that the world will follow. If there is to be war, it is to be Iraq's war
against the entire world community.

The U.N. charter was signed in the hope that a new international system might
''save succeeding generations from the scourge of war.'' That hope was
frustrated by the cold war. Now, 45 years after the charter was adopted, the
U.N. is in a position to unite and act. The international community appears
ready to cooperate to enforce the law of nations.

The Security Council enacted economic sanctions against Iraq without a
dissenting vote. If it finds that sanctions have ''proved to be inadequate,'' it
may order other operations, including a military blockade. We must give the U.N.
time to lead.

Such a multilateral effort is needed to make sanctions effective, and to deprive
Saddam Hussein of the propaganda claim that he is simply standing up to American
imperialism. His trump card is in turning the ordinary Arab against the royal
families and against their protectors. The United Nations can take that card out
of his hand.

Washington simply must, through the United Nations, exercise leadership among
the community of nations to convey, forcefully and collectively, the message
that blatant aggression will not be tolerated. Our greatest weapon is the
embargo that will cut off Iraq's revenue.

The U.S. must also shift to the United Nations the responsibility for the
American and other foreign families being detained in Iraq and Kuwait. There are
indications that the continued buildup of U.S. forces in the region - by raising
Iraqi fears of invasion - may expose them to even greater danger. The U.N. can
best liberate these people.

We must not allow Iraq to transform an international crime into an offense
against the United States - as Iran did so successfully in the hostage crisis in
Teheran. Mr. Hussein's offense is against the world.

Those who suggest that Mr. Hussein is a brutal dictator are correct. But those
who argue that we should take back Kuwait and take over Iraq in order to
liquidate him are not thinking clearly. There are safer ways to bring him under
control.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawings

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              210 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 25, 1990, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

CONFRONTATION IN THE GULF;
Generals Favor 'No Holds Barred' By U.S. if Iraq Attacks the Saudis

BYLINE: By MICHAEL R. GORDON, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 929 words

DATELINE: RIYADH, Saudi Arabia, Aug. 24


Top American military commanders here are recommending that Washington respond
to any Iraqi invasion of Saudi Arabia with a punishing, all-out attack against
Iraqi military forces and installations.

''My belief is that if they attack Saudi Arabia, it will be no holds barred,''
said Lieut. Gen. Walter E. Boomer, the commander of the growing Marine Corps
force in Saudi Arabia.

Lieut. Gen. Charles A. Horner, the commander of the Air Force units in Saudi
Arabia and the acting head of all American forces in the Persian Gulf, said he
hoped Washington would be ''very sparing in the restrictions'' placed on the
American military to respond to any Iraqi attack.

General Horner said that senior military officers generally oppose a protracted
war against Iraq involving a gradually increasing escalation of forces, as was
done in the Vietnam war. Instead, General Horner said, he favors decisive
strikes to win the war as quickly as possible.

Impact of Vietnam Cited

''Many of us here who are in this position now were in Vietnam, and that war
left a profound impact on our feelings about how our nation ought to conduct its
business,'' General Horner said. ''We will carry out any particular policy but
as individuals we think that war is a very serious business and it should not be
dragged out in an effort to achieve some political objective.''

[A military official at the Pentagon said that the commanders were not
reflecting a specific policy recommendation to the President by the Joint Chiefs
of Staff. Rather, he said, they were taking a ''reasonable view'' from a
tactical standpoint in the field.

[Because the Iraqis so outnumber American forces deployed in Saudi Arabia, the
official said, the field commanders' assessment is that if the Iraqis were to
attack now the only way to prevent them from striking deep into Saudi Arabia
''would be to hit them with everything we've got.'']

The commanders in Riyadh were interviewed at the command post for the U.S.
Central Command, which directs Army, Navy, Marine and Air Force units in the
gulf area.

Gen. H. Norman Schwarzkopf, the four-star officer who heads the central command,
has been directing the Saudi operation from the command headquarters in Tampa,
Fla. General Schwarzkopf is expected to arrive in Riyadh on Saturday, a military
official said.

Blunt Warning to Hussein

The comments by the senior military leaders come on the heels of similar remarks
by Defense Secretary Dick Cheney, who said explicitly for the first time on
Thursday that any Iraqi attack on Saudi Arabia would provoke an American
response against targets in Iraq.

''If he were foolish enough to attack U.S. forces,'' Mr. Cheney said of
President Saddam Hussein of Iraq, ''we clearly are in a position, if the
President so decides, to respond very forcefully against those things he cares
about - and specifically, those are his forces and his capabilities inside
Iraq.''

Mr. Cheney's comments and similar remarks by other top Pentagon officials appear
intended as a blunt warning to President Hussein.

At the same time, they reflect the American military's preference to seize the
offensive if Iraq launches an invasion of Saudi Arabia. The American military
would like to blast Iraqi airfields so that the United States can keep command
of the skies, hit missile launchers before the missiles can be launched and
destroy President Hussein's command network, officials have suggested.

''From a military point of view,'' Gen. Boomer said, ''in order to contain the
attack we need to utilize all of our assets, including the air, and I perceive
the will to do that.'' Nonetheless, officials here said they could not gauge
President Hussein's precise intentions.

One military official here, who insisted that he not be identified, acknowledged
that Iraq's taking of American and other foreign hostages, and their apparent
confinement at strategic locations in Iraq, would complicate a sweeping American
attack on installations and military forces inside Iraq. But this official
suggested that President Bush would have to accept that some of the hostages
would likely be among the casualties in an American retaliatory strike.

''The President would be faced with a tough decision and would have to weigh the
overall national security in terms of doing the best to protect as many hostages
as he could,'' the official said.

The growing American military presence here, which is estimated to exceed
30,000, is expected to jump considerably over the next few weeks, partly due to
the deployment of the large number of additional marines.

The Marines have already dispatched a brigade of about 15,000 men form their
base at Twenty-Nine Palms, Calif.

The Marine force is scheduled to roughly triple over the next three weeks as
more marines arrive from Hawaii, the Western Pacific and North Carolina. The
Marines are equipped with F-18 fighter attack planes, Harrier jets, Cobra attack
helicopters and A-6 bombers, among other aircraft.

Gen. Boomer said the Marines were currently capable of carrying out their
mission to defend a port in northeast Saudi Arabia.

The Army's 82d Airborne Division conducted a large ground exercise on Thursday
involving several thousand troops, a military official said.

General Horner said that steps are being taken to insure that Iraq does not
misconstrue such exercises as preparations for an American attack. Some of those
precautions include not conducting the exercises close to the Saudi-Kuwait
border and letting journalists know about the exercises in advance.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: A guard from the Saudi frontier forces standing watch at the
border crossing into Kuwait. Although Operation Desert Shield bolsters Saudi
Arabia's defenses with American troops, the border with Kuwait re mains under
the direct control of the Saudi Royal Forces. (Pool photo via Associated
Press)(pg4)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              211 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 25, 1990, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

CONFRONTATION IN THE GULF;
Air Force Calls Up Reserves in 6 States

BYLINE: By ERIC SCHMITT, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 5, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1033 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 24


In the first round of reserve call-ups, the Air Force activated units today in
six states to augment flight crews shuttling cargo and equipment to the Persian
Gulf region.

About 1,000 pilots, flight engineers and cargo handlers in the Air National
Guard and Air Force Reserve were notified of the call-ups by telephone today.
Air Force officials said the reservists had 24 hours to report to their units
and that they would join flight crews in the next few days for active duty in
the Middle East and in the United States.

The initial Air Force call-up reflects a pressing need to relieve cargo-plane
crews who in some cases are working 20-hour shifts and rapidly approaching
monthly safety limits on flight time.

Army and Navy officials said thousands of reservists, including doctors, port
handlers, postal workers and water purification specialists, would be notified
over the weekend. The Marine Corps said it had no immediate plans to mobilize
any reserve units.

Nearly 50,000 by Oct. 1

Air Force units have been activated in Maryland, Massachusetts, Mississippi, New
Jersey, New York and Texas. Some reservists have already received calls from
reserve commanders or from people on active duty altering them to the pending
mobilization.

On Thursday, Defense Secretary Dick Cheney authorized the military service
chiefs to call up nearly 50,000 reservists for active duty by Oct. 1, and to
mobilize the first 10,000 of that number in the next week.

The Defense Department has also authorized the service chiefs to delay the
retirements of officers and extend the expiring hitches of enlisted personnel
who have ''critical skills,'' like fluency in Arabic. The Pentagon has not said
how many such people would be affected, but one official suggested that the
number would not be sizable.

Under Mr. Cheney's directive, the services could mobilize as many as 49,703
reservists by Oct. 1. The Army would be allowed to call up 24,734 reservists,
the Navy 6,243, the Air Force 14,476, the Marines 3,000 and the Coast Guard
1,250.

'Aggression' Could Raise Number

Pentagon officials said the size of the call-up was based on what military
chiefs said they needed to support the air, ground and naval forces in Saudi
Arabia and those on the way.

''If things continue to flow smoothly, that's the nature of the support we will
need,'' a Pentagon spokesman, Pete Williams, said on Thursday. ''If there is an
act of aggression, then perhaps these numbers will need to be revisited.''

President Bush has the authority to mobilize as many as 200,000 reservists for
90 days, with the option to renew the order for another 90 days. Pentagon
officials have discounted an all-out call-up unless war breaks out. Mr. Bush
would need Congressional approval to extend the call-up beyond 180 days or to
call up more than 200,000 reserves.

Asked if an additional call-up was already being contemplated, Mr. Williams
said, ''I don't think anyone knows what's going to happen after Oct. 1.''

In addition to the call-up, more than 15,000 reservists, including 9,000 in the
Air Force, volunteered before the mobilization was authorized.

Units 'Already in the System'

Reserve officials at units mobilized today said that many of their pilots and
crews have been making the 8,000-mile journey from the East Coast to Saudi
Arabia for the past two weeks.

''We already have people in the system,'' said Maj. Bob Matthews, crew scheduler
for the 183d Military Airlift Squadron, an Air National Guard unit based at
Thompson Field in Jackson, Miss. He said about 30 of the squadron's 120 members
had already volunteered.

Lieut. Col. James Gallin, commander of the 337th Military Airlift Squadron at
Westover Air Force Base, Mass., said that 95 percent of the squadron's 206
members had already volunteered.

The squadron has been flying 15 C-5 cargo planes to the Middle East from Langley
Air Force Base, Va., and Pope Air Field, N.C., with crews making 10-hour rest
stops at air bases in Frankfurt or at Torrejon, Spain.

'Something We Train For'

''Hussein has used chemical weapons, so that's a concern,'' said Colonel Gallin,
an account executive for Digital Equipment Corporation, referring to President
Saddam Hussein of Iraq. ''But I've been in Vietnam and Panama, and this is
something we train for every day.''

Maj. Aaron Olmsted Jr., an inspector with the Federal Aviation Administration,
said he was called at 1:19 A.M. and told to report to the 337th.

''When you're a reservist you usually go for a week or so and then come home,''
said the major, who is a C-5 pilot. ''A reservist usually has control over his
own destiny. Now a higher power commands it.''

Airlines, which hire many of their pilots from the military, said some crew
members had been called up for reserve duty, but that overall staffing and
flight schedules would not be affected.

The Pentagon said today that relatives of reservists seeking information about
support programs should contact family centers at major military installations.
Families of Army National Guard members can call (800) 356-2764. Families of
members of the Army Reserves can call (800) 874-8451.

6 RESERVE SQUADRONS ARE CALLED TO SERVICE

WASHINGTON, Aug. 24 (Special to the New York Times) Following are the Air
National Guard and Air Force Reserve units activated today in the first round of
reserve call-ups. The Pentagon announced the names of these units today; it has
said it will not name other specific reserve units to be mobilized until members
are first notified by telephone.

Air National Guard

Jackson, Miss. - 183d Military Airlift Squadron, flying C-141B Starlifters (150
members). Newburgh, N.Y. - 137th Military Airlift Squadron, flying C-5A Galaxies
(135 members). Dallas - 136th Mobile Aerial Port Squadron, airlift terminal and
cargo managers (100 members).

Air Force Reserve

McGuire Air Force Base, N.J. - 732d Military Airlift Squadron, flying C-141B
Starlifters (225 members).

Andrews Air Force Base, Md. - 756th Military

Airlift Squadron, C-141B Starlifters (175 members). Westover Air Force Base,
Mass. - 337th Military Airlift Squadron, C-5A Galaxies (220 members).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              212 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 25, 1990, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

CONFRONTATION IN THE GULF;
Disadvantage for U.S. in the Desert: Fewer Tanks

BYLINE: By MALCOLM W. BROWNE

SECTION: Section 1; Page 6, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1056 words


If the crisis in the Persian Gulf should lead to full-scale war, United States
and Iraqi forces would square off in a desert four times the size of France in a
battle unlike any other in American history. While most American, British and
Israeli military experts say United States aircraft in the region could quickly
smash an Iraqi invasion of Saudi Arabia, American counterattacks on the ground
might be hindered by a relative lack of armored vehicles, without which ground
troops in a desert environment can do little more than defend static positions.

On the desert sand that covers most of Saudi Arabia, Kuwait and Iraq, wheeled
vehicles bog down quickly. An infantryman slogging through ankle-deep sand can
run no more than a few hundred yards before becoming exhausted. Only those
vehicles with oversize low-pressure tires or tracks -tanks, armored personnel
carriers and fighting vehicles - can remain mobile off the few roads that cross
the desert.

American M-60 and M-1 tanks and M-2 Bradley Armored Fighting Vehicles are on the
way to Saudi Arabia on ships, but it will take weeks and perhaps months for
American armor to reach its full strength.

Where Tanks Cannot Hide

Adding to American problems would be the erosive effects of sand and heat on
machinery and morale, as well as the threat of poison gas.

Although there is general agreement that armor is indispensable to desert
warfare, its effective use depends strongly on air supremacy.

''Old-time armor commanders used to think of deserts as ideal battlegrounds for
tanks,'' an Israeli military expert said. ''But don't expect to see great tank
battles in the Arabian Peninsula.''

One of the main changes in modern desert warfare stems from the vastly improved
intelligence afforded by satellites and Awacs aircraft. ''There is simply
nowhere in the desert for an Iraqi vehicle to hide, much less a column of
tanks'' an American military official said. ''If the other guy moves, we'll know
it.''

'A Matter of Numbers'

But at least one leading expert said he believed that good intelligence and air
superiority may not in themselves assure a quick American victory. That expert,
Donn A. Starry, a retired United States Army general who commanded tank forces
in Korea, Europe and Vietnam as well as the Army's Armored Center at Fort Knox,
Ky., said Iraq's 5,500 Soviet-designed tanks could pose a serious threat.

''In quality, we're way ahead of them,'' Mr. Starry said. ''Even their best
tank, the T-72, has many vulnerabilities. We know from its performance in Syria
and elsewhere in the Middle East that its tracks don't do as well on desert sand
as our own tanks.''

But for the time being, Iraqi tanks probably outnumber those of the Saudis and
their American allies by nearly 10 to 1.

''It's simply a matter of numbers,'' he said. ''If their tanks outnumber the
weapons we can bring to bear against them, then they have an advantage, even if
each of our weapons knocks out a tank.''

U.S. Infantry Missiles

American ground commanders are counting heavily on infantry missiles to stop
Iraqi tanks. But the effectiveness of those weapons - notably the tube-launched,
optically tracked, wire-guided TOW missile and the Dragon wire-guided missile -
is questioned by many experts.

The Dragon has too small a warhead to penetrate the thicker types of tank armor,
and many weapons experts say it would be virtually useless against Iraqi tanks.

The TOW 2A, the latest modification of the TOW, is asserted to be capable of
penetrating even the explosive armor applied to the outside of modern tanks to
divert the force of shaped-charge missile warheads.

But the TOW and Dragon have a crucial disadvantage: They fly to their targets
relatively slowly, and the soldier who launches them must guide them all the way
by keeping the sights on the launcher trained on the target. In practice, that
is difficult. If the soldier's tracking movements are anything but smooth and
precise, the missile will veer away from its trajectory so abruptly that it
cannot be brought back in time to hit the target.

Problem of Sandstorms

For up to 10 seconds after firing the missile, a soldier must face the tank
being tracked, and remain exposed to the machine guns and other weapons the tank
may have. In most parts of the world, the user of a TOW or Dragon could find
covering terrain while guiding the missile. But in the Arabian desert there is
little cover of any kind.

For Iraqi tanks, therefore, the main danger would probably be from American-made
air-to-ground missiles like the AGM-65 Maverick, most experts say. The Maverick,
first used during the Vietnam War, also proved its worth in the 1973
Arab-Israeli War and in a 1975 clash between Iran and Iraq. In the latter two
conflicts, Maverick missiles nearly always hit the tanks at which they were
fired, destroying or disabling them.

The version of the Maverick carried by many American and Saudi aircraft uses an
on-board infrared television camera to identify and track its target, and the
missile can hurl its 125-pound warhead into a tank from 14 miles away.

But to work properly, the Maverick's glass eye must see, and Air Force officials
have acknowledged that sandstorms in the Arabian desert can scratch transparent
lens housings badly enough to incapacitate a missile's imaging and guidance
system. Maverick noses must be checked constantly for clarity and must be
replaced immediately when clouding is detected.

'Sand Gets Into Everything'

Aircraft engines in the desert must be checked and serviced much more frequently
than would be necessary elsewhere. Sand was also a problem for the original
version of United States M-1 tank, a tank expected to begin arriving in the
Persian Gulf region in the next few weeks, although the Army says the problem
has been cured.

''Sand gets into everything, from the air filters of tanks to the receivers of
M-16 rifles,'' an Army official said. ''Everything in the desert clogs, jams,
wears out and breaks down faster than it would in, say, Europe.''

Despite the problems, ''the odds are certainly in our favor,'' an American
analyst said. ''But it would be foolhardy for anyone to assume that Iraq would
be a pushover,'' the analyst continued. ''If we fight them, we'd better be sure
we're prepared to stick out a tough one.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Graph comparing the Soviet designed T-72 and the Maverick Missle.
(Source: Periscope Database (specifacations), Jane's Armor and Artillery 1989-90
and Jane's Weapons Systems 1989-90 (Diagrams))

TYPE: Military Analysis

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              213 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 25, 1990, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

CONFRONTATION IN THE GULF;
Reserves' Quick Shift: Civvies to Olive Drab

BYLINE: By SARA RIMER, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 5, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 558 words

DATELINE: NEWBURGH, N.Y., Aug. 24


He spent Thursday night in Greenwich Village, shopping for clothes - just
another 19-year-old. He got the call at 11:30 P.M. By this afternoon he was in
an olive drab flight suit with an American flag insignia on one arm, checking in
at the Air National Guard base here, 60 miles north of New York City.

His unit, the 137th Military Airlift Squadron of the 105th Group, had been
called to active duty.

Standing in a line, in front of a window, waiting to begin a slew of paper work,
the second-year student at the Fashion Institute of Technology in Manhattan
still seemed dazed.

'Excited and Apprehensive'

''I'm excited and apprehensive,'' he said. ''I'm backing this 100 percent.''

All day long, the 150 members of his unit, based at Stewart International
Airport, arrived from New York, Connecticut, New Jersey, Philadelphia,
Washington and as far away as Texas.

They were mostly men, mostly in their 20's, with a few in their 40's who had
fought in Vietnam. There was a computer analyst from Texas, an unemployed
Eastern Airlines pilot, a lawyer, a switching technician for New York Telephone
Company and a 26-year-old New York City detective.

At least in front of reporters, the talk was not of war or hot desert sands or
chemical gas but of the mundane details of tying up loose ends at home: powers
of attorney, W-4 forms, checking accounts, life insurance and wills. They were
told not to give their names to reporters.

Patriotic but Not Gung-Ho

What they actually felt as they left their families and entered the cauldron of
the Mideast they kept to themselves. The base was not the place for them to
spill emotions. They seemed proud but not gung-ho.

''We're not a bunch of Tom Cruises,'' said the commander of the 137th, a
lieutenant colonel who identified himself only as Tom.

The narcotics detective said he was not worried at all. ''It's probably worse in
New York than it is over there,'' he said.

World's Largest Aircraft

This is an elite unit. Its members fly and operate 12 C-5A Galaxies,
221-foot-long cargo planes that are among the largest aircraft in the world. The
transports cost $130 million each and hold 246,000 pounds. The members fly the
planes, maintain them and handle the cargo.

The guardsmen have been called up for 90 days and will be shuttling the planes
forth across the ocean. Volunteer guardsmen have been operating the planes since
Aug. 7.

Long Preparations

Colonel Tom, as the unit's commander was called all day, is a 43-year-old former
Air Force pilot in Vietnam. He said this unit had prepared long and hard for
today.

There had, he said, even been simulated calls to active duty. ''This is a
simulated recall,'' the phone caller used to say.

After 9:30 P.M. Thursday, as Colonel Tom and other full-time personnel
telephoned the unit members, they repeated the words: ''This is an actual
recall. This is an actual recall.''

A unit member named Valerie, checked in late Thursday night. A 22-year-old
assembly line worker at the General Motors plant in Tarrytown, N.Y., she had
worked her usual 8 A.M. to 4 P.M. shift, putting together gas tanks on 400 cars.
Then she drove to the air base.

Her father, who served in Korea and also works at the plant, gave her advice:
''He told me, 'Just be brave.' You'll feel better about yourself when you get
back,'' she said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              214 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 25, 1990, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Books of the Times;
How the U.S. Decides It's Times to Go to War

BYLINE: By Herbert Mitgang

SECTION: Section 1; Page 16, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 952 words



Constitutional Diplomacy
By Michael J. Glennon
353 pages. Princeton University Press. $35.

Although ''Constitutional Diplomacy'' was written before an American line was
drawn in the sands of the Arabian Peninsula after Iraq took over Kuwait, it is
hard to imagine a book that is more prescient and provocative about the huge
military buildup in the Persian Gulf. People who wonder about the
constitutionality of the American response purely by Presidential order will
find plenty of legal and historical ammunition here.

From President Dwight D. Eisenhower to President Bush, the debate continues
about who has the primary power to make foreign policy and war, or something
perilously close to it, without a formal declaration. It's an old battle: Cicero
said that laws are silent amid the clash of arms.

The author, Michael J. Glennon, a professor of law at the University of
California in Davis, brings to his book firsthand knowledge about the clash of
interests between the President and Congress. He was legal counsel to the Senate
Foreign Relations Committee from 1977 to 1980. In a foreword, J. William
Fulbright, the chairman of that committee from 1959 to 1974 - who strongly
opposed President Lyndon B. Johnson's military intervention in the Dominican
Republic in 1965 and whose hearings in 1966 challenged the increased American
involvement in Vietnam - does this reviewer's work for him by summing up the
book's theme:

''This is a book about law, about the highest order of law by which our society
governs itself: the United States Constitution. It suggests that we look to the
Constitution in the making of foreign policy, and that in so doing we no longer
cede to the executive extensive and exclusive diplomatic power. It proposes that
we respect constitutional limits when they obstruct our personal wishes as much
as when they advance them. As we begin a new administration in Washington, the
first since the self-congratulatory and largely mindless celebrating that marked
our constitutional bicentennial, it strikes me as fitting that we consider
constitutionalism as an idea whose time has come for the making of American
foreign policy.''

Professor Glennon emphasizes that the Constitution's grants of war-making power
to the President are paltry compared with its grants to Congress. The main
source of the President's war-making power is the Commander in Chief clause. In
addition, some Presidents have cited the clause vesting the executive power in
the President to justify sending troops abroad for purposes short of war, even
without implementing legislation by Congress.

In contrast, the Constitution grants Congress specific war-making authority in
many places: to provide for the common defense, to define and punish offenses
against the law of nations, to raise and support armies, to provide and maintain
a navy, to make rules for the Government and regulation of the land and naval
forces, to provide for organizing, arming and disciplining the militia, to call
forth the militia to execute the laws of the Union, suppress insurrections and
repel invasions, to declare war itself.

In the aftermath of the American involvement in Vietnam and its extension into
Cambodia, Congress enacted the War Powers Resolution in 1973 over President
Nixon's veto. It is that resolution that has been cited by some senators and
representatives in recent years to oppose sending United States military forces
abroad.

The resolution restricts the duration of any involvement of the armed forces in
''hostilities'' or in ''situations where imminent involvement in hostilities is
clearly indicated by the circumstances'' without a declaration of war. It
requires the President to submit a report to Congress within 48 hours after any
such use of the armed forces and to end the involvement within 60 days after
such a report is, or should have been, submitted.

Professor Glennon's book contends that President Ronald Reagan ''flouted the
spirit'' of the War Powers Resolution in sending American forces to Lebanon and
to Grenada. Of particular significance to the military presence in the Persian
Gulf today, Professor Glennon recalls our involvement there, albeit on a smaller
scale, only three years ago during the Iran-Iraq war:

''Any lingering doubts concerning the inefficacy of the resolution were removed
by President Reagan's successful flouting of its requirements when units of the
armed forces were introduced into hostilities in the Persian Gulf. On July 22,
1987, the first Navy escort operations began for two reflagged Kuwaiti ships.
Iran had previously taken the public position that the escort operations of the
United States were protecting the ships of Kuwait, which Iran viewed as an ally
in its war against Iraq.''

When the cruiser Vincennes shot down an Iranian airliner on July 3, 1988,
killing 269 people, Vice President Bush defended the action by accusing the
Iranians of sending an airliner over a warship engaged in battle. But no report
had been submitted to Congress under the War Powers Resolution. In a
communication to Congress, President Reagan ''stated his belief that the War
Powers Resolution is unconstitutional.''

In ''Constititional Diplomacy,'' Professor Glennon writes as if he had a crystal
ball that foretold the events now unfolding in the Persian Gulf. Regardless of
whether Presidents heed the War Powers Resolution, he says, members of Congress
should carry out their Constitutional responsibilities and show ''the fortitude
to stand up to those who equate criticism with lack of patriotism.'' And he
concludes: ''Rather than mimic the dictatorships we have vanquished, should we
not strengthen the democracy we have built?''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              215 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 25, 1990, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

S.I. Port's Fate Is Muddled by the Mideast Crisis

BYLINE: By ANTHONY DePALMA

SECTION: Section 1; Page 27, Column 3; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1058 words


Before the Persian Gulf crisis began, the Staten Island home port was almost
ready to open, or almost ready to close, depending on who was asked. Now, the
prospects for the port are even more confused.

The debate over the port, the New York metropolitan region's largest military
project, has been given a new wind by the largest and costliest troop deployment
since the Vietnam War.

The port is now more than 90 percent complete. More than $150 million has been
committed to building the pier, the maintenance building and other parts of the
base. The families of more than 100 crewmen for the Normandy, the new ship that
is the center of the naval task force that is the center of the plan, have
already settled into new apartments at Fort Wadsworth near the Verrazano-Narrows
Bridge.

Before the current crisis, the scramble to cut military costs had landed the
port project on the list of possible cuts in the military budget.

'Everything Is Up in the Air'

Now, no one is certain what will happen. ''A few days ago we thought we would
probably be announcing more base closures,'' said Glenn E. Flood, a Defense
Department spokesman. ''Now everything is up in the air.'' Mr. Flood said no
decision was likely on the port until the fall, when a new budget is adopted.

In the meantime, the base's supporters and opponents are pushing in opposite
directions. Officially, at least, Staten Island is the designated port for the
Normandy and its support group.

The 567-foot missile-carrying cruiser is being checked at a shipyard in Maine.
Navy officials expect it to arrive in New York in October.

Chief Petty Officer Lawrence A. Jones, an engineer on the Normandy, and his
wife, Diane, recently moved into a new garden apartment at Fort Wadsworth. Mr.
Jones has no doubt that the Normandy will sail into New York harbor in a few
weeks. ''That's why I'm moving my whole house here,'' he said.

Private Users Sought

But more than $100 million in additional construction for the base and personnel
support installations has been stalled for months.

Moreover, Mayor David N. Dinkins, who opposes the base, is so certain the
project will be killed that a few weeks ago he sought plans for alternative uses
for the installation. A report is due in early September.

''The Mayor's intent is the same as it's always been, to find private industrial
uses of that site,'' said Albert Scardino, the Mayor's press secretary.

Staten Island and five other new ports across the country were proposed in 1983,
when the United States was working to build a 600-ship Navy and needed more
berthing space. Opponents said the dispersal was intended to win political
support for the buildup.

The Navy is now reviewing its system of bases, including all six home ports,
which face different levels of opposition. Secretary of Defense Dick Cheney has
imposed a spending moratorium on military construction projects, including
ports, and has placed four of six home port projects, including Staten Island,
on a list of possible cuts. A Nuclear Danger?  The port was initially embraced
by New York City officials, led by Mayor Edward I. Koch and Representative Guy
V. Molinari, now the Staten Island Borough President. Many believed that the
Navy would pump $387 million a year into the city's economy. But in the mayoral
campaign last year, Mr. Dinkins said he would fight the project because the
ships to be berthed on Staten Island could carry nuclear weapons that would
endanger the region.

A tour of the two areas within the port - Fort Wadsworth, beneath the
Verrazano-Narrows Bridge, and the new pier and 200,000-square-foot maintenance
building in Stapleton, about two miles away - indicates that the base is close
to operating capacity and Navy officials say it is ready to handle the Normandy.

The pier, on which the Normandy and 10 other ships can be docked, was dedicated
in 1989. In June, the Navy officially moved its local headquarters from the
Brooklyn Navy Yard, which is to be closed by 1992, to Staten Island.

According to the General Accounting Office, $193 million has been appropriated
for the Staten Island port. Of that, $152 million had already been obligated as
of May 31, and $136 million had been spent.

To Build or Not to Build

Before Congress recessed a few weeks ago, a proposed budget amendment to cut off
financing for the ports was defeated in the Subcommittee on Seapower and
Strategic and Critical Materials and the full Armed Services Committee. A
similar amendment could be introduced when a budget bill is debated on the floor
of the House of Representatives in the fall.

Mr. Dinkins has asked Defense Department officials and a Congressional committee
to force the Navy to stop building on Staten Island until the project's future
is decided. He vetoed a city budget expenditure of $22.7 million this year for
the reconstruction of Front Street and city bulkheads near the Stapleton pier.

If the Navy were to ship out, Mr. Dinkins has supported the idea of buying back
the property and using the new Navy pier to dock a 200-foot-long oil spill
recovery ship operated by the oil industry.

'I'll Carry the Ball'

Capt. Charles H. Gnerlich, commanding officer of Naval Station, New York, which
encompasses Fort Wadsworth, the Brooklyn Navy Yards and several other military
installations in the area, has said he is willing to allow an oil spill recovery
team to berth at the port even after the Normandy arrives, if that is what the
city wants.

''I'll carry the ball for the city to make such an agreement happen,'' Captain
Gnerlich said. ''The Mayor doesn't have to buy the facility from me to get what
he wants.''

Supporters of the base say it is needed now more than ever. Joseph F. Callo,
executive director of Homeport Information Task Force, which represents
businesses and officials supporting the project, said that if Navy ships had
sailed to the Gulf from New York instead of Newport News, Va., they would have
arrived one or two days earlier.

But Representative Ted Weiss, a New York Democrat, said the Persian Gulf crisis
has not changed his view that completing the port would be a waste of taxpayer
money. ''I don't doubt at all that some people are going to use the crisis as an
excuse for keeping home port alive,'' he said, ''but I don't think the argument
is going to sell.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: More than $150 million has been committed to building the pier,
maintenance building, at rear, and other parts of the home port on Staten
Island; The home port is the New York metropolitan region's largest military
project. Capt. Charles H. Gnerlich looked over some of the 400 completed family
units. More than 1,200 others have yet to be started. (Photographs by Keith
Meyers/The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              216 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 26, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

China Finds a Han Tomb and 'Men of Mud'

BYLINE: By NICHOLAS D. KRISTOF, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 1, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 998 words

DATELINE: BEIJING, Aug. 25


Workers building a road in central China appear to have stumbled on an
archeological treasure: a 2,100-year-old network of underground vaults said to
contain tens of thousands of terra-cotta sculptures buried with a Han Dynasty
emperor, during one of the greatest civilizations of ancient times.

The figures, spread over an area as big as 10 football fields, are believed to
be part of the burial site of Jingdi, an emperor who ruled from 157 B.C. to 141
B.C. This would be the first excavation of the area around a Han Dynasty
imperial tomb, and some Chinese archeologists have described the find as
surpassing in artistic quality and in number of artifacts even the famous
terra-cotta army discovered near the ancient capital of Xian in 1974.

The excavation is only in the early stages and so far Chinese officials have
been coy about the discovery, refusing to let a foreign journalist visit the
site or interview experts who have examined the artifacts. Information about the
discovery has emerged only in dribs and drabs in the official Chinese press
organizations in the last month.

'A Pretty Terrific Find'

Yet from the growing number of accounts published in Chinese-language
newspapers, and from accompanying photos published in recent days, a more
complete picture is emerging of a vast underground array of scupltures. There
are said to be rows and rows of terra-cotta sculptures of men, boys or horses.
Each is only about two feet tall, but they reportedly are all carved masterfully
with different facial expressions.

''Reporters recently visited the excavation site, descended a ladder into the
moist pit, and saw the terra-cotta figures,'' wrote a journalist in People's
Daily. ''They were about 60 centimeters tall, all naked male figures, all
armless and all red. The sculptures are thin, and all are different. Some are
very handsome, featuring small smiles on their faces. Some have high cheekbones
and serious expressions, some stare straight ahead, others seem serene and
contented. The figures are so vivid that they almost seem alive.''

Foreign experts interviewed by telephone said they had not heard of the
discovery, or had seen only the briefest references to it. But they said that
China did not have a record of exaggerating archeological claims.

''It sounds like a pretty terrific find,'' said Michael Loewe, a specialist in
ancient China at Cambridge University in England. ''If this really is the tomb
of Jingdi, with that size and complexity, then it should certainly be as
significant as Qinshihuangdi's tomb.''

The tomb of Qinshihuangdi, the first Qin emperor, is only 25 miles away, also in
the countryside outside Xian, and attracts several hundred thousand foreigners
to Xian annually.

24 Vaults, Thousands of Figures

The latest sculptures are considerably smaller than the life-sized warriors and
horses buried with the Qin emperor. The Qin excavation, which is unfinished but
is believed to consist of fewer than 10,000 figures, is 70 years older than the
new find, but consists of only three vaults, compared to the 24 found so far at
the Han tomb.

''Some say there are tens of thousands'' of figures buried in the Han vaults,
People's Daily reported. ''Some say there are 100,000. Then there is some talk
of a million figures.''

K. C. Chang, professor of archeology at Harvard University, said the reports of
the discovery were in line with what was known of Han Dynasty burial practices,
but that it was too early to assess the magnitude of the find. In particular, he
said it was important to examine the craftsmanship to see if the artistic level
marked an improvement compared with previous finds.

The Han Dynasty, of which Jingdi was the fifth emperor, was one of the greatest
periods in Chinese history, in which paper and porcelain were invented,
philosophical and historical studies flowered, and Chinese culture spread to
Korea and Vietnam. While Jingdi came to be overshadowed by his father and by his
son, he still is remembered for consolidating the empire and his generally wise
stewardship of the nation.

Workers Find Antiquities

It is not unusual for China to limit access by foreigners to its antiquities.
Because so many Chinese artifacts are abroad, China is particularly sensitive
about conducting excavations on its own. National law even forbids foreign
nationals from taking part in digs.

The site was discovered on March 10, as workers were building a new road about
15 miles north of the ancient capital of Xian. At a depth of about 22 feet,
their digging tools made an unusual noise and so they stopped for an inspection.
They realized they had discovered antiquities, and so archeologists were called
in, just as they were in 1974 when a peasant digging a well stumbled across the
site of Qinshihuangdi's terra-cotta army.

Assessment of the new find is difficult because the work has only just begun.
The 24 pits each measures about 13 feet wide and between 82 feet and 950 feet
long. Some contain horses and carts instead of human figures, and others appear
to have been emptied by ancient grave robbers.

''If only the central Government and the province will give us manpower and
financial support, we believe that in two to three years of hard work we can
excavate all 24 pits, and we can solve the mysteries surrounding them,''
People's Daily quoted Wang Xueli, an archeologist from Xian, as saying. The
newspapers have said that a museum is expected to be constructed at the site.

China has always been short of people to conduct archeological digs, which is
one reason why many known imperial tombs have not been excavated and why major
finds often occur when experts are called in to rescue a site that workers or
peasants have turned up. But the Chinese Government might be willing to devote
considerable resources in this case because of the likely gains from tourism.

''These men of mud can bring in hordes of Westerners,'' People's Daily quoted
local peasants as saying.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: A terra-cotta statue buried with a Han Dynasty emperor in
central China was unearthed recently during road construction (New China News
Agency) (pg. 1); map: China indicating a huge ancient burial site has been
discovered outside Xian. (The New York Times) (pg. 20)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              217 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 26, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

CONFRONTATION IN THE GULF;
The Golf Cart Crisis

BYLINE: By ANDREW ROSENTHAL, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 16, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1641 words

DATELINE: KENNEBUNKPORT, Me., Aug. 25


Even on a day when he savored a hard-won diplomatic triumph at the United
Nations, President Bush and his handling of the Persian Gulf crisis encountered
irritating criticisms from unexpected quarters.

At the same time that

Mr. Bush is basking in beams of approval from Europe and receiving support from
the Soviet Union, television comedians and journalistic commentators at home are
suggesting that he set an example for the nation by giving his gas-guzzling
speedboat a rest.

And he is getting conflicting reviews from American conservatives, with some
doubting the worth of the mission and others, including two former Secretaries
of State, Henry A. Kissinger and Alexander M. Haig, warning about the dangers of
wearing out popular support by waiting too long to act in his effort to control
the expansionist ambitions of Saddam Hussein.

This situation reflects the problem that while Mr. Bush has adeptly marshaled
foreign support and stitched together a broad alliance, he has had little
appetite or time for grappling with the implications of the crisis for the
national economy, the impact on the Federal budget deficit of tens of millions
of dollars a day in additional military spending and, finally, developing an
election-year rationale for the overarching goals of his policy.

Within the White House and among outside experts, there is a sense of a
President launched on a stormy period that will be crucial to the verdicts on an
Administration that had begun well but had not yet faced a test of such
magnitude.

''I think we're seeing Bush feeling his way into a whole new world,'' said
Stephen Ambrose, biographer of Dwight D. Eisenhower and Richard M. Nixon. ''This
is the first post-cold war crisis, the first in which none of the givens of his
lifetime are there anymore. It's uncharted water for the White House and I don't
think they're navigating it entirely successfully yet.''

As the focus of such attention, Mr. Bush has so far avoided the appearance of
personal anguish that characterized the presidency of Jimmy Carter. He has tried
to project the image of a leader unintimidated by perilous military action and
willing to bear the responsibility of military command without being paralyzed
by threats to the lives of American hostages.

Mr. Bush has clearly distinguished himself from his predecessors - more decisive
than Mr. Carter, more in charge than Ronald Reagan - and yet is haunted and
occasionally hobbled by the ghosts of their presidencies.

By holding to his summer vacation plans, Mr. Bush has rejected Mr. Carter's
decision to stay in the White House during the Iran hostage crisis. But Mr.
Bush's approach has sprung an entirely new trap: while Mr. Bush is hard at work
here, the television imagery is of a President blithely speed-boating and
golfing through what has become a dangerous summer for tens of thousands of
American soldiers and thousands of American civilians.

''He may end up being the first President who's held hostage on a Cigarette
boat,'' said Jody Powell, who was Mr. Carter's press secretary. ''He's sort of
got himself in a position where he has to go fishing even if he doesn't want to.
They made a decision about appearances that's got away from them and is now
controlling him.''

An Intimate Portrait

Although Mr. Bush fiercely resists close inspection, the last three weeks have
provided a intimate portrait of his leadership. They have revealed him at his
most temperamental, grousing at reporters who dog his golf cart. They have shown
him at his diplomatic best, telephoning around the world to hold together the
anti-Iraq alliance.

They have also demonstrated the perils of the personal way Mr. Bush conducts his
diplomacy. He has relied on a knowledge of the Middle East that comes from a
long association with its oil-rich, conservative royal families and leaves Mr.
Bush with a blind spot in assessing the currents of the Arab street and the
intentions of President Saddam Hussein of Iraq.

In general, the Persian Gulf conflict puts the final focus on a picture that
began taking shape in 1989 as the new President began shedding images accrued
over the years in which he had been Mr. Reagan's silent and loyal No. 2:
''wimpy,'' ''excessively cautious,'' ''inarticulate,'' ''lacking in vision.''
''He's had to wipe off eight years of cobwebs,'' said a senior Administration
official.

The leader evident in today's crisis began emerging, this official suggested, in
a May 1989 meeeting of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization at which he made a
proposal to cut conventional armed forces. ''The idea was to tell the allies
clearly that he was going to lead NATO, that he had the personal will and
ambition to match the U.S. role as a superpower,'' the official said.

After the Malta summit meeting and the Washington meeting with President Mikhail
S. Gorbachev this year, many of Mr. Bush's critics were acknowledging that he
had moved effectively on the world stage. But there has been a lingering
complaint that while he excelled at shifting gears quickly, Mr. Bush was
disinclined to provide a broad vision for his actions.

Untested in Adversity

He was also untested in adversity, but in the Panama invasion last year, Mr.
Bush demonstrated his willingness to employ military force. Newsweek magazine,
which once speculated about ''the wimp factor,'' now calls him the ''WASP
warrior.''

Administration officials say Mr. Bush is giving thought to the larger picture,
pondering what the Middle East will look like if the military operation drives
Mr. Hussein from Iraq. But there are indications here that the Administration is
prepared to accept an ending in which Mr. Hussein remains in power in Iraq and
it is not clear what its solution for Middle East security would be in that
case, apart from an indefinite American military presence.

These internal deliberations have been conducted in a classic Bush fashion, in
the smallest circle of advisers. Indeed, the President and his national security
adviser, Brent Scowcroft, have spent hours together, often with fishing lines
trailing in the Atlantic Ocean off Mr. Bush's speedboat.

But whatever the intensity and scope of these discussions, Mr. Bush has had
trouble expressing his larger goals to the public. Mr. Scowcroft tried to do
some of that for him today in an appearance on Cable News Network, saying the
gulf crisis was reflecting ''the emergence of a new world order,'' with the
United Nations functioning as originally intended ''to mobilize the civilized
world against aggression and against aggressors.''

Turning to the political problem, Mr. Scowcroft said Mr. Bush is actually
putting in a full day's work and is so pressed for time that he winds up taking
''a forced march around the golf course instead of a leisurely round.''

For Mr. Bush's part, he has been markedly accessible for a President in the
midst of a crisis, giving regular news conferences, which he obviously enjoys,
and three major speeches, which equally obviously he does not.

These speeches have summoned patriotic imagery and talked of stopping a
Hitler-like aggressor. Mr. Ambrose, the Presidential biographer, argued that
these are words more suitable to an older era. ''He's talking about the American
way of life being at stake, about freedom being at stake,'' he said. ''That's
typical Nixonian rhetoric, typical Vietnam rhetoric.''

One problem Mr. Bush may be having is that the importance of preserving oil
supplies is an important part of his Gulf policy, but one that does not play
well in public. The other problem is the hostages. Mr. Bush and his advisers
have been absorbed in not allowing him to fall into the same patterns that
paralyzed Mr. Carter and Mr. Reagan, not only adhering to the famous vacation
but also making sure that Mr. Bush does not - as Mr. Reagan did -begin appearing
with hostages' families and thus establish a hobbling personal relationship with
them.

A Central Truth

Implicit in all his decisions is one central truth: If Mr. Bush orders military
action, he will do so in full knowledge that it will likely cost the lives of
Americans and others held hostage by Mr. Hussein. But Mr. Bush cannot speak that
thought directly.

Administration officials have argued with justification that the speed with
which Mr. Bush gathered other countries behind him is testimony to his personal
diplomacy. Bush.

But what the Persian Gulf crisis has also demonstrated are the hazards of Mr.
Bush's penchant for dealing only with the top officials of foreign countries. In
this case, Mr. Bush's views are heavily tinted by his friendships with the
ruling elites of countries like Jordan and Saudi Arabia.

''During a trip to Saudi Arabia in 1986, Bush met with King Fahd from 4 P.M. to
3 A.M. one day,'' a senior official said. ''He is a longtime friend of the Saudi
Ambassador in Washington, Prince Bandar, who gave Bush an enormous party in
air-conditioned tents in the desert and took him riding on the dunes in a jeep.
They got stuck in the sand together.''

Personal Bonding

''But the scene that sticks in my mind the most is Bush on a yacht with King
Hussein of Jordan,'' he said. ''They were going out sailing together and there
was Bush, this tall, lanky American, rubbing suntan lotion all over the face of
the King, who was much shorter.''

This personal bonding is critical to Mr. Bush. He is said to be unable to trust
another leader until he has achieved it. But Administration officials
acknowledge gaps in his understanding of the Middle East.

''There is an aspect of Arab religion, culture and political life that is not
clearly understood by anybody,'' an official said. ''Since that's the card that
Saddam is playing right now, this manifests itself not being able to understand
Saddam's motivations or predict his next move.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: President Bush being briefed at his Walker's Point home in
Kennebunkport yesterday by Brent Scowcroft, the national security adviser.

TYPE: News Analysis The President has been criticized for remaining in Maine
during the Iraqi crisis instead of returning to the White House. (White House
Photo via Associated Press)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              218 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 26, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

For Vietnamese in U.S., Uneasy Ties to Home

BYLINE: By STEVEN ERLANGER, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 22, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 680 words

DATELINE: HO CHI MINH CITY, Vietnam


The young man in the toque and clipped mustache, chatting with customers at what
has become one of Vietnam's best restaurants, is a symbol of the economic
strength and potential of the Vietnamese exiles in the United States, as well as
of their ambivalence about closer ties between the two countries.

He knows that as well as anyone. ''Write what you like,'' he said, pulling a
gold Dunhill lighter from beneath his double-breasted chef's apron, with the
name of the restaurant, Le Mekong, embroidered on the chest. ''But please don't
mention my name. There are a lot of extremists among the Vietnamese in the
United States who think that I am betraying them, and I have my family there.''

He said Vietnamese exiles will be ''the great bridge between the United States
and Southeast Asia,'' restoring friendship between the Americans and the
Vietnamese.

''The Vietnamese like American products, they like American businessmen and they
like Americans,'' he said. ''I don't care whether you call it Communism or
socialism, this country will continue to carry out an open-door policy slowly
and carefully. They know they must participate in the international community.''

Now 38 years old, he left Vietnam 18 years ago to study business at the
University of San Francisco. Most of his family, except for some cousins, fled
Vietnam in 1975. They left nearly everything behind - a factory that produced
animal feed and fertilizer, a plantation for corn and soybeans, a warehouse and
money in the bank.

For years he sent money back, sometimes $50 a month, sometimes more, to help
support nearly 30 relatives. Government officials estimate that up to a third of
the population of Ho Chi Minh City lives at least in part on money or goods sent
from relatives abroad.

He started his own import and export business, and cooking became his hobby. He
came back as a tourist and to see his family.

Year of Tourism's Modest Success

With the liberalization of the private economy here and the welcoming of
investment from Viet kieu, or Vietnamese living overseas, he and his family
decided to open the restaurant, which his relatives in Vietnam would run, and he
visits, and cooks, when he can.

They started a joint venture with Vietnam Tourism, a Government agency, which
owns the building and provides a license. A joint venture, he said, avoids some
of the heavy taxes on private enterprises, which include a 15 percent sales tax
and a 10 percent income tax, as well as the ''tea money'' - the payoffs - to
officials.

Le Mekong opened late in December, just in time for the start of Vietnam's Year
of Tourism, which has been only a modest success. But with some gilt on the
ceiling moldings and some mirrors on the white-painted walls, some of the nicest
linen and tableware that Thailand has to offer (and quite decent French food,
too), Le Mekong has quickly made a reputation with foreign businessmen and
well-off Vietnamese.

The opportunities for profit here are enormous, he said, especially for overseas
Vietnamese, who can work with relatives. But as an American, still forbidden to
invest here by a United States Government embargo on aid and trade, he must be
careful to limit his participation to family charity.

''I'd like to trade, but the law is still there,'' he said. ''There's nothing we
can do. We just watch the Japanese pouring in here. I think we Americans are
losing a lot of leverage.''

Japan, which is supposed to be respecting the American-led embargo, is Vietnam's
second-largest trading partner after the Soviet Union. In the first five months
of this year, Japanese officials say, exports to Vietnam were up 85 percent over
the corresponding period last year, to $90 million, and imports doubled to $196
million. Singapore, which also is supposed to be respecting the embargo, does
$200 million a year in trade with Vietnam.

Doing business with the Vietnamese Government is still very difficult, he said.
''But they are learning every day, and you can't blame them for that,'' he said.
''They are changing, and mostly for the positive.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              219 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 26, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

In One City, Support for Gulf Action, but No Fervent Patriotism

BYLINE: By WILLIAM E. SCHMIDT, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 26, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1216 words

DATELINE: CHICAGO, Aug. 25


With lots of American flags and a homemade sign that read ''Send a message to
our troops in the Persian Gulf,'' Lydia Munger and her friends set out on a
mission this week, a campaign to flood soldiers and sailors in the Middle East
with cheerful postcards from back home.

But after several hours of campaigning at O'Hare Airport on Wednesday, Lydia,
who is 12 years old, and her mother, Mary, said they managed to persuade just 13
people to stop and scribble a greeting. ''People either are too busy to care, or
they just aren't very patriotic,'' Mrs. Munger said.

In some parts of the country, the confrontation in the gulf has prompted
outbursts of patriotic fervor: flag-waving demonstrations and huge yellow
ribbons tied to trees. In Chicago, to judge by the calls to radio call-in shows
and by television and newspaper interviews, people say they strongly support
President Bush's decision to send troops to the Middle East, but their mood has
not translated into demonstrations of patriotism.

General Ambivalence

Despite all the troops dispatched to the Middle East, the thousands of
reservists summoned to active duty and the way the story has dominated
newspapers, television and radio, it just does not feel here as if America is
going to war.

In private conversations, there is ambivalence and uncertainty. There is, among
some, a mood of almost studied indifference - perhaps it is wishful thinking -
that all of the hard language is just words.

''There's not going to be any war,'' said Ron Magnussen, a house painter who was
drinking a glass of beer at the Jump Inn, a tavern on the city's North Side.
''You know we're not going to bomb them, since it would kill all the hostages.
Both sides realize there is too much at stake to go to war.''

For others, those with friends or families overseas, or reservists awaiting a
phone call, the mood is tinged with apprehension.

''Did you ever notice that those who are the most gung-ho, who say we ought to
go on in clean him out, are those who don't have anything to lose?'' asked Bill
Jackson, a Chicago building manager and the father of a son whose Naval unit in
San Diego is on alert for duty in the gulf.

'People Are Uneasy'

On radio station WLS-AM, Bob Lassiter, the host of a call-in show, said he
thinks a lot of people are genuinely afraid. ''People are uneasy, on edge,'' he
said. ''I hear it on the air, and I think you can feel it on the street.''

Twice on Friday, he said, he had to cut people off when they began to spout
obscenities, during heated discussions about the Middle East, the topic that is
dominating all other conversation on his program. ''I'll usually go weeks at a
time before I have to hit the dump button,'' he said. ''I think a lot of people
are just plain scared.''

With others, there is a wariness about what it is exactly that America has
gotten itself into. Even among those who say President Saddam Hussein of Iraq
needs to be taught a lesson, the troop movements and rumors of war in a distant
place inevitably evoke comparisons to Vietnam and the specter of a protracted,
unresolved and divisive standoff.

''Let's just not get stuck over there like we did in Vietnam,'' said Barbara
Krafcisin, who tends bar at an American Legion post on the North Side.

Many Yellow Ribbons

In some neighborhoods, residents have tied yellow ribbons to trees and
lampposts, but that rite - born of the hostage crisis in Iran - only seems to
underscore American ambivalence about committing its sons and daughters to
foreign entanglements.

On the one hand, the gesture is intended to convey support and sympathy for
those overseas, particularly the hostages. On the other hand, it suggests a kind
of impatience, a signal that now that America has taken a stand, the main point
is not defend national interests, at all costs, but rather to make sure
everybody gets back home as quickly and safely as possible.

As big a story as the gulf crisis is, it is not the only news here. The Chicago
Sun-Times has reserved some of its biggest headlines in recent days for local
news: stories about record rainfall and flooding in the suburbs or battles over
a statewide referendum on property taxes.

On WGCI-AM, a radio station that serves a predominantly black audience, Mike
Watkins, the program director, said the Middle East was a hot topic. But among
the station's listeners, it is running second to another story, Operation PUSH's
campaign to boycott Nike athletic shoes.

Few New Recruits

At Army recruiting headquarters here, there are no lines of eager recruits, no
crowds of young men rushing to join up.

Sherryl Henderson, a spokeswoman for the Army in Chicago, said there was no
increase in activity at recruiting stations. ''It's business as usual,'' she
said.

Meanwhile, a batch of young recruits who enlisted in the Army earlier this
summer showed up as scheduled in suburban Des Plaines this week to be sworn in
and shipped off to basic training. Most of them confessed that when they joined
the Army, before the trouble erupted in the Middle East, their plans to did
include warfare.

''I basically joined for just the school money,'' said Jim Carroll, a teen-ager
from suburban Glen Ellyn, in an interview with a Chicago television station. ''I
never figured on a war.'' Another recruit, Mark Murphy, told the same story,
adding nervously, ''I don't really want to go over there.''

Mayor Weighs In

At City Hall, Mayor Richard M. Daley ventured into the subject of the Middle
East the other day, much to the delight of newspaper columnists, who reported
the Mayor's garbled references, as they described it, to the troubles in
''Kee-wait'' and ''Soddo Arabie.''

Making a point echoed in any neighborhood tavern, the Mayor said the Middle
Eastern oil nations should foot the bill for the American troop movements, since
it was being done on their behalf.

In the City Council, meanwhile, Alderman Edward M. Burke was moved by the
conflict to do what comes naturally to any good local politician: take care of
city workers. Mr. Burke proposed that the city amend its compensation rules to
insure that city employes who are reservists would continue to accrue vacation
and sick time and other benefits while on active duty. ''These men and women
could be putting their lives on the line to protect this country,'' Mr. Burke
said.

Campaign Continues

Back in the Mungers' neighborhood, the tally of greetings scratched on the back
of postcards rose slowly through the week.

After the lack of success at the airport, Mrs. Munger stationed the children at
rapid transit stations with the 2,000 postcards donated by a local company.

''Hey, folks, kick Saddam Hussein's keister, O.K.?'' wrote Dan Lister, who
stopped to sign a card outside a train station.

''Be careful out there,'' wrote the O'Conner family. Someone who did not sign
his name scribbled: ''So when are the oil companies going to pay you? Aren't you
deserving enough?'' Mrs. Munger said she just didn't get it. ''Maybe people
around here are scared or nervous about what is going to happen,'' she said.
''Maybe they're upset about gas prices. But think how scared all those young
people are we sent over there. I mean, shouldn't we be telling them how much we
are behind them right now?''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Twelve-year-old Lydia Munger, behind table, soliciting support
for American troops in the Persian Gulf from passersby at a Chicago rapid
transit station. With the help of her mother, Mary, at rear, she is leading a
campaign to send postcards to troops in the Middle East. (Steve Kagan for The
New York Times)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              220 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 26, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

After Shunning Black, A Legion Post Relents

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 26, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 144 words

DATELINE: COLUMBIA, S.C., Aug. 24


An all-white American Legion post that refused membership to a Vietnam veteran
last month because he is black has now agreed to let him re-apply and has
adopted a bylaws change that virtually insures he will be accepted.

The post, Fred H. Sexton Post 1 in Florence, 80 miles east of Columbia, rejected
the application of the veteran, Thurman Thompson, in a vote last month. Only six
of the more than 200 members of the post opposed Mr. Thompson, but that was four
more than needed under its bylaws to refuse him membership. Minutes of the
meeting that were obtained by The Florence Morning News quoted several members
as saying they could not support admission of a black.

But the state commander of the Legion, Norris Kinion, said in an interview
Thursday that the post now welcomed a new application by Mr. Thompson and that
the bylaws had been changed.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              221 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 26, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Lives on Hold: Call-Up Sends Harlem Guard Unit Scrambling and Packing

BYLINE: By LISA W. FODERARO

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 36, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1044 words


Her first week of law school behind her, Hillaire Wheatley walked into her
apartment Friday afternoon, threw down her books and noticed her answering
machine blinking.

''I knew it was Captain Bush,'' the 23-year-old Bronx resident said. ''I didn't
even have to listen to the message. I just started packing.''

Ms. Wheatley is a lieutenant in the National Guard's 719th Transportation
Company in Harlem, and Capt. Dennis E. Bush is the man who gives her her orders,
this time telling her to come home from Widener University Law School in
Wilmington, Del., to prepare for a call-up of the National Guard and reservists
by the Federal Government.

Yesterday, at the armory building that rises on Fifth Avenue and 143d Street by
the Harlem River, she and other members of the Guard's unit scrambled to ready
themselves for duty in the crisis in the Persian Gulf.

Other Units Alerted

At the same time, four units of the 77th United States Army Reserve Command,
whose headquarters are in Fort Totten, N.Y., were called in for active duty
yesterday and three other units were alerted that their members could be
mobilized at any time, a spokesman for the command, Lieut. Col. Carl Fiore,
said.

During peacetime, units of the National Guard report to the Governor while the
Army Reserve answers to the President. But in a call-up, both fall under Federal
jurisdiction.

Already Lieutenant Wheatley had notified a dean at the law school, who promised
to stop her $15,000 tuition payment and to save her a spot in the class. She
asked a neighbor to keep her pet shark and tiger fish fed and her plants
watered. Hardest of all, she tried to calm her mother, Joyce. ''She's going
crazy,'' said Lieutenant Wheatley, her almond-shaped eyes narrowing as she broke
into a you-know-how-moms-are smile.

Mrs. Wheatley's distress is understandable. She is confronted with the departure
of not only her daughter, but her husband as well; Sgt. Bernard Wheatley, a
Guardsman in the 69th Infantry Division in Manhattan, is on standby.

'It Brings Back Memories'

''I'm more afraid than they are,'' Mrs. Wheatley, a secretary, said from her
home in the Morrisania section. ''I've been through this before with my brothers
in Vietnam. It brings back memories. You're constantly afraid that at some point
you'll get a phone call that something real serious happened.''

The 719th Transportation Company, as well as two other companies that have yet
to be placed on alert for call-up, make up the 369th Transportation Battalion.
The 719th is responsible for tranporting all kinds of cargo in 56
tractor-trailers, based at Camp Smith in Peekskill, N.Y.

''Computers, helicopters, armored personnel carriers - anything that will fit on
the back of an 18-wheeler,'' Maj. Anderson Barnes, the battalion's executive
officer, said.

The battalion has a proud history. Its greatest glory was during World War I
when it fought as a ''Negro Regiment of Infantry'' with the French Army. Known
as ''Harlem's Own,'' the infantry took part in the attack at Maison en
Champagne, which advanced them to the Rhine River. The 369th was the first
United States regiment to serve as an integral part of a foreign army and the
first to arrive home and march up Fifth Avenue under the Victory Arch.

The vast majority of the Guard members in the 719th come from the New York
metropolitan region, with about 80 percent, in their civilian lives, employed by
New York City as transit workers, postal clerks, sanitation workers and police
officers. Most fought in Vietnam, a few in the Korean War.

Anxiety and Resignation

In the cavernous halls and corridors of the armory yesterday, ricocheting with
orders, questions and nervous laughter, that pride was still palpable, along
with healthy doses of anxiety and resignation. ''I volunteered for this - nobody
twisted my arm,'' Major Barnes said. ''When you get the call, you go.''

For some, the fear of a confrontation in the desert with the Iraqi Army was
tempered by the realities of living and working in New York City. Captain Bush,
a 34-year-old city police officer from Queens, said: ''I'm not worried about it.
New York City is more brutal.

''In a police job, you're walking the streets in a blue uniform, and you don't
know who's who,'' he said. ''No one's wearing a sign announcing that they're a
criminal or a good guy. In a military theater, you know who your enemies are.''

Over at the reserve command headquarters in Fort Totten, Colonel Fiore, the
command's spokesman, said the four units' 201 members must report to their
respective reserve centers tomorrow when they are scheduled to be processed and
receive special training.

Once the training is completed on Wednesday, the reservists will be assigned to
active duty at posts either in the United States or in the Middle East, Colonel
Fiore said. Members of the four units, which provide transportation, security
and intelligence support to the military, said yesterday that they do not expect
to go into direct combat.

Still, Warren Harris, a 20-year-old from the East New York section of Brooklyn
and a member of the 139th transportation detachment who was told Friday morning
to report for active duty tomorrow, said his family was ''very upset.''

''I was looking forward to going back to school,'' said Private Harris, a
part-time student at Medgar Evers College. ''But there is nothing I can do about
it. This is why I enlisted, and I am ready to go and fight if I have to.''

Private Harris said he planned to spend last night ''getting in one last night
of partying with my girlfriend,'' whom he described as ''very strong emotionally
and willing to wait'' for him to return.

''It came a little faster than I expected, but I'm ready to go,'' said Vera
Barnaby, a 19-year-old resident of the Bedford-Stuyvesant section of Brooklyn
who joined the 139th's transportation detachment only two months ago. ''It's
actually kind of exciting.''

A student in information systems at New York University, she said yesterday that
she planned to tell her parents and two brothers of her new assignment last
night. ''I know they won't like it and will probably try to convince me not to
go,'' Private Barnaby said, ''but I am ready to stand up for what I believe
in.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: A member of the 105th Military Airlift Group in Newburgh, N.Y.,
working on a transport plane that will be used to carry cargo to Saudi Arabia
(Jim Wilson/The New York Times); After only one week in law school, Lieut.
Hillaire Wheatley returned home to prepare for a call-up of the National Guard.
(Angel Franco/The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              222 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 26, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Minh-Chau Luong, Translator, Wed

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2, Page 67, Column 3; Society Desk

LENGTH: 199 words


Minh-Chau Luong, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs. Luong-Si Chuong of Cherry Hill,
N.J., was married yesterday to William Maxwell Crouch Jr., a son of Mrs. William
M. Crouch of Bridgeport, Conn., and the late Mr. Crouch. The Rev. Jacques
Bossiere, an Episcopal minister, performed the ceremony at the Episcopal Church
Center in New York.

Ms. Luong, who is keeping her name, is a French translator at the United
Nations. She has a master's degree in languages and translation from the
Sorbonne, and a master's in political science from the Institute of Political
Studies in Paris. Her father, who was an Assistant Secretary of State for
Agriculture in South Vietnam, is a retired counselor in refugee assistance at
the Camden, N.J., campus of Glassboro State College.

The bridegroom, an author, is a sales executive at the General Business Envelope
Company in Hartford. He graduated from Columbia University and received a
master's degree in journalism from Pennsylvania State University. He edited
''Dick Tracy: America's Most Famous Detective,'' a history of the comic strip
published in May by Citadel Press. His father was the founder and president of
the Equity Paper Company in Bridgeport.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              223 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 26, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

HOME ENTERTAINMENT/VIDEO: AND KEEP IN MIND

SECTION: Section 2; Page 26, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 787 words


Here are some notable releases of the last few months.

ALWAYS - Steven Spielberg's remake of ''A Guy Named Joe'' (1943), with Richard
Dreyfuss as a dead pilot and Holly Hunter as his sweetheart, has the big moments
but ''lacks the intimacy to make any of it moving.'' (Janet Maslin) 1989.
MCA/Universal. $91.95. Laser disk, $34.98. 2 hours 1 minute. Closed captioned.
PG.7/1 BLUE STEEL - Jamie Lee Curtis is so appealing as a rookie cop that
Kathryn Bigelow's good-looking thriller ''holds together even when it has no
reason to.'' (Janet Maslin) 1990. MGM/UA. $89.98. Laser disk, $24.98. 2 hours, 3
minutes. Closed captioned. R. BORN ON THE FOURTH OF JULY - Ron Kovic returns
from Vietnam a bitter paraplegic. Oliver Stone's film has ''enormous visceral
power'' and is ''stunning when it is most specific.'' (Vincent Canby) 1989.
MCA/Universal. $91.95. LD, $39.98. 2:25. CC. R. DRIVING MISS DAISY - On screen
Alfred Uhry's play opens up with a ''singularly theatrical lightness of touch.''
Jessica Tandy is an independent widow and Morgan Freeman her chauffeur. (Canby)
1989. Warner. $92.95. LD, $24.98. 1:39. CC. PG. ENEMIES, A LOVE STORY - The year
is 1949 and the place New York in Paul Mazursky's ''deeply felt, fiercely
evocative'' adaptation of Isaac Bashevis Singer's novel about Holocaust
survivors. (Maslin) 1989. Media. $89.98. LD, $39.95. 2:01. CC. R. THE FABULOUS
BAKER BOYS - Michelle Pfeiffer slithers away with the film, while Jeff and Beau
Bridges ''make the tensions, jealousies and loyalties of brotherhood
believable.'' (Caryn James). 1989. I.V.E. $89.98. LD, $39.95. 1:56. CC. R.
FAMILY BUSINESS - Sean Connery, Dustin Hoffman and Matthew Broderick make up a
three-generation crime family in a film that doesn't leave the stars much to
work with. (Canby) 1989. RCA/Columbia. $89.95. LD, $34.95. 1:53. CC. R.
FLASHBACK - Dennis Hopper and Kiefer Sutherland give fine performances in an
engaging comedy that ''ends upwoozy and sort of distraught.'' (Canby) 1990.
Paramount. No price listed. LD, $34.95. 1:48. CC. R. HARD TO KILL - As a
pony-tailed Los Angeles cop out for revenge, Steven Seagal is the ''latest
inheritor of the Charles Bronson-Chuck Norris-Bruce Lee action-film mantle.''
(Maslin) 1990. Warner. $92.95. LD, $24.98. 1:36. CC. R. INTERNAL AFFAIRS -
Richard Gere and Andy Garcia star in a dizzying police thriller by Mike Figgis,
a ''master of steamy sex appeal and brooding, nocturnal murk.'' (Maslin) 1990.
Paramount. No price listed. LD, $34.95. 1:55. CC. R. LABYRINTH OF PASSION - This
screwball sex comedy from Pedro Almodovar was made six years before his ''Women
on the Verge of a Nervous Breakdown.'' The same energy was in evidence, but
''less evenly channeled and a lot more raw.'' (Maslin) 1982. Cinevista. $79.95.
In Spanish with English subtitles. No rating.

THE MAN IN THE GRAY FLANNEL SUIT - Gregory Peck possesses humble, stolid valor
as a New York ad man with five mouths to feed. 1956. CBS/Fox. $39.98. 2:33. No
rating. THE LITTLE MERMAID - The Hans Christian Andersen story is a marvel of
skillful animation. ''The best animated Disney film in at least 30 years.''
(Maslin) 1989. Disney. $26.99. LD, $29.99. 1:23. CC. G. MEN DON'T LEAVE -
Jessica Lange is a vulnerable widow with two young sons to raise, but ''it's
hard to believe'' that Ms. Lange ''can be as devoid of resources'' as is her
character. (Maslin) 1990. Warner. $89.95. LD, $24.98. 1:55. CC PG-13.  MY LEFT
FOOT - Daniel Day-Lewis won an Oscar as Christy Brown, the disabled Irish
painter and writer. ''Intelligent and beautifully acted.'' (Canby) 1989. HBO.
$89.99. LD, $34.95. 1:43. CC. R.  ROGER AND ME - Michael Moore goes looking for
Roger Smith, chairman of General Motors. ''The corporate nose has never been
tweaked to such serious and delirious effect.'' (Canby) 1989. Warner. $89.95.
LD, $24.98. 1:31. CC. R. SHE-DEVIL - As a writer of romance novels, Meryl Streep
''shows how fine and funny she can be'' in a comic role. Roseanne Barr, however,
gives a ''monotonous'' performance. (Canby) 1989. Orion. $89.98. LD, $39.95.
1:39. CC. PG-13. STEEL MAGNOLIAS - Truvy's beauty shop is dressed up with a
big-name cast in a ''pop entertainment of an especially condescending,
superficial sort.'' (Canby) 1989. RCA/Columbia. $91.95. LD, $34.95. 1:58. CC.
PG.

VALMONT - Milos Forman's film falls well short of its predecessor, ''Dangerous
Liaisons''; it lacks the bite and ''arch, brittle bitchiness.'' (Maslin) 1989.
Orion. $89.98. LD, $44.95. 2:17. CC. R. THE WAR OF THE ROSES - Michael Douglas
and Kathleen Turner trade smashed china and broken bones. ''When the Roses'
marriage explodes, it becomes a dark, funny divorce to the death.'' (James)
1989. CBS/Fox. $89.98. LD, $39.98. 1:56. CC. R.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              224 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 26, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

On Language;
War Words

BYLINE: By William Safire

SECTION: Section 6; Page 18, Column 3; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 1260 words


Naked Aggression,'' President Bush called the blitzkrieg seizure of Kuwait by
Iraq; the United States, he said, had to ''draw a line in the sand'' to defend
Saudi Arabia. News analysts called the presence of American troops in the path
of Saddam Hussein's ''megalomaniacal and hegemonic'' ambitions a tripwire.
Lexicographers donned their battle gear.

Naked Aggression

''Iraq, Having Committed brutal, naked aggression,'' President Bush said,
''ought to get out.''

Aggression means ''forceful attack,'' from the Latin word for attack; in modern
usage, the noun has the connotation of an unprovoked attack. Therefore,
''unprovoked aggression'' would be redundant.

The adjective wedded to the noun aggression is naked. These words are as tightly
fused in cliche as brutal murder, unmitigated gall and stark naked.

Why naked? This word, its meaning ranging from ''free'' to ''unconcealed, bare,
plain,'' has another sense of ''stark'' (which also means ''bare,'' making stark
naked redundant) but has the connotation of ''shocking, stunning'' or even
''ghastly, appalling.'' Although naked looks like a past participle - a verb
form ending in -ed - it was not formed from the verb ''to nake''; its earliest
use can be found in ''Beowulf,'' written about 725, as nacod.

Why naked and not nude? Shock is the key to the word: not the fact of being
unclothed, but the surprise and perhaps embarrassment in the eye of the beholder
of the plain sight is what gives this adjective its impact. A blade is naked,
never nude, when it is unsheathed. ''For the human body,'' writes J. N. Hook in
''The Appropriate Word,'' ''naked is the more frank, honest and shameless
word.'' Robert Graves dealt with that difference in his 1957 poem ''The Naked
and the Nude'': ''For me, the naked and the nude stand as wide apart/As love
from lies, or truth from art.''

Naked aggression, then, means ''unprovoked, shameless attack,'' denuded, or
stripped bare, of any pretense to legality.

Draw the Line

''A line has been drawn in the sand,'' said the President in a televised speech
to the nation.

To draw the line is to set a limit; its figurative origin may have been in
plowing a boundary line between farms in England or in establishing dimensions
for a court in early tennis games in France in the 14th century. First recorded
use was in the trial of Fyshe Palmer in 1793, not in defiance but in puzzlement:
''It is difficult . . . to draw the line.''

During the siege of the Alamo in San Antonio in 1836, legend has it that William
Barrett Travis drew a line in the ground (some say sand) with his sword and
said, ''Those prepared to die for freedom's cause, come across to me'' (189 of
190 Texas defenders did; the 190th provided the story).

In what material is the line drawn? Mr. Bush was referring, of course, to the
sands of the Arabian desert. However, the addition of in the sand recalls a
children's game on the beach, in which the drawing of a line in the sand was a
dare to come across. That could not have been what he meant. However, the usage
by a President in a crisis may have overridden the ''dare'' connotation; a New
York Times headline read ''Worried Nation Backs U.S. Line in the Sand.''

Tripwire

A British soldier writing home in World War I described a facet of trench
warfare: ''He walks forward, he has found his landmark. . . . He is coming to
the Hun trip wire. He has cut the German trip wire.''

From that literal meaning - a wire strung to set off a trap or alarm - came a
figurative sense of ''a small force used as a first line of defense, less to
stop an invading force than to trigger the intervention of reinforcements.''

''The German electorate are baffled,'' wrote The Observer in 1957, ''as to
whether NATO is meant to defend their soil, or provide the tripwire for a
Soviet-American suicide pact.'' By 1969, this idea spread to the Middle East:
''[King Hussein] is anxious to make a separate peace with the Israelis,'' wrote
The New Statesman, ''on the basis of a demilitarised West Bank, with an Israeli
military tripwire on the Jordan.''

The meaning is firmly set as ''self-activating commitment to deeper
involvement,'' more automatic and less self challenging than the older tossing
your cap over the wall. Throughout the prepost-Cold War period (only yesterday),
the American troops stationed in Berlin knew that in the event of hostilities,
they were destined for internment; other troops in NATO knew they were expected
to struggle until reinforcements arrived, or until their loss of life caused a
nuclear retaliation. Tripwire troops are in position to be saved or avenged. The
larger the force, the less frequently it is referred to as a tripwire.

Blitz

During the Vietnam War, doves derided the Munich analogy, an attempt by hawks to
draw a parallel between the defense of South Vietnam and the failure of the
Allies to stop Hitler after he first showed his expansionist intent.

For at least a year before Saddam Hussein's attack across the Kuwaiti border,
his critics had little luck establishing a Munich analogy. Subversive sobriquets
like ''The Butcher of Baghdad'' and ''The Hero of Halabja'' (a reference to
Saddam's use of poison gas against Kurdish civilians in Halabja, Iraq, killing
at least 5,000) did not persuade policy makers or the American public that a new
Hitler was in the making. Neologisms like Todeskramer, literally ''peddlers of
death,'' were coined to derogate those Western nations who sold arms to Saddam
and to Libya's Qaddafi; the use of a German word was intended to call attention
to the Federal Republic's participation in the Mideast military buildup as well
as to the Hitlerite nature of the arms buyers.

However, after the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait and the threat to U.S. oil supplies,
President Bush took an interest in the Munich analogy and used a key word from
World War II to make his point: ''When you plan a blitzkrieg-like attack that's
launched at two o'clock in the morning, that's pretty hard to stop. . . .'' For
emphasis, he repeated blitzkrieg in his statements.

The German word has been so absorbed into English that it is no longer
capitalized. It means ''lightning (blitz) war (krieg)''; its first use in
English was on Oct. 7, 1939, in The War Illustrated: ''In the opening stage of
the war all eyes were turned on Poland, where the German military machine was
engaged in Blitz-Krieg - lightning war - with a view to ending as soon as
possible.'' Another World War II reference was apt: in discussing possible ways
of stopping Saddam, the phrase the von Stauffenberg solution was used. Count
Claus von Stauffenberg was the Wehrmacht officer who led the plot to assassinate
Hitler in 1944.

Meg & Heg

Deploying U.S. Forces was necessary, said Frank J. Gaffney Jr. of the Center for
Security Policy (an organization entitled to wear the coveted Anti-Saddam Before
Kuwait button), if the Iraqi dictator ''is to be prevented from indulging still
further his megalomaniacal and hegemonic ambitions.''

Megalo- is a combining form for ''abnormally large''; a megalopolis is a
metropolis gone too far. Megalomania, according to Dr. Kay Redfield Jamison of
the Johns Hopkins medical school, co-author of the definitive work on manic
depression, means ''a mental disorder characterized by delusions of grandeur.''

Hegemonic - properly, hegemonistic - is an adjective for hegemonism, with the
emphasis on the gem, meaning ''a policy of dominance over other nations.''

Using both adjectives in a single phrase is called overkill.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              225 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 26, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

A Travel Nut's Library

BYLINE: By WILLIAM ZINSSER; William Zinsser is the author of ''On Writing Well''
and is writing a book about American places.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 1, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 3294 words


Old travel books occupy so many shelves in my apartment that a visitor might
take me to be some kind of antiquarian nut. I am merely a travel nut, and the
books are artifacts of that hobby. Just looking at their sonorous titles
(''Forbidden Sands,'' ''Monsoon Seas,'' ''Dead Cities and Forgotten Tribes,''
''They Reigned in Mandalay''), I am taken back to places in many parts of the
world that I traveled far to see. I am also reminded of how the books found
their way into my life.

I am not a likely owner, for instance, of ''Garden Islands of the Great East:
Collecting Seeds from the Philippines and Netherlands India in the Junk 'Cheng
Ho' '' by David Fairchild; botany is not a subject I've been accused of boring
my friends with. Yet if I take the book down and open it to its endpapers - an
illustrated map of the Moluccas, the old Spice Islands of the East Indies, where
Fairchild gathered exotic plants in 1940 for the Fairchild Tropical Garden in
Florida - I can see and smell the copra boat that I took through those same
Moluccas in 1953, and I think with gratitude of the traveler who urged me to
make the trip. That traveler was S. J. Perelman.

Perelman was a licensed humorist practicing his trade when Ted Patrick, editor
of Holiday, a magazine that elevated travel journalism to literature in the
years right after World War II, sent him on two round-the-world trips - one with
the artist Al Hirschfeld, the other with his wife and two children. The pieces
that Perelman wrote became the books ''Westward Ha!'' and ''The Swiss Family
Perelman,'' both of which also sit on my shelf. But humor is not what I remember
when I see them. I remember what a serious traveler those two trips made of
Perelman. (Ultimately he went around the world six times.) He fell in love with
Southeast Asia, especially Indonesia, and talked about the area with erudition
and high enjoyment, his famously esoteric vocabulary now seasoned with Malay
words and pompous British colonialisms.

What stuck in his mind most fondly was a voyage he made on a copra boat of the
old Dutch K.P.M. line that ''hemstitched'' its way around the island of Celebes
and the Moluccas, and he recommended it to me as a fellow addict. I duly booked
passage on a K.P.M. boat out of Macassar, and he sent me off with the names of
various people in the islands he thought I would find helpful. One was an urbane
Dutch planter in Surabaya named Daan Hubrecht. He told me that he knew the
Moluccas well because he had sailed among them as a young man with David
Fairchild's plant-collecting voyage on the junk Cheng Ho. The junk, he
explained, had been built in Hong Kong especially for Fairchild's expedition -
it had a modern botanical laboratory below decks - by an American explorer and
scientific patron named Anne Archbold. It was modeled on a 15th-century Chinese
junk, was brightly painted and decorated and, he said, altogether it was quite a
sight. He showed me a picture of it in ''Garden Islands of the Great East.''

The story got pushed out of my mind by all the other stories I heard on that
trip. But when I got back home I found myself thinking about that Chinese junk,
and I tracked down Fairchild's book. From the first paragraph I was charmed:

''It was sometime in the eighties that Alfred Russel Wallace came to the college
in Kansas where my father was President and delivered a lecture on Natural
Selection. I was too young to understand what Wallace said on the platform, but
I listened intently to his conversation in our house the evening after the
lecture. I like to imagine that it was this meeting with the great naturalist
which started my longing to see, when I grew up, those islands of the Great East
- the Malay Archipelago.''

What charmed me was the idea of a boy too young to understand the lecture but
not too young to recognize the eminent man on the platform as his model, the
exemplar of what would become his own life work. By the time Fairchild went
plant-gathering in the Moluccas he was an old man himself - the jacket
photograph on ''Garden Islands of the Great East'' shows a white-haired
gentleman standing on the deck of the Cheng Ho. (His wife Marian, who also went
along, was the daughter of Alexander Graham Bell.) But if there is one work that
his book echoes in its warmth and its scholarly curiosity it is Alfred Russel
Wallace's mighty classic, ''The Malay Archipelago.'' Fairchild's expedition was
halted after six months by the outbreak of World War II in the East Indies, but
the plants that it collected are alive and well in Florida today. The book did
not say what became of the Cheng Ho, and, again, I put it out of my mind.

Three years later, stopping off in Papeete on a trip through the South Seas, I
noticed what appeared to be a derelict junk pulled up onto a beach at the far
end of the harbor. At that time Tahiti's capital was still a small town, its
only air service a seaplane every two weeks, and everyone who hung around the
waterfront - the town's main occupation - knew everyone else's business. I asked
if anybody knew about the junk. Everybody did. It was called the Cheng Ho, they
said, and it had led a succession of picturesque lives during World War II,
serving as, among other things, a radar ship and a naval officers' club in
Honolulu. After the war it had fallen into private hands and had been seen in
various parts of the South Pacific, finally coming to rest in Papeete.

I suspected that there was more to the story of the Cheng Ho than any one teller
of tales had put together, and for a while I thought of pursuing it and writing
it myself; someone said The Honolulu Star had an entire file on it. In the end,
however, I let the scent grow faint. Only one person kept it alive, and that was
Perelman. He loved the idea of the Cheng Ho. I think he wanted to believe that
someone like himself had restored it and was sailing it in perpetuity through
the Moluccas. A year or two before he died at the age of 75 he called to tell me
he had been corresponding with a shipbuilder in Hong Kong to see if he could get
a junk built that would take him back to the Banda Islands. Travelers'
destinations do not come much smaller or harder to reach than Banda Naira - a
minuscule Spice Island that Westerners have known since the early 1600's because
of its nutmeg. Perelman had gone there in 1949 solely because of what another
writer wrote about it. The writer was W. Somerset Maugham, the book was his
novel ''The Narrow Corner'':

''The bungalows on either side of the road had very high roofs, thatched and
pointed, and the roofs, jutting out, were supported by pillars, Doric and
Corinthian, so as to form broad verandahs. They had an air of ancient opulence,
but their whitewash was stained and worn, and the little gardens in front of
them were rank with tangled weeds. They came to shops and they all seemed to
sell the same sort of things, cottons, sarongs, and canned foods. There was no
animation. Some of the shops had not even an attendant, as though no purchaser
could possibly be expected. The few persons they passed, Malays or Chinese,
walked quickly as though they were afraid to awaken the echo. Now and then a
whiff of nutmeg assaulted the nostrils. . . . '' 'The place is dead,' said
Captain Nichols. 'We live on our memories. That is what gives the island its
character. In the old days, you know, there was so much traffic that sometimes
the harbor was full and vessels had to wait outside till the departure of a
fleet gave them a chance to enter. . . .

'' 'The old Dutch merchants were so rich here in the great days of the spice
trade, they didn't know what to do with their money. There was no cargo for the
ships to bring out and so they used to bring marble and use it for their houses.
And sometimes, in winter, they'd bring a cargo of nothing but ice. Funny, isn't
it? That was the greatest luxury they could have. Just think of bringing ice all
the way from Holland. It took six months, the journey.' ''

Perelman was so determined to see those houses that he caught a small boat from
Amboina that took him 120 miles through a heavy storm. His cabin, he wrote, was
''just enough for a malnourished orangutan to stand upright in'' and he was
sustained only by ''the sense of accomplishment that springs from lying half
dead in a greasy bunk adrift on an alien sea.'' But when he arrived he was no
less astonished than Maugham had been:

''We stumbled through a cluster of weedy streets lined with bombed-out dwellings
and arrived in due course at an awesome structure resembling a Southern
antebellum mansion. This, I was to discover, was one of 30 equally splendid
houses built by the Dutch perkeniers, or nutmeg planters, when Banda was at her
crest. To convey the magnificence of these establishments without lapsing into
the florid style of Ouida or Edgar Saltus is not easy. They all had lofty
Corinthian porticoes, reception halls and bedchambers without end, floors of
18th-century tile and Carrara marble, servants' quarters, and formal gardens;
but more remarkable, they were all available at a ceiling rent of a dollar and
fifty cents a month. If the foregoing sounds overly idyllic to anyone caught in
a housing shortage, it is well to remember that every rose has its thorn. Banda,
no matter what part of the world you live in, is approximately 13,000 miles away
and a very tough commute.''

What I admire about Perelman's account is not the style; it is the effort he
made to get there and to write about it. In itself the wealth of white colonials
in the East is not a new story; countless writers have taken us to the posh
homes and hill stations of the British raj. But Banda? Who knows about a
microscopic island so rich that its colonial masters were able to build marble
mansions and import ice from home? This I've got to see, Perelman thought,
reading Maugham, and he put himself through severe discomfort - as good travel
writers will - to see it. But it was Maugham who got there first. The debt is to
him.

Indebtedness is at the heart of travel literature. Writing well about a place
goes back at least to Herodotus, and the best practitioners usually know and
love what has gone before. Travel books, more than most books, get lent, raved
about, handed on. One of the writers Perelman most admired is Norman Lewis -
which is how I happen to own his book, ''A Dragon Apparent: Travels in
Indo-China.'' It was published in 1951, and I still remember the tranquillity of
the Indo-Chinese culture that Mr. Lewis evoked; his writer's sensibility and the
sensibility of the country were in tune - one of the best things that can happen
to a writer and to a country. Today a heavy sadness lies over the book; we have
killed Norman Lewis's country. Yet only 40 years ago this is how he introduced
it at the start of his journey:

''The population of the whole of Indo-China is concentrated in a few fertile
valleys and deltas, leaving the greater part of the country unpopulated,
jungle-covered, and looking much the same as China itself must have looked
several thousand years ago, before the deforestation began. The interior is
neither completely mapped, nor completely explored. It abounds with game:
elephants, tigers, deer and many kinds of cattle, which, having known only
hunters armed with cross-bows, may be closely approached and slaughtered with
the greatest ease from cars on the jungle tracks. Pacification of the Mois of
Central and Southern Vietnam - those bow and arrow tribes which in the early
part of the last century were believed to be the only human beings with tails -
was only undertaken in 1934. Certain tribes of the remote interior have not yet
submitted to French authority.''

Beyond the beauty of its language, ''A Dragon Apparent'' had the strength of
solid observation. Travel writers no less than journalists are prisoners of a
particular time and place, and their books are often the last portrait of an
intact culture before it was overtaken by events and changed forever. Another
such act of preservation on my shelf is a book by Evelyn Waugh called ''They
Were Still Dancing.'' Waugh went to Abyssinia in 1930 to cover the coronation of
Haile Selassie and found his reportorial efforts often bogged in what was still
a pastoral 19th-century kingdom. Anyone reading his book would have known what
the newsreels so brutally told the rest of us a few years later when the
Emperor's foot soldiers tried to resist Mussolini's invading tanks.

After the invasion Waugh recycled his research into a novel, the hilarious
''Scoop,'' wherein a London newspaper mistakenly sends its nature correspondent
to a similarly feudal African country to cover a similarly outlandish war.
Whether Waugh's nonfiction version is truer than his fiction version is almost
beside the point; some of the best travel writing turns up in novels and short
stories. Nobody has caught the underside of Los Angeles better than Raymond
Chandler in his private-eye novels like ''The Big Sleep,'' or the tackiness of
the American road better than Vladimir Nabokov in ''Lolita,'' or the
claustrophobia of British planters' wives in Malaya better than Maugham in his
short stories, or the languor of Italy better than Norman Douglas in ''South
Wind.''

''South Wind,'' which is set on an island easily recognizable as Capri, is the
only book by Norman Douglas that anyone but a travel nut remembers - the source
of his lasting fame. But I first met him as the author of highly distinctive
accounts of his journeys, mostly on foot, to corners of the Mediterranean so
plain and primitive - ''Old Calabria'' is typical - that to want to go there
takes a certain perversity. Douglas was a charter member of that breed of
British ''desert eccentrics'' who sought the solitude of harsh places and wrote
brilliant books about them. (Pertinent titles on my bookshelf: ''Arabia
Deserta'' by Charles M. Doughty, ''Seven Pillars of Wisdom'' by T. E. Lawrence,
''Riding to the Tigris'' by Freya Stark, ''The Last Nomad'' by Wilfred Thesiger
and ''The Letters of Gertrude Bell.'') The worlds that these restless hermits
wrote about were often interior worlds, tinged with mysticism and rumination,
and it could hardly have been otherwise. They had reached their destinations by
following trails that were not on any map; part of their genius was that they
were a little crazy. But no books remind us more powerfully that what raises
travel writing to literature is not what the writer brings to a place, but what
a place brings out of the writer. Probably the best travel book written by an
American is Thoreau's ''Walden,'' though the hermit of Concord hardly got beyond
the town limits.

My first Norman Douglas book remains vivid in my memory because it is connected
with the trip that started my travel habit. The place was North Africa, the
period World War II. I was a private in the Army, not long sprung from a
sheltered boyhood. I had crossed the Atlantic on a troopship and had disembarked
in Casablanca late at night. The next morning I awoke to a landscape so colorful
in so many ways that I have been drawn to Islamic places - Baghdad and Damascus,
Omdurman and Timbuktu - ever since. My fellow G.I.'s and I were put on a train
that consisted of decrepit wooden boxcars called ''forty-and-eights,'' so named
because they had been used by the French army in World War I to transport forty
men or eight horses. Proof of that historical fact was still stenciled on the
side of every car: ''QUARANTE HOMMES OU HUIT CHEVAUX.''

For six days I sat in the open door of that crowded train with my legs hanging
out over Morocco, Algeria and Tunisia, not wanting the trip to end. Everything
was so new, so unrelated to anything I had encountered in my Protestant
upbringing and my Ivy League education. Who were these exotic Arabs and Berbers?
How did these countries get to look this way, half Islamic, half French
provincial? What was their history? I wanted to know, but there were no books to
tell me, even when I was later stationed at a base not far from Algiers and
could visit its bookstores. I assumed that nobody had written any such books in
English. English-speaking people thought the civilized world stopped in Europe;
I certainly did.

Then, one day, a package came in the mail from my mother. It was ''Fountains in
the Sand'' by Norman Douglas. A British writer had actually walked around
Tunisia and written a book about it. Not only that; he had done it in 1912. What
kind of man would walk around Tunisia in 1912? Just from the chapter titles -
''By the Qued Baiesh,'' ''Stones of Gafsa,'' ''The Gardens of Nefta'' - I knew
that the book would answer my need for a predecessor in this unknown land,
someone who could validate the excitements I was feeling myself, and it did. I
was especially grateful for the exactness of its detail. Wherever Norman Douglas
went, I felt one thing for sure: he had been there.

This is the crucial gift that all good travel writers bestow -the sense that
they were there. As I look at all the travel books that I have acquired since
that first debarking in Casablanca, I realize that every one of those authors
provided that gift, even if, as was often the case, they were not primarily
travel writers. Many of the books are by people who were more famous for other
accomplishments (''My African Journey'' by the Rt. Hon. Winston Spencer
Churchill, M.P., written in 1908) or for other kinds of writing: ''Innocents
Abroad'' by Mark Twain; ''The Stones of Florence'' by Mary McCarthy; ''In
Morocco'' by Edith Wharton; ''Etruscan Places'' by D. H. Lawrence; ''In the
South Seas: Being an Account of Experiences and Observations in the Marquesas,
Paumotus and Gilbert Islands'' by Robert Louis Stevenson. Many of the books are
by adventurous women - from ''A Thousand Miles Up the Nile'' by Amelia R.
Edwards, written in 1877, to ''Where Mountains Roar: A Personal Report From the
Sinai and Negev Desert'' by Lesley Hazleton, written more than a century later.

Some are journeys to dead civilizations (''Pleasure of Ruins'' by Rose
Macaulay). Some are journeys between points never previously linked: ''From the
Cape to Cairo: The First Traverse of Africa From South to North'' by Ewart S.
Grogan and Arthur H. Sharp (1900). Some are memoirs of an earlier life (''Peking
Story: The Last Days of Old China'' by David Kidd). Some are rich personal
odysseys (''East of Home'' by Santha Rama Rau, ''In Patagonia'' by Bruce
Chatwin). Some are vivid ethnographic portraits (''Island of Bali'' by Miguel
Covarrubias). Some are explorers' accounts of their own exhilarating trips
(''Kon-Tiki'' by Thor Heyerdahl). Some are accounts of earlier explorers' trips
- a genre raised to perfection by Alan Moorehead, especially in ''The White
Nile,'' a book that I reread with shameless admiration. Moorehead's feat is not
only to make us feel that we are with Burton, Speke, Baker and the other doughty
Victorians who sought the source of the Nile, but that we are with him as he
follows the steps of those explorers in the Sudan, Uganda, Zanzibar and Kenya.

It's all travel writing, whatever shape it takes; the form is infinitely
welcoming, renewing itself every year with writers who bring fresh powers of
observation to the sites they visit, making us see those places as we have never
seen them before. Today some of the best of it originates as magazine
journalism, especially in Granta and The New Yorker, and has considerable
reportorial importance; all travel writers, even Herodotus, even Thoreau, are
reporters before they are anything else.

This essay is adapted from the introduction to a collection of lectures by
distinguished authors, to be published next year as ''The Art and Craft of
Travel Writing.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing (pg. 19)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              226 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 26, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

PREPARING FOR THE WORST;
The Stuff Wars Are Made Of

SECTION: Section 4; Page 1, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1530 words


In the last week the United States crossed a threshold in confronting Iraq over
its Aug. 2 invasion of Kuwait. It became more than a nation responding firmly to
an international crisis; in its collective consciousness and in cold fact, it
began preparing for war.

The signs were numerous. In characterizing the Americans and other foreigners
held by Iraq as hostages, President Bush in effect accused President Saddam
Hussein of direct hostile action against the United States. While declaring
peaceful and defensive intentions, Mr. Bush repeatedly evoked memories of
America and its allies justly confronting threats in the past as he argued for
resolve now.

The American and foreign military buildup in Saudi Arabia and the Persian Gulf
hit full stride, and Mr. Bush called up the reserves, the first time they have
been called since the Vietnam war.

The costs of this effort, many billions of dollars even without the mammoth
expenditures that would be required in a war, will weigh heavily on a Federal
Treasury already battered by seemingly uncontainable deficits and on a national
economy tilted toward recession. The Dow Jones industrial average lost nearly
4.5 percent of its value in one week as investors feared the worst.

The charts and pictures on this page and on page 3 illustrate the magnitude and
complexity of the mobilization, and give some hint of its costs. Experts caution
that even the best cost estimates are speculative, in large part a reflection of
the uncertainty of the days, weeks and months ahead.

ALIGNED AGAINST IRAQ

The United States has been joined in the operation against Iraq by many counries
from the West, Middle East and Asia. Full data on troop strength, equipment and
deployments have not been released but many details are known. Iraq has about
170,000 troops in Kuwait and on the border with Saudi Arabia, of a force that
has been estimated as high as 1 million but is probably less. Iraq also has 500
planes and 5,500 tanks but a weak navy.)

Country:

Troops:

Ships:

Warplanes:

Country: U.S.

Troops: More than 110,000 committed to region includiung 40,000 now in Saudi
Arabia, 35,000 on ships

Ships: About 45 warships, including 4 aircraft carriers, 1 battleship, 2
hospital ships and 2 submarines

Warplanes: At least 300 on ships, 180 in Saudi Arabia

Country: SAUDI ARABIA

Troops: Troops: 38,000, National Guard: 56,000, Navy: 7,200, Air Force: 16,500

Ships: 8 warships

Warplanes: 180; 36 flown from Kuwait

Country: AUSTRALIA

Ships: 2 warships

Country: BANGLADESH

Troops: 5,000 likely

Country: BELGIUM

Ships: 2 mine hunters, 1 supply ship

Country: BRITAIN

Ships: 4 warships, 3 minesweepers

Warplanes: 36 in three countries

Country: CANADA

Ships: 3 ships

Country: EGYPT

Troops: 5,000

Country: FRANCE

Troops: 8,500*

Ships: 4 warships, 1 aircraft carrier, 2 support ships

Country: GREECE

Ships: warships promised

Country: GULF STATES

Troops: 10,000

Country: ITALY

Ships: 2 frigates

Country: MOROCCO

Troops: 1,000

Country: NETHERLANDS

Ships: 2 frigates

Country: PAKISTAN

Troops: 5,000

Country: SOVIET UNION

Ships: 2 warships

Country: SPAIN

Ships: 3 ships

Country: SYRIA

Troops: 1,200

Country: TURKEY

Troops: 70,000 on border

Country: WEST GERMANY (deployed to eastern Mediterranean)

Ships: 3 minehunters, 2 minesweepers, 1 supply ship $

*Includes 3,500 troops on 4 warships, plus troops from Djibouti and the Indian
Ocean.

(Sources: Reuters; Associated Press; Defense Department; Center for Defense
Information.)

MOVING MOUNTAINS

The American military's principal action in the Persian Gulf crisis so far has
been transporting thousands of troops and huge amounts of materiel from many
points in the United States and elsewhere. Some highlights:

By rail.  The Association of American Railroads says that rail companies hired
by the Pentagon have transported to ports more than 2,000 flatbed and boxcar
loads of equipment, including everything from M-1 tanks to ammunition.

By truck.  The American Trucking Association said the Pentagon could call on
thousands of truckers nationwide. For example, Landstar System Inc. of Stamford,
Conn., ran 327 truckloads from Fort Campbell, Ky., to port at Jacksonville,
Fla., 780 miles away. Cost to the Pentagon: from $1.05 to $1.30 a mile per
truckload.

By sea.  The Military Sealift Command says that as of late last week it cost $93
million to move equipment by sea. Much of the 447,000 short tons was sent on
eight fast sealift ships, which carried the equivalent of enough fully loaded
semi-trailer trucks parked side by side to cover 76 football fields, including
end zones.

Forty cargo ships from the 96-ship Ready Reserve Force have been activated, and
three commercial cargo ships have been chartered so far.

By air.  The Center for Defense Information says 286 military transport aircraft
are being used: 174 C-141's, each capable of carrying 200 troops and 34 tons of
equipment; 32 C-130's and 80 C-5's. Both the C-130 and the C-5 can carry 340
troops and 130 tons of equipment.

Thirty-eight commercial aircraft also are being used.

COSTS OF DEPLOYMENT: AN EDUCATED GUESS

The Pentagon on Aug. 15 gave a preliminary estimate of $1.2 billion for the cost
of Operation Desert Shield through Sept. 30. But that did not take into account
subsequent developments like the call-up of reserves, and in any case military
officials for strategic reasons are reluctant to provide many specifics about
deployments. The estimates here were developed by the Center for Defense
Information, an independent organization of retired senior officers that
analyzes military policy. The number show how much it might cost, above and
beyond normal military operations, to keep 100,000 American troopsin Saudi
Arabia with other forces aboard ships in the region. There is no way to
calculate the costs should war break out, the center says.

Military units                                                Cost per day
                                                             (in millions)

Navy

Independence carrier battle group                                      1.7
Eisenhower carrier battle group                                        1.7
Saratoga/Wisconsin battle force                                        2.0
Two hospital ships                                                     0.2
Sealift                                                                3.8
Joint Task Force, Middle East                                         $0.5

Marine Corps

2 Marine Amphibious Ready Groups (5,000 marines)                      $0.5
Marine Expeditionary Force (45,000 marines)                            4.5

Army

50,000 troops                                                         $4.0

Air Force

245 tactical combat aircraft                                          $1.6
5 AWACS                                                                0.1
40 aerial refueling aircraft                                           0.9
Airlift operations                                                     6.3

Reserve/Guard forces

50,000                                                                $4.2

TOTALS                                                               $31.9


Note: Estimates assume a cost of oil of $31 a barrel.

(Source: Center for Defense Information)

CARE AND FEEDING OF THE TROOPS

The Department of Defense has allocated $600 million for food, clothing and
medical supplies for troops involved in Operation Desert Shield in Saudi Arabia.
About $400 million is for food, $25 million for medical supplies and the rest
for clothing. Here are examples of the quantities and costs of such supplies as
of Wednesday.

Item                                                    Quantity           Cost

Medical >

Suncreen lotion                                  150,000 bottles       $219,000
Lip balm                                   600 boxes, a100 tubes         99,000
Foot powder                                        230,000 tubes         80,000
Chigger repellent                                    40,000 cans         76,400

Food

Hamburger                                       2,000,000 pounds     $2,000,000
Fresh fruits & vegetables                           2,000 pounds            N/A

Clothing and protective gear

Chemical protection suits                                168,000    $68.15 each
Goggles                                                 100,000+      3.85 each
Sewing kits                                             100,000+      $3-5 each


(Source: Defense Personnel Support Center)

OIL'S POWER OVER THE ECONOMY

The economic consequences of the gulf crisis are uncertain to say the least, but
econometric models can show some likely effects of a specific disruption like a
sharp rise in the price of oil. These figures compare forecasts of United States
economic performance by DRI/McGraw Hill, a forecasting firm. The first, issued
on Aug. 2, before Iraq invaded Kuwait, assumed that the price of oil would not
go above $22 a barrel. The second, issued after the invasion, forecasts what
might happen if oil purchased on contract goes as high as $27 a barrel. Contract
oil generally costs less than oil bought on the spot market, where it has risen
above $30 a barrel.
 Growth in real Gross National Product       1990      1991      1992
Forecast before Aug. 2                       1.1%      1.6%      2.5%
Current forecast                              1.0       0.6       2.5

Change in Consumer Price Index               1990      1991      1992
Forecast before Aug. 2                       4.9%      4.3%      4.2%
Current forecast                              5.2       4.8       3.8

Change in industrial production              1990      1991      1992
Forecast before Aug. 2                       1.2%      1.6%      2.6%
Current forecast                             1.0%      0.1%      2.8%

Federal budget deficit                       1990      1991      1992      1993
In billions of dollars (unified budget basis,
Forecast before Aug. 2                     $225.5    $216.1    $197.7    $167.2
Current forecast                           $225.4    $234.4    $225.0    $185.1

Targets under Gramm-Rudman                   $100        64        28         0
deficit reduction act.


(Sources: DRI/McGraw Hill; Joint Economic Committee)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: soldier with full pack (Pool photo via Reuters) (pg. 1);
armored vehicles bound for the Middle East await loading at a port in Georgia.
(Les Stone/Sygma); Troops sent to the Middle East are equipped to deal with
chemical warfare. If the area is delcared an imminent danger zone, each member
of the armed forces will receive an extra $110 a month; family separation pay of
$60 a month begins after 30 days. (Pool photo via Associated Press); map: Saudia
Arabia, Kuwait and Iraq indicating possible targets and opportunities (Source:
Center for Defense Information) (pg. 3)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              227 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 27, 1990, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Cambodian Rebels Say They Repelled Army

BYLINE: By The Associated Press

SECTION: Section A; Page 7, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 397 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Aug. 26


A Cambodian guerrilla group said today that it had repelled an offensive by that
country's Communist Government.

Troops backed by multiple rocket launchers and Soviet-made T-54 tanks struck
guerrilla defense lines in western Cambodia early Saturday, Ok Serei Sopheak, a
spokesman for the Khmer People's National Liberation Front, said in a statement.

''The front lines remain stable but still tense,'' the statement said. Ok Serei
Sopheak has generally proved to be reliable in the past.

The liberation front, a non-Communist group led by former Prime Minister Son
Sann, is one of three guerrilla organizations fighting the Government that
Vietnam installed after invading Cambodia in December 1978.

The statement said the guerrillas had beaten back troops who attacked near
Sisophon, a strategic crossroads town in Battambang province about 30 miles east
of the Thai border.

''After two hours, enemy forces retreated without any success,'' the guerrillas'
statement said. ''We maintain all our positions in the south.''

Government troops were also said to have been driven off after attacks near Svay
Chek, 15 miles north of Sisophon, and Ta Vong, 17 miles southeast of Thmar Puok,
a district capital in western Cambodia.

Peace negotiations between the Government and the three-part guerrilla coalition
have been stalled by a dispute over who should govern Cambodia in the period
leading up to an election.

Khmer Rouge and Sihanouk

The other rebel groups are the non-Communist followers of Prince Norodom
Sihanouk and the Khmer Rouge, a Communist group that ruled Cambodia from 1975
until the Vietnamese invasion and now has the most powerful insurgent army. More
than one million people were killed during the rule of Pol Pot, the Khmer Rouge
leader.

The Vietnamese Foreign Minister, Nguyen Co Thach, said in an interview broadcast
Saturday by official Hanoi radio that Cambodia was capable of holding free
elections.

He said that a dissolution of the Vietnamese-installed Government before an
election would only bring chaos and help the Khmer Rouge restore a brutal
regime.

''The general elections in Nicaragua, all organized by the existing
administrations under the supervision of the United Nations and foreign
countries, were recognized by the world as truly free, democratic and fair,'' he
said. ''Obviously, the same thing can be done in Cambodia.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              228 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 27, 1990, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Flags Fly Over South For Troops

BYLINE: By RONALD SMOTHERS, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1028 words

DATELINE: ATLANTA, Aug. 26


As the news swept through this area last week that military convoys were moving
along the Interstates carrying soldiers bound for the Middle East, clutches of
people waving flags seemed to appear magically along the highway overpasses to
salute them.

On Monday, a local television station and an elementary school will begin a
fund-raising drive for the United Service Organizations, the group that aids
soldiers like those on the convoys.

Similar outpourings seem to be going on all over the South. On Highway 24
between Jacksonville, N.C., and the port of Morehead City, a gigantic yellow
ribbon was tied around a tree in front of a church, and children held a homemade
sign with a message for the marines from nearby Camp Lejeune: ''Hurry Home.''

The troops do not know when they will be home, and some of those going overseas
are making big decisions about what to postpone, and what to do now: Some
communities report large increases in the number of marriage licenses taken out.


Fair's Gaiety Dampened

In Hopkinsville, Ky., near Fort Campbell, home of the 101st Airborne Division,
the plan to send that unit to the Middle East hit hard at the opening of the
Christian County Fair.

''It was just before the truck and tractor pulls,'' said Elwanda Kennedy, the
County Clerk. ''Before the pulling ever started, we had three minutes of silent
prayer for our boys headed overseas. I've never seen that done before.''

Such expressions are hardly unusual in a region that has a large share of
military bases and military payrolls. But what is unusual and ''just a humbling
experience,'' Mrs. Kennedy said, was the speed and the spontaneousness of the
patriotic expressions.

''It caught us all by surprise,'' said Mary Lou Austin, executive director of
the Georgia chapter of the U.S.O. The chapter had more than 100 volunteers last
week serving coffee, soft drinks and hospitality to more than 3,500 soldiers who
passed through.

The Calls Flood In

In five days, the organization collected $3,000 in cash donations and more than
$7,000 in goods from companies like Coca-Cola. Calls are flooding in from
television stations and elementary schools that want to give out yellow ribbons
and flag decals in exchange for donations for the U.S.O.

Though the expressions were enthusiastic, they lacked the fevered or impassioned
tone of a country on a war footing. For some who remembered the Vietnam era, the
low-keyed calm of the expressions was most important.

David Mathews, a 45-year-old Air Force veteran, recalled the ''disheartened,
beat and dirty'' faces of soldiers he had helped fly out of battlefields in
Southeast Asia more than 20 years ago. The other day, as he stood on an overpass
over Interstate 285 just outside Atlanta waving a flag to the military convoy,
he contrasted that memory with the smiling, waving soldier he saw driving a
jeep.

''There is no flag burning going on here, just flag waving,'' he said. ''If I
could just lock that expression I saw on all their faces, that would make me
happy.''

Headed for the Docks

The convoys passing through the Atlanta area were large and small vehicles of
the 101st Airborne Division. About 400 of them daily have come through the area,
said Lieut. Col. Bob Skinner, chief of media relations for Forces Command at
Fort McPherson in Atlanta.

Besides the groups gathering on the overpasses, said Colonel Skinner, up to 100
people daily have gathered at the entrance to Fort Gillem, just outside the
city, where most of the vehicles are headed for short layovers on the way to the
docks and military ships of Jacksonville, Fla.

Not everyone in the crowd was sure of why they should be expressing support.
Christi Peters, 19, of Cobb County stood waving a flag on an overpass and said
she had not followed news reports of the deployment closely. ''We're going to
help,'' she said, ''but I'm just not sure who we are going to help.''

'Getting Married Is Scary'

In other parts of the region, the impending deployment of troops meant a run on
marriage licenses, and in one case a record in the number of licenses issued in
a single day. In Hinesville, Ga., the location of Fort Stewart and the 24th
Infantry Division, Judge Nancy Aspinwall of Probate Court said that on Thursday
she issued 23 licenses, as against a daily average of 2.4 licenses a day.

''That's a record for us,'' said Judge Aspinwall. ''I performed seven weddings
today, and they were all military personnel. I feel a lot of compassion for
these young couples. Getting married is a scary thing anyway, and under these
circumstances it's even more scary.''

One couple, who said they were in the military, said they had planned a November
wedding, but with their likely departure for the Middle East soon, they decided
not to wait.

''Now I can go over there happy and not worry about anything and my motivation
will be high,'' said the groom, a tank driver in the 24th who would not give his
name.

A Request for Water

Wesley Bennefield, the manager of the K Mart in Hinesville, has been working
around the clock to supply Fort Stewart troops with a host of last-minute
supplies ranging from camp stoves to compasses, bottled water to sun lotion. He
said that the store's employees had been putting in extra hours ferrying
material from warehouses to docks in Savannah for shipment overseas. The most
challenging order from the military so far, said Mr. Bennefield, was 174,000
gallons of bottled water. It took a couple of days, he said, but with the help
of the company's Atlanta warehouse he filled the order.

''We're in this 100 percent,'' said Mr. Bennefield, a 39-year-old Vietnam
veteran. ''The whole store and the whole company is involved.''

That was the case as well several hundred miles away in Jacksonsville, N.C.,
near Camp Lejeune and Morehead City, where ships of the Military Sealift Command
were loading equipment bound for the Middle East. Lon Hanford, manager of a
local Rose's Department Store, said the store had begun handing out yellow
ribbons and small American flags to customers.

''People are tying the ribbons on their car antennas, on trees and everywhere,''
he said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Supporters waving from a highway overpass near Atlanta to a
convoy of soldiers bound for the Middle East. (Alan S. Weiner/The New York
Times)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              229 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 27, 1990, Monday, Late Edition - Final

ESSAY;
Return of the Doves

BYLINE: By William Safire

SECTION: Section A; Page 17, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 748 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


Longtime doves of the left, joined by anti-Israelites of the far right - plus
sober second thinkers who want to give pacifism a chance -have combined forces
to try to stop the worldwide momentum aimed at driving Saddam Hussein from
power.

You could see the not-so-fast crowd out in strength in the Sunday papers and on
the talk shows. ABC's Sam Donaldson, fresh from a star turn at the desert front,
suggested on the Brinkley show that those bellicose types calling for a strike
at the dictator's nuclear plants were personal cowards unless they volunteered
to do it themselves.

The intellectual guru was Zbigniew Brzezinski, arguing for a long-term
''squeeze'' to induce Iraq to disgorge Kuwait. He posits that time is on our
side - as if a blockade would not be run; as if television interviews with
starving hostages would not squeeze us to supply all Iraqi food needs; as if the
world's nations united in crisis would not soon separate during a long siege.

Zbig out-certituded Henry Kissinger, who could not bring himself to define our
strategic purpose as ending Saddam Hussein's threat to the world. Instead, Henry
spoke with the caution of a Secretary of State (a position apparently now
unfilled); he found much to praise in a New York Times editorial yesterday that
offered a formula for a negotiated settlement even while Mr. Hussein continues
to rape Kuwait and seizes ever more Western hostages.

The Times is an institution whose style dictates I loyally obey. (Notice the
required ''Mr. Hussein'' above; until our stylebook conforms to the general
usage of ''Saddam,'' which avoids confusion with the little Hussein, I will
retaliate by conferring an honorific on ''Mr. Hitler.'') But editorial-page
readiness to split the difference with organized evil I am here to help offset.

It is one thing for Kurt Waldheim to treat with the hostage-taker - symbols of
Nazism then and now flock together - but it is hardly helpful, with Mr.
Hussein's gun to our heads, to begin offering a way-out way out.

The Times's suggested capitulation to aggression includes (1) adjudication of
Iraq's claims on Kuwait by the World Court, which would surely be amended to an
Arab League court, which would hand over half the country; (2) the overturn of
the present Emir in a replay of JFK's early Vietnam mistake; (3) a world embargo
on arms to Iraq, sure to be undermined in a few months, and (4) self-destruction
of poison-gas stocks and inspection of nuclear facilities, a nice idea that
would be the first sacrificed in any negotiation.

In return for these so-called concessions, the dithering deal calls for a
promise from Syria and Iran not to attack the new regional superpower, freeing
Mr. Hussein to develop his nuclear missiles in secret and to choose his next
target undistracted.

Before negotiating with ourselves to see who can come up with the sweetest deal
for the aggressor and hostage-taker, we should re-examine our purposes:

The aim of doves is to limit our involvement to a U.N. force to defend Saudi
Arabia. They want no risky rollback of Kuwait, whose deposed Government they
only recently recognized as a corrupt dictatorship unworthy of collective
defense. Stern message to aggressor: Only one conquest at a time.

The U.N. purpose is both to defend the Saudis and to nullify the conquest of
Kuwait. This puts at risk thousands of hostages trapped but not yet rounded up,
and accepts war as a possibility.

The goal of the realists is to rid the world of the danger of a proven
war-starter before he takes more hostages next week and before he gets nuclear
missiles in four years. This goal - held privately by almost all the world's
leaders, but too impolitic to state publicly - requires the use of overwhelming
force quickly.

Which purpose will prevail? Mr. Hussein's defeat will cost lives now; his
undishonored survival will insure a holocaust of Americans later. He has wasted
a million lives in one war, introduced poison gas to the repression of dissent
and turned mass hostage-taking into a conventional weapon; the new Mr. Hitler's
appetite will not be assuaged by appeasement now.

If we slip into a period of ''phony war,'' our resolution will dissolve in the
acid commentary of talk shows. We can hope that Mr. Bush and Arab leaders seize
the moment, but the man realists count on at this moment is in Baghdad. His
arrogance and foolish slyness can provide the spark to ignite his own
destruction; Mr. Hussein may bring hawks and doves together.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              230 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 27, 1990, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Will America Stand A Stalemate in Iraq?

BYLINE: By John Mueller; John Mueller is professor of political science at the
University of Rochester.

SECTION: Section A; Page 17, Column 2; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 701 words

DATELINE: ROCHESTER, N.Y.


As the U.S. moves closer to military confrontation in the Middle East, people
are beginning to wonder how long the American public will support the
enterprise. Historical experience suggests a few answers.

Is time on President Bush's side? In the absence of war, and if the price of
continuing the confrontation is kept bearable, the public could support an
American military presence almost indefinitely. After all, we have patiently
supported the stationing of tens of thousands of troops in South Korea for
nearly four decades, despite continuing tensions and an occasional American
casualty.

Moreover, the U.S. had thousands of military advisers in Vietnam for years
before the big buildup in 1965. Their presence provoked little outcry, even
though some were killed while aiding South Vietnamese troops.

If war somehow breaks out in the Middle East, the experience from the Korean and
the Vietnam wars suggests there will be substantial popular support at first -
the ''rally round the flag'' phenomenon. But this will be followed by declining
support as American casualties mount.

In both Korea and Vietnam, support dropped fast at first, slower later: a
decline of some 15 percentage points in the polls when casualties rose from
1,000 to 10,000, and another 15 points when they soared from 10,000 to 100,000.
The trend of popular support for the two wars was remarkably similar. This
belies the notion that television and the protest movement - both virtually
absent during the Korean War - had a special impact on public opinion during the
Vietnam War.

Popular support for a Middle East war is likely to differ from these cases not
so much on the cost side as on the benefit side. Despite their costs, the wars
in Vietnam and Korea were seen to be necessary by many people. This was not
because those countries had much intrinsic appeal to Americans (any more than
Kuwait or Saudi Arabia do), but because the wars were part of a broad effort to
deal with expansionary Communism, which seemed to threaten the U.S.

Saddam Hussein may well be out to dominate much of the Middle East. But the
public is unlikely to be persuaded that the desperate thug in backward Baghdad
is intent on world domination. Nor is a long war over ''the free flow of oil at
tolerable prices,'' as Mr. Bush has said, likely to inspire lasting dedication
and sacrifice.

Thus, Mr. Bush can reasonably count on support for watchful waiting in the
deserts of Saudi Arabia. And there may well be backing for a war that is quick,
cheap and successful, in the fashion of Grenada or Panama. But enthusiasm for a
long, frustrating war is likely to deteriorate even faster than in the cases of
Korea and Vietnam.

As for the impact on public opinion of the western nationals held hostage by
Iraq, much depends on how President Bush handles the issue. So far, he has been
fairly restrained. He cannot, like Jimmy Carter, allow himself to become trapped
and immobilized by the issue, putting his own prestige and that of the country
at stake. If he does, he will give a powerful weapon to the Iraqi regime,
encourage even more hostage-taking and see his own popular support plummet.

It should not be assumed that this is an issue over which the American public is
utterly irrational. When, for example, Americans were killed by suicidal
terrorists in Lebanon, there were many calls for retaliation. But President
Reagan's sensible observation that there were no real targets to hit was
generally held to be persuasive, as was his rationale for his subsequent
withdrawal.

Later, the public had no trouble grasping the wisdom of seeking to improve
relations with the much-villified Iranian regime. But Mr. Reagan's willingness
to go against his own sound policy by exchanging weapons for hostages was widely
disparaged for the simple, elemental reason that this would only encourage more
hostage-taking.

Polls suggest that the people may not be as well informed or as closely analytic
as some pundits might like. But it also is clear that Americans are neither
fools nor erratic bundles of emotion. They can spot, and understand, common
sense when it is offered to them, even when some of the consequences may be
unpleasant.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              231 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 28, 1990, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

CONFRONTATION IN THE GULF;
Bush Facing Scrutiny by Congress On His Policy in the Persian Gulf

BYLINE: By R. W. APPLE Jr., Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1281 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 27


After 25 days of remarkably clear sailing, perhaps unparalleled in a foreign
policy crisis in the last quarter-century, President Bush is about to face
closer scrutiny from Congress for his policy in the Middle East.

Many members of Congress, though scattered across the country and the world on
vacations or other trips, have intently followed the events in the Persian Gulf.
So far, most have approved of most that Mr. Bush has said and done, but they do
not see clearly where the United States goes from here.

Few are openly critical, many are apprehensive, some are fearful.

''This is the easy time for the President,'' said Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato of
New York, a conservative Republican. ''He's done terrific so far, rallying the
world behind his policy, responding vigorously to aggression. But now the real
test starts. A lot of people in Congress are going to start to ask pointed
questions.''

Representative Dante B. Fascell, the Florida Democrat who heads the House
Foreign Affairs Committee, said that ''the time has come to deepen and broaden
the national dialogue on steps yet to be taken.''

The questioning may begin in earnest Tuesday, when Mr. Bush, again interrupting
his vacation in Kennebunkport, Me., returns to Washington to meet at the White
House with the Congressional leadership and then at the Old Executive Office
Building with senators and representatives from committees concerned with
foreign and military policy.

At first, the inquiries are likely to be mild, and the Administration can count
on stalwarts like Senator Sam Nunn, the Georgia Democrat who heads the Senate
Armed Services Committee, to mute whatever doubts they have. Visiting American
troops in Saudi Arabia today, the influential Mr. Nunn was supportive, telling a
small group of marines, ''This is the world against Saddam Hussein.''

Some of the Questions

From comments made already, and all but drowned out by the chorus of praise for
Mr. Bush, it is possible to discern some of the things on the minds of the
lawmakers: Who's paying for this? What's the long-term goal? What about the
hostages?

A more aggressive American policy, involving an attack on Iraqi military or
Governmental installations, would certainly arouse passions on Capitol Hill.
Representative Les Aspin, the Wisconsin Democrat who heads the House Armed
Services Committee, remarked that the President does not now have ''the
political mandate to conduct a military attack on objectives inside Kuwait or
inside Iraq.''

But even without such a catalyst, many foresee much more intense Congressional
scrutiny when the current recess ends and Congress as a whole returns to
Washington on Sept. 5.

A prominent Republican Representative, speaking on condition that he not be
identified, said that time was the enemy of the President's policy, and that
''as the Iraqis work on the hostage families and whip up emotions in this
country, George Bush is going to feel plenty of heat from people on the Hill.''

Hoping to delay that as long as possible, Mr. Bush has been reluctant to talk
very much about the fate of the Americans trapped in Iraq and Kuwait. His aides
say that anything the President might say would inflame the situation.

On television on Sunday, Senator Bob Kerrey, a Nebraska Democrat who won the
Medal of Honor during the Vietnam War, inquired into a potential weak spot,
saying that he could not support a policy based on the idea that ''we're going
to go there and have our young people die so that we can have cheap oil here at
home.''

Anticipating that criticism, Administration officials in recent days have been
emphasizing the need to set right a political wrong - Iraq's occupation of
Kuwait - rather than the need to avoid an economic peril: the loss of the
Arabian peninsula's vast oil reserves, which Mr. Bush made much of in a speech
in Houston two weeks ago.

Concern About Objectives

Then there is the question of objectives. Some members of Congress, mainly
conservatives, have expressed concern about the President's pledge to reinstate
the Emir of Kuwait, whom they regard as an antidemocratic feudal oligarch, as
the ruler of a little sheikdom.

Others, led by Mr. Aspin, argue not that the President has set dubious goals but
that he has failed to aim far enough. The Wisconsin Democrat said the President
should state a clear goal: ''Saddam Hussein has got to go, or his army has got
to go.'' Otherwise, he said, the United States will be faced with the problem of
Baghdad more or less permanently in a position to threaten Saudi Arabia and
influence its oil prices.

''I'm afraid we're in a no-win situation,'' Mr. D'Amato said in a telephone
interview from Cairo. ''We say the embargo will eventually force Saddam to pull
back because he won't be able to feed his people. But if there is famine, that
will create a moral dilemma for us. Can you imagine the TV pictures of starving
kids?

''That will inevitably force a lifting of the blockade on food.''

Sen. Daniel Patrick Moynihan, Democrat of New York, argues that Congress has
been quiescent at least partly because it approves of handling the problem
through the United Nations, ''without the surreptitiousness shown by the White
House in many past crises.'' It is therefore willing, he said, to back off from
any intensive examination of what the White House does.

But most people on Capitol Hill see little disposition in Congress to abandon
the role in making foreign policy that it has hacked out for itself in a series
of struggles with the Executive Branch since the Vietnam War.

Instead, they see a Presidential policy that has so far won wide support - in
Congress and among foreign governments - but that will almost certainly lose
some of that support as time goes by. By moving to reassure Congress through
Tuesday's large-scale briefing, the first of its kind since the crisis began,
Mr. Bush is trying to solidify his support while his political leverage is
greatest.

Nunn Wants More Arabs

IN SAUDI ARABIA, Aug. 27 (Special to The New York Times) - Senator Nunn said
today that there was not enough Arab participation in the international force
here and that a greater effort had to be made to bring Arab troops to Saudi
Arabia.

Mr. Nunn said he would bring up the matter with President Hosni Mubarak of
Egypt. Arab forces are assigned in the north, but in relatively small numbers.
Egypt's forces here are believed to number several thousand.

Senator Nunn was part of the first Congressional group to visit here. Other
members of the group were the Senate minority leader, Bob Dole of Kansas;
Senator John W. Warner of Virginia, the ranking Republican member of the Armed
Services Committee; Senator Jake Garn, a Utah Republican; Senator D'Amato;
Senator Don Nickles, Republican of Oklahoma; Senator Steve Symms, Republican of
Idaho, and Senator Connie Mack, Republican of Florida.

The Senators mingled with Marine and Army troops, taking down phone numbers to
call wives and friends back home. Under the rules imposed by the Pentagon on
reporters here, the location cannot be discloed.

The four-hour visit here was one stop in a six-nation trip, which includes
visits to Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union. Before speaking to reporters, the
Senators were briefed by the troops' commander, Gen. Norman Schwarzkopf, the
head of the Central Command, who is eager to maintain Congressional support for
the mission.

Senator Nunn said the United States had assembled a sufficent force to deter an
Iraqi attack.

''An Iraqi attack on Saudi Arabia would be national suicide,'' Mr. Nunn said.
''You cannot say that the man won't do it. But if he is logical he won't do
it.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: An American field medical vehicle from a unit of the 82d
Airborne Division passing a herd of camels yesterday in the Saudi desert.
(Associated Press) (pg. A12)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              232 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 28, 1990, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

U.N. Plan on Cambodia Reported

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 307 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, Aug. 27


After eight months of negotiations, the five permanent members of the Security
Council agreed today on a proposal for a comprehensive political settlement to
end the Cambodian civil war, diplomats said.

The plan would give the United Nations an unprecedented role in the
administration of Cambodia, which has been buffeted by political upheaval and
violence since the 1960's.

But for the fighting to stop, the proposals must be accepted by the Vietnam
-backed Government of Prime Minister Hun Sen and the three groups that are
seeking his ouster: the Communist Khmer Rouge, the non-Communist People's
National Liberation Front led by former Prime Minister Son Sann and the faction
led by Prince Norodom Sihanouk. The four groups are to meet in Jakarta,
Indonesia, in September.

Under the plan, the United Nations would eventually control five key ministries
- Defense, Foreign Affairs, Finance, Public Security and Information. It would
also verify a cease-fire, supervise disarmament, organize elections and insure
that all Vietnamese forces withdraw from Cambodia. The Vietnamese invaded
Cambodia in late 1978, ending the four-year regime of the Khmer Rouge, under
whose rule as many as a million Cambodians died.

The five permanent members - the United States, the Soviet Union, China, Britain
and France - proposed a complicated procedure for disarmament in which the
armies of each faction would regroup in cantonments and gradually cede their
arms to the United Nations.

A Supreme National Council to be chosen by the Cambodian factions would
nominally govern, but hand over many of its powers over to the United Nations
until elections are held. By leaving the composition of the council vague, the
five powers are handing a challenge back to the Cambodian combatants that has
helped stall an agreement in previous negotiations.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              233 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 28, 1990, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Harmful Effects Dioxin Can Have on Humans

SECTION: Section A; Page 20, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 355 words


To the Editor:

In ''Plan to Burn Dioxin Stirs Fear in Arkansas'' (front page, Aug. 7), you say
''there has been no documentation'' of the effects of dioxin on human beings.
You also say the ''only ailment dioxin is known to cause in humans is chloracne,
a skin disease.''

Neither statement is scientifically accurate. While it is true no scientist has
fed human beings dioxin or injected this chemical into living human tissue, a
plethora of studies indicate that dioxin is indeed harmful, even deadly, to
humans.

In April 1990 the Agent Orange Scientific Task Force, a group of independent and
reputable scientists, concluded ''there is a significant statistical association
between exposure to phenoxyacetic acid herbicides and/or their associated
contaminants (chlorinated dioxins) and the following adverse health effects: (1)
non-Hodgkin's lymphoma, (2) soft tissue sarcoma, (3) skin disorders/chlor-acne,
(4) subclinical hepatoxic effects . . . and (5) porphyria cutanea tarda''
(linked to a genetic trait).

Specific studies on the harmful effects of dioxin on human beings include Dr.
Lennart Hardell's research in Sweden, which found a significant correlation
between exposure to dioxin and the development of soft tissue sarcomas in human
beings.

A Veterans Administration study found a 110 percent higher rate of non-Hodgkin's
lymphoma in marines who served in heavily sprayed areas of Vietnam as compared
with those who served in areas not sprayed. The V.A. study also found a 58
percent higher rate of lung cancer among marines who served in areas of Vietnam
sprayed heavily with Agent Orange compared with a group that served in areas
probably not sprayed at all.

Those of us who have spent the last decade watching Vietnam veterans die at an
early age from diseases that normally affect the elderly and who have seen many
children with birth defects do not need any more studies to convince us that
dioxin is extremely harmful to human beings.

FRED A. WILCOX
  Trumansburg, N.Y., Aug. 9, 1990

The writer is author of ''Waiting for an Army to Die: The Tragedy of Agent
Orange'' (New York, 1983).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              234 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 29, 1990, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

Confrontation in the Gulf;
Bush Briefs Legislators on Crisis And They Back His Gulf Strategy

BYLINE: By R. W. APPLE Jr., Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1558 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 28


President Bush won overwhelming support today from more than 170 members of
Congress whom he briefed on the crisis in the Middle East, but several senior
lawmakers expressed worry about the patience of the American people in
supporting a strategy that may take months to work.

''Let no one at home doubt my commitment to work with Congress, and let no one
abroad doubt our unity or our staying power,'' Mr. Bush told the group. The
President, who broke off his vacation in Maine to return to Washington, said he
hoped to force Iraq to withdraw from Kuwait and the release of hostages
''without further violence.'' [Excerpts, page A14.] Senator Richard G. Lugar of
Indiana, probably the most influential Republican on Capitol Hill on
foreign-policy issues, said President Saddam Hussein of Iraq must be driven from
power to finally resolve the situation, ''and many of the forces he has
aggregated have to be removed as a threat.'' Doing that, Mr. Lugar said, is
likely to require the use of American military forces.

The Administration has made no commitment to oust Mr. Hussein.

''There is a sense of awe at how brilliantly Bush has handled this,'' said
Representative Newt Gingrich, a conservative Republican from Georgia who serves
as House minority whip.

Representative William H. Gray 3d of Pennsylvania, the No. 3 man in the House
Democratic leadership, said the nation would back the President ''provided we do
not get into a protracted struggle with loss of life and no prospect for
victory.''

In a move that underscored the Bush Administration's commitment to defend Saudi
Arabia, the Pentagon announced today that it was selling the Saudis a emergency
package of $6 billion of sophisticated weaponry, including F-15 fighter planes.
The sale exceeds a Congressional limitation on warplanes in the Saudi arsenal.

Shortly before Mr. Bush met with the legislators, the Pentagon disclosed that
American operations in the Persian Gulf will cost $2.5 billion through the end
of next month (beyond normal military operating costs), more than twice the $1.2
billion estimate issued 12 days ago.

Military officials cited higher fuel costs, the expense of mobilizing the
reserves and stepped-up shipping schedules to explain the increase. They
declined to supply any estimate of how much other countries like Saudi Arabia
were contributing.

Senator Patrick J. Leahy, Democrat of Vermont, said he favored a special
income-tax surcharge to help pay the bill. Arguing that countries that had not
sent military forces to the gulf should help defray the cost, Senator Frank R.
Lautenberg, Democrat of New Jersey, said, ''The Japanese have a hell of a stake
in this and ought to pay a hell of share.''

Speaker of the House Thomas S. Foley, a Washington Democrat, said: ''There's
very strong support for the President's actions. He was commended by speaker
after speaker. There were really no overall reservations expressed.''

Tonight, 47 Americans with first-hand experience of the crisis, all dependents
of staff members at the United States Embassy in Kuwait, arrived at Andrews Air
Force Base outside Washington after a journey of three days. Most smiled wanly,
and many children carried stuffed animals in their arms.

Bush-Thatcher-Hussein Debate

On a day of confusing cross-currents, with Iraq promising to release women and
children it has held as hostages but taking more Americans into custody in Iraq
and Kuwait, the Administration maintained a skeptical stance. A White House aide
said, ''You can't take their word for anything, so we'll wait and see whether
they let anyone go.''

But the White House condemned Baghdad's declaration today that Kuwait, which its
forces overran on Aug. 2, had been designated the 19th province of Iraq.

Margaret D. Tutwiler, the State Department spokeswoman, said President Hussein's
proposal for a debate with Mr. Bush and Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher of
Britain was ''sick, and it doesn't deserve a response.''

She said that the Iraqis had captured nine more Americans, six in Iraq and three
in Kuwait, raising the total number of Americans held under armed guard in
hotels, near industrial sites or at military installations to 70. Of those, she
said, 48 are in Iraq, 22 in Kuwait.

Death of American Captive

Discussing the death of a 56-year-old American in the port city of Basra, which
the Iraqis attributed to a heart attack, Miss Tutwiler said the United States
had asked to have a doctor of its choosing present at an autopsy. She declined
to identify the man, who was reportedly one of the hostages deployed as a
''human shield'' to deter an American attack on a vital Iraqi site.

It is not known whether he had a record of heart disease, but his name was not
on a list of 15 submitted to the Iraqis by Washington as people with medical
conditions justifying their release on humanitarian grounds.

The death, Miss Tutwiler said, ''Underscores again the barbaric nature of Iraqi
policy.''

The Iraqi Foreign Ministry this morning told Joseph C. Wilson 4th, the American
charge d'affaires in Baghdad, that an unspecified number of American diplomats
would be expelled in retaliation for Washington's expulsion of 36 Iraqi
diplomatic personnel, announced on Monday. Presumably, they could leave Iraq
even though United States diplomats evacuated from Kuwait are not free to depart
from the country.

Ousting of Iraqi Diplomats

No other country has followed the United States in expelling Iraqi diplomats.

Moscow, which has been cooperating with Washington on most aspects of the
crisis, criticized the American expulsions, warning that they could lead to ''a
spiral of escalation.''

Nonetheless, American officials and foreign diplomats based here said they were
persuaded that a period where diplomatic rather than military activity would
predominate had begun.

Several suggested that mediation by Javier Perez de Cuellar, the United Nations
Secretary General, who leaves for Jordan on Wednesday, would buy time to
persuade President Hussein to pull back.

In northeastern Saudi Arabia, a pair of troop ships docked and began disgorging
elements of the 24th Mechanized Infantry Division after a voyage of two weeks
from Savannah, Ga. With them came heavy firepower - M-1 Abrams tanks, the first
main battle tanks to join the American forces in the desert, and Bradley armored
infantry fighting vehicles. They are to be deployed just behind Saudi troops on
the Iraqi border.

According to the Department of Defense spokesman, Pete Williams, the Iraqis now
have 150,000 troops occupying Kuwait and 115,000 in areas adjacent to Kuwait.

The Pentagon said the Navy had intercepted about 170 merchant ships since the
blockade of Iraqi commerce began. In most cases, the interceptions consisted of
radio conversations with ship captains, and Mr. Williams said that only a
handful of ships, including no Iraqi vessels, had been boarded.

Lloyd's Shipping Intelligence, a London publication that reported such a
boarding on Monday night, said today that it had been in error.

Bush's Conversational Tone

Shipping sources said that United States Navy warships had stopped a Greek
freighter and an Indian freighter in the Gulf of Aqaba, an arm of the Red Sea,
and American sailors boarded one of them before the ships were allowed to
procede to Jordan. The boarding was believed to be the first by Americans since
the United Nations approved the blockade last Saturday.

In Vienna, ministers representing 10 of the 13 members of the Organization of
Oil Producing and Exporting Countries tentatively approved increased crude-oil
output by Saudi Arabia, Venezuela and some other nations to help offset the
losses caused by the gulf conflict. The agreement is expected to be formally
endorsed on Wednesday.

President Bush adopted an almost conversational tone, much less confrontational
than the one he used at a news conference in Maine on Monday, in his opening
remarks to the legislators. Those were open to reporters. But his later
statements and answers to questions took place in private.

He said Iraq paid a stiff price for occupying Kuwait and would pay ''an even
stiffer price'' if it broadened the war by invading Saudi Arabia. According to
several legislators who heard him, Mr. Bush said he hoped to announce soon that
other countries had made commitments to help pay for the vast American
enterprise in the gulf.

''I think it was unanimous that we ought not to pay for this alone,'' said
Senator Jesse Helms, Republican from North Carolina.

10 Die in Transport Jet Crash

WEST BERLIN, Wednesday, Aug. 29 (AP) - A huge United States Air Force plane that
was ferrying equipment to American forces in the Persian Gulf crashed early
today at the Ramstein Air Base in West Germany, an Air Force spokesman said. Ten
service members were confirmed dead.

The spokesman, Doug Moore, said two other people aboard the C-5 cargo plane were
unaccounted for several hours after the accident. He said five people were
hospitalized.

Another spokesman, Capt. Ed Worley, said the cargo plane, headed to Rhein-Main
base in Frankfurt, crashed and burned one-quarter mile from the runway.

Captain Worley said the C-5 belonged to the 60th Airlift Wing at Travis Air
Force Base in California. He said it was flown by a crew from Kelly Air Force
Base in Texas.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: September 15, 1990, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

CORRECTION:

Because of an editing error, a front-page article on Aug. 29 about Bush
Administration actions in the Persian Gulf crisis referred incorrectly in some
editions to an emergency arms sale to Saudi Arabia. The sale -which does not
require Congressional approval because President Bush declared an emergency -
was valued at $2.2 billion, not $6 billion. The Defense Department proposed
further arms sales to the Saudis that would push the total to $6 billion, but
the additional sales are subject to Congressional review. Later developments are
reported today on page 5.

GRAPHIC: Photo: The heaviest American ground firepower sent to the Middle East
arrived yesterday. The first M-1 Abrams tanks, the Army's main battle tank,
reached Saudi Arabia. Previously, the only U.S. tanks there had been Vietnam-era
M-60 tanks, brought by an expeditionary brigade. (Associated Press)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              235 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 29, 1990, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Confrontation in the Gulf: Neutralizing Iraq's Threat;
For Bush, Toppling Hussein Isn't Required

BYLINE: By ANDREW ROSENTHAL, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1407 words

DATELINE: KENNEBUNKPORT, Me., Aug. 28


While President Bush has made it clear that he would like to see Saddam Hussein
removed from power, the Administration's diplomatic plan in the Persian Gulf
rests on the more modest goal of forcing the Iraqi leader to withdraw his troops
from Kuwait.

Then, according to the thinking in Mr. Bush's inner circle, the United States
and its allies could probably contain President Hussein and neutralize him as a
regional power without toppling him.

Administration officials say that this approach, which has come into focus in
recent days, is based on the notion that the gulf crisis has so rearranged the
Middle East - and indeed much of the rest of the world - politically and
militarily that Mr. Hussein would be unable to pursue an expansionist policy.

Defining U.S. Policy

''We don't have a policy of getting rid of Saddam, we have a policy of stopping
him,'' a senior official said.

The issue is dividing Republicans and conservative ideologists in the United
States. Some conservative commentators have questioned the value of sending
American troops into Saudi Arabia in the first place, worrying that it is bad
policy or bad politics, and sounding the alarm against becoming embroiled in
what they see as a potential Vietnam.

Moreover, with Congress returning to the Capitol, Mr. Bush seems likely to face
a debate over whether the ''peace dividend'' must be spent on a protracted
military operation.

The Bush strategy presupposes a prolonged if not indefinite American military
presence in the Persian Gulf, something that risks alienating Arabs and other
Muslims.

Administration officials argue that the crisis is putting Egypt, Syria or Iran,
or some combination of those countries, in a position to offset Iraqi power in
the region. They also believe that Soviet-American cooperation has risen to a
qualitatively new level in the Middle East and that this, along with the Western
alliance's expansion of its military role to the area, provides security for the
militarily weak gulf states and a curb on Mr. Hussein.

The officials acknowledge that it is far from certain that Mr. Hussein would
accept anything that amounts to defeat in Kuwait, and even if he backs down
there, Mr. Bush's approach still carries serious risks. At the least, it will
challenge him to create the kind of comprehensive Mideast policy that has long
eluded American Presidents. And it could end up presenting problems that would
prove no easier to solve than the immediate question of how to get Mr. Hussein's
army out of Kuwait.

Fear of a Nuclear Despot

For one, having Mr. Hussein retreat to Iraq with his army and chemical weapons
intact could bring criticism from those lawmakers and conservatives who fear
that it would be just a matter of time before Mr. Hussein re-emerged in the
arena of terrorism or as an overt military threat - this time with nuclear
weapons.

Senator Richard G. Lugar, Republican of Indiana, said today that he believed it
was necessary to remove Mr. Hussein from power and that to do so would require
military force.

Then there is the danger of kindling Arab world antipathy. President Hosni
Mubarak of Egypt foreshadowed this problem today. ''If Saddam Hussein accepts to
evacuate Kuwait,'' he said, ''we the Arabs, all of us, will collaborate and
stand with one hand and ask the foreign troops in the area to leave.''

Mr. Bush has not talked about his plans in detail and his senior aides will not
discuss them for publication. Indeed, many will talk about strategic questions
only on the condition that they not be quoted in any fashion, even anonymously.
But what follows is an outline of what can be learned so far here and in
Washington.

Diplomacy in Early Stages

First, although Administration officials have started to talk with guarded hope
about new diplomatic activity, Mr. Bush has pointed out that Mr. Hussein has not
shown any sign yet of leaving Kuwait. As the President has continued the
military buildup, there have been warnings from some foreign policy experts,
like Henry A. Kissinger, the former Secretary of State, that Mr. Bush cannot
afford to wait too long if he plans to use force.

But the Administration is concerned that military action without specific
provocation could rip apart the fragile Arab alliance.

And senior Administration officials insist that the President is neither on the
removal of Mr. Hussein nor counting on that happening.

The first part of the Administration policy apparently is to hold together the
sanctions longer than Iraq can withstand the strangulation of its food, cash and
military supplies.

There is always the possibility that Mr. Hussein might attack rather than
retreat. But the Bush Administration is betting that the sanctions would so
weaken Iraq that it could not sustain a war and that Mr. Hussein would withdraw
from Kuwait in the hope that he could negotiate some face-saving way of doing
so.

Some Things Are Not Negotiable

Mr. Bush has repeatedly emphasized that he will not negotiate on the United
Nations' basic demand - that Mr. Hussein leave Kuwait. But senior officials have
left open the possibility that Arab countries could offer some kind of
enticement.

When Mr. Hussein invaded Kuwait, he said the Kuwaitis had not negotiated in good
faith over territorial issues and financial settlements sought by Iraq in
connection with its long war with Iran. Brent Scowcroft, Mr. Bush's national
security adviser, has said that talks over Iraqi-Kuwaiti differences might be
reopened after Iraq agreed to withdraw from Kuwait.

But Edward N. Luttwak, a conservative commentator, said: ''Their calculation
seems to be that Saddam Hussein knows less about Iraqi politics than they do. In
their scenario, Saddam Hussein has to agree to withdraw, not knowing that this
could conceivably lead to his overthrow. The other possibility is that he
becomes altruistic and puts the interests of his country above his personal
survival. Both seem unlikely.''

Even if Mr. Hussein were to quit Kuwait, that would still leave open the
question of how to prevent a future military move.

Why Iraqi Would Flinch

Mr. Bush's approach seems to be based on the hope that Mr. Hussein -as Mr.
Scowcroft put it over the weekend - will be ''in a box'' politically and
militarily.

''A withdrawal would occur after the military forces and political balance of
the Middle East had been so fundamentally realigned that Saddam's actions could
not continue as they did before,'' another official said.

This argument relies on several propositions:

* The new confluence of Soviet-American interests in the Middle East has
radically altered the strategic equation, and Arab leaders can no longer count
on Moscow as a counterweight to Washington. Mr. Bush's advisers say that will
make it harder for Mr. Hussein to attack and easier to stop him if he does.

* With the blockade of Iraq, the members of the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization have expanded the alliance's military role beyond the European
Continent, providing another military deterrent to Iraq.

* The crisis has shaken the Mideast regional power balance. Egypt has moved to
the forefront, and Syria and Iran have moved toward the Arab mainstream. And
What of the Europeans?  But there is no guarantee that America's allies in
Western Europe - to say nothing of the Soviet Union - will remain steadfast
militarily over the long term or respond so quickly in the future.

In addition, simply realigning power in the Mideast does not guarantee that the
United States will benefit. Washington has always had trouble in its dealings
with Egypt, and Iran's antipathy to the United States seems unabated. Syria has
long been accused of sponsoring terrorism.

Another problem is that the Arab countries that back Mr. Bush might seek
repayment - like pressure on Israel to withdraw from the territory it occupies.

Finally, there is the issue of the Government of Kuwait. Ostensibly, the United
States wants to restore the Kuwaiti Emir to power, but that is an awkward policy
after decades of fighting for democracy. Indeed, since the first days of the
Persian Gulf crisis, there have been suggestions that Mr. Hussein's actions will
force a democratization of Kuwait and the other gulf monarchies.

Clearly, Mr. Bush cannot be seen to be negotiating the future of the Kuwaiti
Government with Mr. Hussein. So for now, that question, along with the others,
is being deferred.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: News Analysis

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              236 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 29, 1990, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

FIVE U.N. POWERS ANNOUNCE ACCORD ON CAMBODIA WAR

BYLINE: By FRANK J. PRIAL, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1241 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, Aug. 28


The five permanent members of the Security Council announced an agreement today
on the main elements of a wide-ranging political settlement that could end
almost 20 years of civil war in Cambodia by transferring temporary control of
the country to the United Nations.

One American diplomat, clearly exultant over the accord, said this culminated
''the most historic month in the 45-year history of the United Nations.''

He was referring to the fact that the five permanent members, once torn by
ideological and political differences, had come together first in a series of
resolutions demanding the withdrawal of Iraqi forces from Kuwait and now on a
program for resolving the Cambodian conflict.

Pressure on Four Factions

The agreement, after eight months of negotiations, was concluded late Monday
night and made public today. But to take effect it would have to be accepted by
the four competing military and political factions in Cambodia, an outcome by no
means assured. There was no immediate formal reaction today from any of the
four.

The proposal could involve as many as 10,000 United Nations troops and 10,000
United Nations civilian personnel, and could cost as much as $3 billion to $5
billion in the first two years, diplomats here said.

''If the Cambodians truly reach an agreement, the size of the peacekeeping force
would go down,'' a diplomat said. ''No one is quite sure how it will work out.''


Meeting in Jakarta

Today's plan marks the first time the five permanent members of the Security
Council - the United States, the Soviet Union, China, Britain and France - have
agreed on a program to end the Cambodian civil war.

The Soviet Union is the most important backer of the Vietnamese-installed
Government of Prime Minister Hun Sen in Phnom Penh. China is the sole backer of
the Communist Khmer Rouge, whose guerrilla forces are the strongest of the three
opposition groups but whose ruthless history has alienated even those who would
like to see the Communist Government in Phnom Penh overthrown.

The two other factions are in a loosely aligned rebel coalition dominated by the
Khmer Rouge. They are the non-Communist People's National Liberation Front, and
the group led by Prince Norodom Sihanouk, the leader of Cambodia until his
overthrow in 1970.

The four factions have been asked to meet next month in Jakarta, Indonesia, to
discuss the United Nations plan.

Diplomats here said they were encouraged by the fact that the non-Communist
groups had earlier approved a general outline of the plan of the five permanent
members.

Forming an Interim Council

Under the program announced today, the United Nations would supervise, and if
necessary, control five major Cambodian Government ministries - Foreign Affairs,
Defense Public Security, Finance and Information. It would verify a cease-fire
and oversee the departure of the remaining Vietnamese troops in the country. The
Vietnamese claim that their forces completed a withdrawal from Cambodia last
year, but this has been disputed by the opposition.

The four factions will be asked at their Jakarta meeting to form a Supreme
National Council to represent Cambodia during the interim period before
elections. The council also would fill Cambodia's seat in the United Nations,
currently controlled by the rebel coalition. United States diplomats are to meet
with Vietnamese officials here in New York as early as Friday in an attempt to
persuade them to get Mr. Hun Sen behind the plan.

Mr. Hun Sen has the least to gain from the plan. Asked about the chances of his
ever accepting it, a diplomat close to the talks said, ''We hope that sooner
rather than later, he will see the wisdom of going along.''

The Khmer Rouge has demanded that power in the council be divided evenly among
the four factions, thus putting the present Government in the minority. At a
meeting on the Cambodian conflict in Tokyo in June, the Khmer Rouge said it
would continue fighting to back its demand. The Hun Sen Government wants to hold
half the seats on the council.

Diplomats familiar with the plan said they hoped the council would be in place
by the time the credentials committee of the next United Nations General
Assembly meets in October. But few expect the seating of a Cambodian
representative to proceed smoothly.

Warming Between U.S. and Hanoi

The United States has had no formal relations with Vietnam since the end of the
Vietnam War. But relations between the two are said to have warmed somewhat
since Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d announced last month that Washington
was ending its diplomatic support of Khmer Rouge-dominated rebel coalition.

Washington's support of the coalition dated to the Carter Administration, which
had sought to improve relations with China and with Southeast Asian nations
hoping to contain Vietnam. The American reversal came after recent military
gains by the Khmer Rouge raised the prospect that they might be on the verge of
returning to power, and as a result of pressure from members of Congress and
human rights groups opposed to American support for the Khmer Rouge.

The Khmer Rouge ruled Cambodia brutally in the 1970's, presiding over the deaths
of more than a million people, before Hanoi invaded in December 1978 to install
the present leadership Details of the agreement were announced today, but the
full document will be made public only after the Cambodians and ''other
interested parties'' have had a chance to study it, diplomats said. Other
interested parties would include nations in the region like Thailand, Japan and
Australia.

Diplomats familiar with the peace plan said that it had been worked out over a
series of six meetings in New York and Paris that began in January. They said
most key elements of the plan were in place by the time a meeting concluded in
Paris in July.

'Indispensable Requirements'

The agreement consists of five sections described by five permanent members as
''the indispensable requirements'' for a peaceful settlement in Cambodia. These
are the sections:

* Transitional arrangements regarding the administration of Cambodia during a
pre-election period - that is, the Supreme National Council and United Nations
control of key government ministries, as necessary.

* Military arrangements during the transitional period. This refers to
disarmament of the rebel factions and the peace-keeping activities of troops
under a United Nations command during the transitional period.

* United Nations-supervised elections.

* Human rights guarantees, and

* International guarantees regarding the neutrality of a restructured Cambodia.

''There was a high sense of compromise in the meetings,'' said Claude Martin,
director of Asian Affairs for the French Foreign Ministry.

''But, of course,'' he added, ''it can be implemented only if the Cambodian
parties accept.'''

To John Bolton, the United States Assistant Secretary of State for International
Organizations, the agreement had a larger dimension.

''The month began,'' he said, ''with the unanimous passage of Resolution 660,
condemning Iraq's invasion of Kuwait. It proceeded through four more unanimous
resolutions and culminated today with the agreement of the five permanent
members of the Security Council on framework agreement to resolve the Cambodian
matter.

''That makes it,'' Mr. Bolton said, ''the most historic month in the 45-year
history of the United Nations.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              237 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 29, 1990, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Canada's Military Prepares Move Against Mohawks at Barricades

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 491 words

DATELINE: MONTREAL, Aug. 28


The Canadian military stepped up pressure on Mohawk protesters today, sending
fighter planes over fortified Indian barricades that it has been ordered to
destroy.

The army did not say when it would start to take down the barricades, saying it
could not divulge too many details without risking soldiers' lives.

''We will inform the public to the extent possible,'' Lieut. Gen. Kent Foster,
the officer in charge of the operation, said at a Montreal news conference.

After negotiations failed, Premier Robert Bourassa of Quebec on Monday asked the
army to dismantle Indian barricades at the resort town of Oka, where the
conflict began last month, and at the Kahnawake reservation south of Montreal,
where armed militants from the Kahnawake reservation closed off the Mercier
Bridge to the island of Montreal. The Mohawks have been evacuating women and
children from the reservation since Mr. Bourassa issued his order.

About 4,000 soldiers have surrounded the two Mohawk strongholds. It is the first
time the army has been called into Quebec since 1970, when a fringe French
Canadian separatist group waged a campaign of violence.

Effort to Restart Talks

Although Mr. Bourassa said he had broken off talks with the Mohawks, there were
reports today that Mohawk leaders were meeting with Government officials to
prevent a blood bath.

''There has been an effort to restart negotiations by both parties,'' said a
Mohawk negotiator.

Tensions rose when a crowd of angry Canadians tried to block cars carrying
elderly Mohawks, women and children out of the reservation. The convoy got
through after officers broke up the crowd. Suburban residents have blocked
access routes to Kahnawake in retaliation for the Mohawks' bridge closing.

The army estimates that 200 Mohawk warriors, including some Vietnam veterans,
are manning the barricades at Kahnawake and Oka.

The conflict erupted on July 11 when a Quebec policeman was killed at Oka, 20
miles west of Montreal, as Mohawks resisted a police raid on barricades that
they had erected to stop the town from extending a golf course onto land
regarded by them as sacred. Kahnawake militants subsequently closed off the
Mercier Bridge across the St. Lawrence River; Indians across Canada mounted
sympathy protests.

The army said it would send CF-5 fighters on reconnaissance missions over the
Mohawk reservations and dispatch a naval reserve tender to patrol the riverbank
of the reservation.

It issued a videotape today describing the Mohawk arsenals, which army officials
say include AK-47 assault rifles and Uzi machine guns.

''We suspect they may have land mines, plastic explosives and a mortar,'' an
officer said in the video. ''This is a dangerous situation.''

The army has said that its soldiers would not shoot first. ''No person who is
standing at a barricade without arms needs to fear the Canadian army, whether
it's women, children or Mohawks,'' General Foster said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              238 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 29, 1990, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Berkeley Feels Mideast Storm as a Ripple of Fear

BYLINE: By JANE GROSS, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1117 words

DATELINE: BERKELEY, Calif., Aug. 28


At the University of California campus that was once the national stage for
student unrest, young men and women with bright eyes and promising futures
warily started a new semester this week in a world poised for war.

There were no big antiwar demonstrations in Sproul Plaza on the opening days of
classes, no heated polemics in the Bear's Lair pub, no clear consensus among the
31,000 students about the United States military buildup in the Persian Gulf.

Instead, amid the giddy sensations of the first few days of school, there was an
undercurrent of uneasiness among students who were interviewed, more than 50 in
all, that the tensions in the Middle East could spill over into their peaceful
lives.

The Basic Questions

The questions in many of their minds: Would they be drafted? Would a war in the
Persian Gulf become to them what Vietnam was to their parents?

Alex Bustamante, a freshman from Southern California, said the international
crisis was not ''a big topic'' among his friends until ''somebody mentioned the
word 'draft' and commentators related it to Vietnam.''

''We're all sitting here, 18 to 21 years old, and this could be a grave
reality,'' Mr. Bustamante added during a break in a class about mediation
techniques, part of an undergraduate program called Peace and Conflict Studies
that is popular with students of a pacifist bent.

His comments were echoed across campus, among Army cadets in the Reserve Officer
Training Corps. ''Everybody relates it to Vietnam, which was our parents'
thing,'' said Cecilia Riedel, a senior cadet from San Francisco. ''You've heard
so much about it and there's this vision of 'Oh, my God, total catastrophe,
everyone going, death all over the place.' ''

Their Own Priorities

On the Berkeley campus, as elsewhere in the nation, the current crop of students
is said to be relatively quiescent, uninformed about world affairs,
self-absorbed. Even now, when so many adults are obsessed by international
events and riveted to the television set, the students here went about their
business, poring over course catalogues, soaking up the late summer sun,
squealing with pleasure at reunions with friends.

At Sproul Plaza, a sea of people at noontime, Bart Simpson T-shirts were
everywhere and ''U.S. Out of Saudi Arabia'' ones seen elsewhere are nowhere to
be found. A vendor with a Socialist Action newspaper urging ''Bring the Troops
Home Now'' could find no takers. In registration lines and at lunch tables, none
of the overheard conversations were about the Gulf crisis, although students
were quite knowledgeable when their opinions were sought.

''Nobody has come rushing up to me saying, 'What do you think?' '' said Todd
Gitlin, a professor of sociology who wrote ''The Sixties,'' a book about the
decade. ''It's hard to know whether things are inert or incipient.''

But some instructors detected an immediate difference. Meta Mendel-Reyes, a
graduate teaching assistant, asked the students in her introductory political
science sections whether citizens in a democracy really participated in the
decisions of government.

Ms. Mendel-Reyes intended to nudge the discussion toward the situation in the
Middle East, using it as an example, as she used the abortion issue last year.
But the students began talking about the Persian Gulf before she got around to
it.

''They don't exactly know which way to go, but they're paying attention to
this,'' she said, buoyed by the avid class participation. ''They are going to be
affected, and I think they've figured that out.''

Worries Over a Draft

For many students, the alarm bell was sounded by a parent, worrying about the
resumption of the draft, a prospect that has not been formally raised in
Washington but is already a staple of conversation in families with children of
the vulnerable age.

''My wife is asking, What will happen to Norman?'' said Chang-Lin Tien,
Berkeley's new chancellor. His son Norman is a doctoral student in
microelectronics at the University of California at San Diego.

The students here had sketchy knowledge of the way the draft worked during the
Vietnam War, and most assumed they would be protected because they were in
college.

''I'm trying to stay in school for that reason,'' said Paul Tullis, a history
major. ''I only have a year and a half left, and who knows how long it might go
on.'' Mr. Tullis added that from what he had learned in school about the
conflict in Southeast Asia, ''it seemed that people who were floundering around
and not in school got sent.''

Dario Martinez, a senior from Los Angeles, made the same assumption, citing a
family friend ''who got out of Vietnam by going to Berkeley.'' When Mr. Martinez
was told that deferments were not automatic for all students in the Vietnam era,
his face momentarily clouded. ''What about being gay?'' he asked. ''I'm gay.
That'll work, won't it?'' (In fact, the armed forces have regulations excluding
homosexuals.) While uneasiness about the possibility of a draft seemed
pervasive, opinions about the Persian Gulf were mixed. For every student
dismayed at the idea that the United States might risk a war to guard its supply
of cheap oil, there was another who commended President Bush for standing up to
Iraqi aggression.

Hoping to Demonstrate

''The bottom-line reason the United States is there is oil, the same reason
Saddam Hussein took Kuwait,'' said Eric Meyer, a junior from Hollister, south of
here, who was trying without much success to drum up interest in a demonstration
scheduled for Wednesday in the plaza.

Charles Connolly, a freshman from nearby Alameda, was just as emphatic in the
other direction. ''If the U.S. hadn't intervened, no one would have, and the
situation would have gotten really bad,'' he said. ''I think we should go in
there and take care of it, full throttle.''

More often, however, the young men and women on campus were ambivalant, like so
many of their elders. ''Usually if students get involved, it's railing against
politicians for sending them off to war,'' said Bruce Cohen, a chemistry
graduate student from Cherry Hill, N.J. ''But that seems sort of knee-jerk this
time. It's very difficult to side against the Government with this kind of
aggressor.''

Among students attracted to Berkeley by its reputation for activism, there was
some wishful thinking this week that current events could revivify the campus.
''It's really depressing how conservative Berkeley has gotten,'' said Kristin
Kopp, a junior studying German and biology. ''This isn't the 60's, and I'm
waiting for the pendulum to swing back. It might take a nice ugly war and
conscription. I'm sure that would mobilize people on this campus.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Dario Martinez, Student: ''What about being gay? I'm gay.
That'll work, won't it?''; Alex Bustamante, Student: ''We're all sitting here,
18 to 21 years old, and this could be a grave reality.''; Chang-Lin Tien,
Chancellor of The University of California at Berkeley: His wife is concerned
about what will happen to their son if the United States goes to war.

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              239 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 29, 1990, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Draft Revival Ruled Out

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 198 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 28


Despite the largest American military buildup since the Vietnam War, the
Government says it has no plans to revive the draft, which was abandoned 17
years ago.

''I've had a million questions on that one, but there is no intention to
initiate the draft,'' a Pentagon spokesman, Maj. Doug Hart, said today. Similar
sentiments were expressed by officials of the Selective Service System, which
administers the nation's largely dormant draft apparatus.

The military has 2.1 million members on active duty and 1.6 million in the
reserves, and Pentagon officials say that if fighting breaks out in the Middle
East, those are the reinforcements that will be called on.

Although the draft was dropped in 1973, some remnants remain. All men are
required to register with the Selective Service System within 30 days of their
18th birthday. More than 13 million young men are now registered, and officials
say there has been a surge in registrations since President Bush ordered troops
to the Middle East on Aug. 7.

Those remnants also include more than 2,000 local draft boards, which during
times of a draft make judgments on the availability of all registered men in the
board's district.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              240 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 29, 1990, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Americans Can't Afford to Alienate the Saudis

SECTION: Section A; Page 20, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 454 words


To the Editor:

Your Aug. 11 military analysis of the problems of a multinational force in Saudi
Arabia discusses the great cultural differences between Americans and Arabs, and
how our military personnel will have to be extremely conscious of Arab
sensibilities. How right you are.

In Vietnam, our troops were given perfunctory lectures on respecting the
Vietnamese and their culture, without any defined policy to circumscribe their
behavior or limit the resources they were able to expend on their pursuit of
pleasure.

Prime Minister Pham Van Dong of North Vietnam warned American policy makers in a
January 1967 interview: ''The more American troops are put into South Vietnam,
the more complicated problems they create, something that cannot even be
foreseen. . . . The expeditionary corps is entirely upsetting the economy of
South Vietnam. There is increasing inflation. People cannot live. And another
thing. There is a bad effect on social and cultural life. You have heard it said
that Saigon is now a very huge brothel. Even girls of the upper classes are
prostitutes to American officers.''

Eventually, the lack of a firm American policy and individual discipline led to
overwhelming alienation on the part of our Vietnamese allies, whose hearts and
minds we were supposed to win. What had started as a legitimate war against
Communist expansion was transformed, through our own incompetence and
insensitivity, into an anticolonial war against the new imperialists: us.

''Islamic law,'' you state, ''rigidly enforced in Saudi Arabia, prohibits the
possession or consumption of alcohol or pornography (including magazines that
many Americans would consider merely racy) and bans the defiling of mosques and
holy places.'' Also, ''another possible source of trouble has to do with women.
Saudis strongly disapprove of unmarried women and men associating with each
other in public.''

Saddam Hussein is attempting to convert his naked act of war against a neighbor
into a jihad, or holy war. He has been quoted as saying: ''Rise up against evil,
against the foreigner who has trampled our sacred right.''

Now all our personnel in Saudi Arabia have to do is behave like ordinary
Americans out on the town on Saturday night, and we can make his wish for a holy
war come true.

We are guests in Saudi Arabia; our every action and mode of behavior must
reflect our genuine respect for Saudi customs and religion. To do any less is to
invite the condemnation and resentment of the entire Arab world and convert our
noble efforts to halt this aggression into a bloody jihad that will force us, as
in Vietnam, to come home with our tails between our legs.

JAMES V. HALL
Garrett Park, Md., Aug. 14, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              241 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 29, 1990, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Americans Can't Afford to Alienate the Saudis;
Sophisticated Citizens

SECTION: Section A; Page 20, Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 181 words


To the Editor:

There is a touch of snobbery in ''Chief Trumpet'' (editorial, Aug. 12). In
urging President Bush to provide inspiring leadership in the Middle East crisis,
you write: ''Sophisticated citizens know how much the world depends on Saudi
oil. It's up to the occupant of the bully pulpit to educate ordinary citizens .
. . to these harsh realities.''

The same day you published the results of a New York Times poll that found
support for American intervention strongest among the best educated and those
with highest incomes; weakest among women, blacks and lower-income groups.

I disagree, however, with your editorial, which takes it for granted that the
best and brightest are the most sophisticated in this instance. I am reminded of
Vietnam and the recollection that the war was largely fought by the poor, the
least educated, the minorities.

Perhaps, assuming your poll results are accurate, America's women, blacks and
low-income groups are more ''sophisticated'' on this issue than the rest of us
sophisti-cates realize.

MEL LAVINE
New York, Aug. 12, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              242 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 29, 1990, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Children Who Fear Guns Suffer Trauma

SECTION: Section A; Page 20, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 352 words


To the Editor:

You call attention to the psychological effects on children who live in fear of
guns (''Shootings Jolt Children to New Views of Guns,'' front page, Aug. 1);
however, their distress is often more profound than you report.

Their awareness of the danger at hand shows, you note, when they are careful to
play with brightly colored plastic guns that are unmistakable toys. At the
outpatient mental health clinic for children and families where I am a child
psychotherapist, we have come to realize that children's fear of guns also shows
in terrifying nightmares, in recurring thoughts and images, in pervasive anxiety
and in crippling feelings of helplessness and hopelessness. Many in the field
believe that children thus incapacitated suffer from the same illness afflicting
many Vietnam War veterans: post-traumatic stress disorder.

Many of the children we treat are sent to us by school guidance counselors
because of low school performance. Their behavior is marked by an inability to
concentrate on their schoolwork or to get along with their classmates. In the
past, such symptoms were typical of a child preoccupied with trying to manage
relationships and to gain acceptance from peers, but today a child's inattention
in class may be due to intrusive memories and images of violence; a child's
fighting may be an attempt to wrest a semblance of control in an environment
that threatens chaos.

To improve diagnosis and treatment, mental health services must recognize the
pervasiveness of post-traumatic stress disorder among children who have seen the
havoc wrought by guns. You don't treat a traumatized child as you would one with
poor socialization skills.

As for treatment, the difficulties are grave. War veterans and other victims of
catastrophes may, with guidance, be able to work through their fears of past
events. The child traumatized by guns, however, must live in the horror of dried
blood in the hallway, guns brandished on the playground and shots in the night.
The only solution is to get the guns off the street.

WILLIAM LINGELBACH
Brooklyn, Aug. 13, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              243 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 29, 1990, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Suspect Taken off Respirator

SECTION: Section B; Page 2, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 264 words


A suspected gang member, believed to have been shot accidentally by another gang
member, died yesterday after being disconnected from a respirator at the
family's request, hospital officials and the police said.

After the victim, Cuong Pham, 22 years old, of Jersey City, was declared brain
dead at Bellevue Hospital Monday night, his family decided to donate his body to
science and asked officials to shut the respirator off, said Brenda Rivera, a
hospital spokeswoman.

The police believe that Mr. Pham was a member of the Vietnamese gang Born to
Kill, which takes its name from the phrase American soldiers wore on their
helmets in Vietnam.

The police said Mr. Pham was one of seven armed men who held up W.C. Produce
Inc., a store at 380 Broome Street in Chinatown, on Monday morning. He was hit
in the head by a bullet intended for the store's owner, who had moved his head
just in time, said Officer Scott Bloch, a police spokesman. The gunman then
fired again, striking a store employee, Sam Ng, 37, behind the right ear. He was
listed in serious but stable condition yesterday at Bellevue Hospital.

Money and jewelry were stolen in the robbery, and two other employees were
injured when pistol-whipped. There have been no arrests.  Mr. Pham's body was
given to a local organ-transplant organization, which did not want its name
used. His vital organs were not used ''because of the nature of the injuries,''
a spokeswoman said. She said Mr. Pham was a tissue donor. Donor tissue can be
used for recipients needing cornea transplants, skin grafts or bone transplants.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              244 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 29, 1990, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Suppliers' Employees Sent to the Mideast

BYLINE: By JOHN H. CUSHMAN Jr., Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section D; Page 19, Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 734 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 28


Thousands of civilians employed by military contractors are being sent to the
Middle East as part of the military buildup in and around Saudi Arabia, industry
and military officials say.

The civilians are needed to maintain and in a few cases to operate the
sophisticated equipment used by American forces in the region. Without them, the
officials said, the military machine cannot long function at full power so far
from home bases.

The employees, mostly technicians and engineers, are there in large measure
because advanced weapons like fighter aircraft, antiaircraft missiles, shipboard
radars and radar jammers, tanks and helicopters, and mobile communications gear
break down under the stresses of prolonged field deployments. This is especially
so in harsh conditions like the desert.

Neither the contractors nor the military have been eager to discuss the role of
these civilians, a reticence that reflects concern for their safety as well as
sensitivity about divulging details about the operation.

But most, if not all, of the large companies that do business with the Pentagon
must send technical representatives to help maintain their products, which are
now distributed in unprecedented quantities in the region.

''Neither the military nor any foreign government can really support weapons
without the involvement of contractors,'' said Michael Burch, the chief
spokesman for McDonnell Douglas, which is the nation's largest military
contractor and makes the F-15 fighter, flown by both the Americans and the
Saudis.

William McFarland, director of field engineering at the Grumman Corporation,
which makes several types of naval aircraft, said: ''We do have people on
aircraft carriers supporting the present effort in the Middle East. Some are
also on land. Some are on their way. Some are there.'' Of the 400 people who
work for him supporting Grumman's products in the field, only a relatively few
are directly involved in the Middle East deployment, he said.

Some equipment problems are easily fixed on the spot, but others cannot be
repaired by uniformed military personnel without the extensive involvement of
civilians.

The civilians are not usually needed for relatively quick and small operations
like the invasions of Grenada and Panama. But they were widely used in Vietnam,
and the increasing dependence of weapons on computers and high-tech components
makes them ubiquitous today.

The technical representatives are not armed and do not take part in combat
operations. But they might help operate backup equipment like computers,
communication stations and air traffic control towers.

Mr. Burch, formerly a top spokesman for the Pentagon, said thousands of
aerospace industry employees would certainly be involved in the military
deployment, and spokesmen for other companies agreed.

Pentagon officials were unable to provide precise numbers of civilians playing a
supporting role in the buildup. Many companies, citing security considerations,
declined to specify how many people they were sending to the Middle East, what
kind of work they would be doing, or where they would be based.

Some company officials said they were worried that employees stranded in Kuwait
could be taken into custody by Iraq. Iraq might then put pressure on the
companies to evacuate their personnel from Saudi Arabia, the officials
speculated.

Many military contractor employees were already working in Saudi Arabia before
Iraq invaded Kuwait on Aug. 2. For example, Saudi Arabia's military airfields
were in large measure operated by foreign contractors, including Americans.

Once the crisis began, it became more important than ever to keep those
positions filled, at a time when many American companies were deciding to reduce
the number of employees in the Saudi oilfields.

McDonnell Douglas decided to withdraw from Saudi Arabia about 200 family members
related to its employees, Mr. Burch said. But with a huge influx of F-15's into
the country, the company could not pull out employees involved in providing
technical support for that program.

The deployment of the technical representatives has been a topic of considerable
speculation among military contractors, and Pentagon officials said companies
had asked many times whether they could discuss the subject in the newsletters
they distribute to employees. But the Pentagon has been reluctant to allow
details out.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              245 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 30, 1990, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

A Challenge In Cambodia

BYLINE: By STEVEN ERLANGER, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 5, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 852 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Aug. 29


The agreement of the five permanent members of the United Nations on the
essentials of a political settlement of the Cambodian conflict may finally force
the warring Cambodian factions to negotiate seriously and confront the real
risks of peace.

But the United Nations plan, like any negotiation, represents a compromise, and
it dodges some fundamental questions that go to the heart of the conflict. Those
questions are largely about power sharing, and they may also allow the Cambodian
factions to continue wrangling while the killing and maiming go on.

For the United Nations plan, despite the participation and agreement of the main
proxy powers to the Cambodian conflict - the Soviet Union, China and the United
States - is essentially a set of guidelines to an agreement. The Cambodians must
agree on how to fill out the guidelines and implement them. [In New York, the
three Cambodian resistance groups battling the Vietnam-backed Government in
Phnom Penh have endorsed the five-part peace program agreed on by the five
permanent members of the United Nations Security Council. The resistance
coalition includes the Khmer Rouge. [The Government of Prime Minister Hun Sen
has yet to comment on the new peace proposal.] The plan confronts the
Vietnamese-installed Government in Phnom Penh with the hardest choices. Its
officials always knew that a comprehensive settlement would involve the ceding
of some power. Now they know how much, and it is by no means a given that they
will go along.

Largely Symbolic Council

Even if all the factions find it prudent to meet again, as they have been
invited to do next month in Jakarata, Indonesia, there is no guarantee that they
will agree on the necessary first step toward a solution - the formation of a
Supreme National Council to embody Cambodian sovereignty in the period before
new elections can be organized and held.

The four factions are the Phnom Penh Government of Prime Minister Hun Sen and an
opposition coalition, led by Prince Norodom Sihanouk, that also includes a
former Prime Minister, Son Sann, and the Communist Khmer Rouge.

The United Nations envisions the council as largely symbolic, made up of notable
individuals representing all shades of Cambodian opinion - an American-inspired
attempt to include the Khmer Rouge, who clearly cannot be left out altogether,
without having to admit to doing so.

While suggesting that all four factions need not be equally represented, another
effort to diminish Khmer Rouge visibility, the plan leaves it to the Cambodians
to decide the composition of the council.

But even the composition of the council is a decision about how to share power,
which has blocked negotiations in the past. And Mr. Hun Sen signed an agreement
in Tokyo, in early June, with Prince Sihanouk that establishes a Supreme
National Council to be made up of six members from each rival government, a
concession originally offered by the Prince.

U.N. Supervision, Then Vote

The Tokyo agreement was in large part brokered by Thai and American diplomats,
in particular Richard H. Solomon, Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian
and Pacific Affairs. But after the Khmer Rouge continued its refusal to take
part, Prince Sihanouk repudiated his signature and Mr. Son Sann withdrew his
support.

Now, in the United Nations process, the United States has discarded the Tokyo
formula it brokered, seeing it as an impediment. Mr. Hun Sen and his backers in
Hanoi, however vainly, insist that the Tokyo pact remains valid. If they
persist, as they very well might, even the formation of a council will not
happen.

The United Nations plan also envisions the council delegating its authority to
United Nations officials in the key areas of foreign affairs, defense, internal
security, finance and information.

But it is not clear that Mr. Hun Sen's Government will agree to cede that much
control. He argues that United Nations monitoring of elections in Namibia and
Nicaragua did not involve dismantling existing governments or such a large
United Nations role, and the South Africans and Daniel Ortega Saavedra lost
anyway.

Easy Choice for Khmer Rouge

For the weak, non-Communist factions of Prince Sihanouk and Mr. Son Sann, the
choices are easy, and spokesmen for both quickly welcomed the completed United
Nations outline.

Deeply embarrassed by their relationship with and military dependency on the
Khmer Rouge, they are eager to get to a forum far from the battlefield.

For the Khmer Rouge, too, the choice is relatively easy. They give up the
coalition's exclusive hold on Cambodia's seat at the United Nations, but would
lose it anyway, next year if not this one.

In exchange, they get to satisfy China, appear flexible for peace, and increase
their legitimacy. They also get to return under international auspices and
protection - and with some share of power - to Phnom Penh, the capital they have
not been able to re-enter in 11 years of fighting.

For all Cambodians who experienced life under the Khmer Rouge, a Western
diplomat suggested, even peace represents a leap in the dark.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: News Analysis

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              246 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 30, 1990, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

The Five vs. the Four in Cambodia

SECTION: Section A; Page 22, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 557 words


From the Persian Gulf to Phnom Penh, the end of the cold war has brought no
respite from deadly regional conflicts. But the superpower role in these
confrontations has been dramatically transformed. The agreement on Cambodia
announced Tuesday by the Security Council's five permanent members converts
major sponsors and suppliers of the rival factions into peacemakers.

The agreement, approved by the U.S., the Soviet Union, China, France and
Britain, provides for an interim administration, combining elements from the
U.N. and all four Cambodian factions, to run Cambodia until U.N.-supervised
elections can be held. Factional armies would be disarmed and kept apart by U.N.
troops. Cambodian neutrality and human rights would be internationally
guaranteed.

Peace in Cambodia is not yet at hand. The four Cambodian factions, which differ
on key details of the agreement, cannot be dismissed as mere proxies of their
big-power sponsors. But concerted international pressure can now be exerted on
the factions to compromise so the U.N. plan can proceed.

China's role as major arms supplier to the Khmer Rouge gives it leverage, and
Beijing has recently shown that it wants to be seen as a constructive partner in
the new international diplomacy. Last week Prime Minister Li Peng persuaded
Khmer Rouge leaders, along with their allies Prince Sihanouk and former Prime
Minister Son Sann, to accept the broad parameters of the U.N. plan.

The Soviet Union similarly can contribute to peace. Prime Minister Hun Sen's
Government depends heavily on Hanoi and Moscow for day-to-day support.
Washington can offer positive incentives for compromise, through its new
diplomatic dialogue with Vietnam and its offer of humanitarian aid to Cambodia.
Japan, increasingly active in regional diplomacy, is also prepared to help, as
are other neighboring countries. A meeting in Jakarta, Indonesia, next month
will bring the four factions together to discuss the U.N. plan.

Cambodia was once home to a glorious civilization, memorialized in the great
temples of Angkor. But recently Cambodians have been at the receiving end of
other peoples' history. Long squeezed by Thai and Vietnamese expansionism, the
country eventually succumbed to French colonialism. Later came the brutal
fallout of America's Vietnam War. Finally Pol Pot transformed it into a killing
field.  One Cambodian in five died during that 1975-78 catastrophe, which ended
only with invasion and occupation by the hated Vietnamese. The United States
joined China in reviving the Khmer Rouge to fight Hanoi, and Hanoi's ally
Moscow.

By the time the Bush Administration extricated America from this unholy alliance
last month, the Khmer Rouge had once again become a fearsome force. Now, with
Vietnamese troops withdrawn from the fray, continued combat could mean a
military victory for Pol Pot's killers.

The U.N. plan is the only plausible way to stop this. But agreement won't be
easy. The Hun Sen Government wants to manage the elections itself, with U.N.
supervision. The rebels demand wholesale dismantling of the present regime.
There is also disagreement over the relative strength each faction should have
in an interim administration.

Yet, for the first time, the Security Council five have the chance to make
amends for their history and use their strength for peace.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              247 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 30, 1990, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

WHERE TO FIND IT;
Shoji Screens at Home in the West

BYLINE: By Terry Trucco

SECTION: Section C; Page 2, Column 4; Home Desk

LENGTH: 787 words


IN Japan, shoji screens are found in nearly every home, used instead of curtains
to create privacy while letting in light. But Westerners have devised less
traditional uses for these elegant screens, originally formed from wood and rice
paper, says Hisao Hanafusa, a partner in Miya Shoji, a Manhattan company that
has made customized Japanese screens for more than 40 years.

Free-standing folding screens are popular room dividers, particularly in small
apartments. Shoji screens can be suspended from the ceiling to encase
fluorescent lights. And sliding shoji screens are often substituted for doors
between rooms. Properly waterproofed, a shoji screen can even be a shower
curtain. ''This is America,'' said Mr. Hanafusa with a grin, tapping the bright
blue frame of a free-standing screen.

Many customers like screens with elaborate fretwork in unusual patterns, he
added. While the classic horizontal rectangles found on most Japanese screens
are popular with purists, Miya Shoji also offers a variety of geometric designs
and will create new ones on request. Mr. Hanafusa's $1,490 free-standing screen
has three 24-inch-by-72-inch panels, with an Art Deco pattern in black laminated
basswood. And a $1,000 free-standing screen with similar measurements looks like
a Mondrian painting. ''That design is 400 years old,'' said Mr. Hanafusa.

Shoji screens originated in China and reached Japan via Korea. ''But the
Japanese simplified them,'' Mr. Hanafusa said. His company usually uses basswood
or red cedar because they do not warp. Finishes include a clear coating, wood
stains and colored lacquers, usually black, though wilder hues like purple or
yellow are available.

Most screens are fiberglass polyester instead of traditional rice paper. ''It
looks like paper, but is very strong, long-lasting and can be cleaned,'' Mr.
Hanafusa said. ''Americans don't want to change their paper every six months
like the Japanese.'' Screens can also be ordered in cream-colored plastic-coated
silk, which shows the fabric's grain, or plastic-coated rice paper, which is
pretty but brittle.

The shop, in a converted horse stable on West 17th Street near Barneys New York,
has a sampling of free-standing screens priced from $360 and shoji table lamps
from $45. A basic 2-foot-by-3-foot basswood and fiberglass screen costs $145;
rice paper and plastic screens cost $5 more and laminated silk $10 more. Paint
and wood finishes are additional. Miya Shoji accepts mail orders and ships
screens nearly anywhere.

East Meets West

Nguyen Van Lan, who owns the Japanese Screen Corporation, learned to make
traditional shoji screens in Korea after escaping from his native Vietnam in a
tiny boat. These days he designs and builds custom screens at his home in
Queens, where he has a showroom.

Mr. Lan makes three types of screens: sliding screens, free-standing screens
that fold in two directions and free-standing room dividers. He also blends
Eastern and Western designs, as in a pair of wide-slat shoji doors designed for
New York Telephone's corporate headquarters in White Plains. The door design can
be specially ordered.

The screens have traditional hinge fittings instead of the staples used in
cheaper, ready-made screens. Mr. Lan favors California redwood, which is light
and durable, but will use costlier material on request.

His screens start at $221 for a pair of window screens 3 feet by 4 feet. A
handsome, red-lacquered folding screen with four 28-inch-by-84-inch panels looks
vaguely Chinese and costs $950. Mr. Lan offers a brochure, accepts mail orders
and ships.

New Blends With Classic

Shoji screens are a fine source of insulation, said Lin Choi, president of
Oriental Living, a custom shoji company based in Edgewater, N.J., with workshops
in Abington, Pa., and Bethesda, Md.

Mr. Choi, a native of Seoul, South Korea, offers a variety of styles, from
sliding screens to free-standing single-panel screens on wood feet. He also
creates new designs, often based on classic Asian patterns. ''Some very old
designs look contemporary,'' he said. American-inspired designs are also
popular, he added.  Oriental Living uses California redwood or pine. Single
panels, 16 inches by 60 inches, start at $126. The company accepts mail orders
and ships throughout the United States.

MIYA SHOJI, 109 West 17th Street, New York, N.Y. 10011; (212) 243-6774. Hours:
Monday through Friday, 8:30 A.M. to 5 P.M.

JAPANESE SCREEN CORPORATION, 23-37 91st Street, East Elmhurst, Queens 11369;
(718) 803-2267. By appointment.

ORIENTAL LIVING, 266 River Road, Edgewater, N.J. 07020; (201) 941-8378 or
800-942-4005. Hours: Monday through Friday, 9 A.M. to 7 P.M.; Saturday, 9 A.M.
to 5 P.M.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Hisao Hanafusa with customized shoji screens. The Mondrian
style, left; a diagonal, right. (William E. Sauro/The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              248 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 31, 1990, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Murder or an Act of War: Soldier on Trial

BYLINE: By DIRK JOHNSON, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 1328 words

DATELINE: FORT BRAGG, N.C., Aug. 30


An Army soldier who served in the United States invasion of Panama went on trial
this week, charged with murdering a Panamanian, in a case that raises the
question of what justifies the use of deadly force in combat. It is the first
such court-martial since the Vietnam War.

In a small courtroom on the base here, adorned with little more than a clock and
the American flag, Sgt. Roberto Bryan, who has served 19 years in the Army,
stands accused of killing an injured Panamanian after a battle in the invasion
last December in which United States troops were seeking to capture Gen. Manuel
Antonio Noriega on drug charges. The Army asserts that Sergeant Bryan murdered
the man in revenge after the sergeant saw a grenade blast wound 10 American
soldiers.

He has been charged with ''unpremeditated murder,'' the Army's equivalent to
second-degree murder. If convicted, Sergeant Bryan, a 43-year-old native of
Panama, could be sentenced to life in prison at Fort Leavenworth, Kan.

Accusation by Lieutenant

The Army's case rests chiefly on the testimony of Lieut. Brandon Thomas, who
said Sergeant Bryan pumped several rounds into the body of a Panamanian who lay
critically wounded.

''I said, 'What the hell are you doing?' '' Lieutenant Thomas testified he asked
the sergeant. The officer said Sergeant Bryan responded, ''They hurt my
people.''

Witnesses at the court-martial, which began Tuesday, have contradicted that
testimony. They have asserted that the lieutenant did not see the shooting. They
have also testified that the Panamanian, despite being injured, had not been
searched and seemed to pose a threat when he wriggled and made a motion with his
arm. And several have said the lieutenant bore a grudge against Sergeant Bryan.

It was also revealed in testimony that the lieutenant himself shot an unarmed
Panamanian in the back, killing him, three days before the incident involving
Sergeant Bryan. The lieutenant said the man, who he believed was a member of
General Noriega's forces, escaped after being searched to the waist. He said the
man did not stop when ordered, so he shot. The lieutenant is facing no charges.

Division in Higher Ranks

The case has divided the higher ranks of the Army. In June Col. Jack P. Nix,
commander of the First Brigade of the 82d Airborne Division, ruled that charges
were ''not supported by the available evidence.'' But that judgment was overuled
by Maj. Gen. James H. Johnson Jr., commander of the 82d Airborne Division, who
ordered the charges to stand.

Lieut. Col. Lynn Moore, commander of Sergeant Bryan's battalion, testified
Wednesday that the shooting was justified.

''There was one inviolate rule,'' Colonel Moore said. ''If you felt the threat
to your own life or the lives of your commander, then deadly force was
authorized.''

Sergeant Bryan, a tall man in dress greens, has watched intently, but without
outward emotion, as his present and former fellow troops have taken the stand.
The sergeant had been temporily assigned to duty at Fort Bragg headquarters,
pending the trial.

Circumstances of Shooting

The shooting occurred about midday on Dec. 23, after American troops stopped a
yellow jeep near Madden Dam, a strategic water reservoir outside Panama City,
after receiving reports that the vehicle had been stolen by armed forces loyal
to General Noriega.

When a search found a grenade, knives and other weapons, the five Panamanians
inside the jeep were ordered out. Former Sgt. Aurelio G. Delarosa, who has left
the service, testified that he called out to the other American troops: ''These
guys are bad; get them down.''

Surrounded by American troops, one of the Panamanians rose up, despite orders in
Spanish and English to stay down. A hand grenade was tossed toward the
Americans, who responded with gunfire. Four of the Panamanians were killed in
the burst; the fifth, who was wounded, was the one killed by Sergeant Bryan.

The Panamanian has never been identified, nor has his body been recovered.
Sergeant Bryan's defense lawyers say the man was working with General Noriega's
forces, an assertion that the United States Army does not contest.

Lieutenant Thomas testified that he had dragged away the wounded Panamanian
after the battle. Moments later, he said, Sergeant Bryan shot the wounded man
with several rounds from an M-16 rifle. Lieutenant Thomas said he knocked the
gun from the sergeant's hands.

The lieutenant testified that he angrily told Sergeant Bryan, ''He was going to
die anyway.''

Testimony Is Contradicted

But that account was contradicted by several soldiers who said that the
lieutenant had never touched the body of the Panamanian and did not see the
shooting.

The chief defense lawyer, Mark Waple, a graduate of West Point and a former
lawyer at Fort Bragg, sought repeatedly to undercut the Army's allegation that
the injured Panamanian posed no threat.

''Did you perceive him to be a threat?'' Mr. Waple asked Pvt. David Irwin, who
was at the scene.

''Yes I did,'' Private Irwin replied. ''He was moving. He was alive. He hadn't
been searched.''

Sgt. James A. Miller, a medic who treated American soldiers injured after the
grenade blast, said he noticed the wounded Panamanian make a threatening
''chain-breaking motion'' with his hand.

''I yelled, ''He's alive! He's alive!'' Sergeant Miller testified. At that
point, he said, Sergeant Bryan ''took immediate action, responding with classic,
textbook infantryman skills.''

Issue of Being Scapegoat

Supporters of Sergeant Bryan, whose military record had been unblemished, have
charged that he has been made a scapegoat for other improper actions by American
servicemen in Panama. The Army made inquiries into about 60 cases of possible
wrongdoing in Panama, but most have been dismissed.

Roy Innis, the civil rights leader, has attended the court-martial to show his
support for Sergeant Bryan.

''To show itself as being open, the Army felt it had to look at some case,'' Mr.
Innis said. ''But rather than look at a bad incident, they took this one.You get
the feeling they won't be put out if they lose it. Afterward, the Army can still
say to the world, 'See, we had the courage to examine ourselves. This was the
worst of it. And it wasn't so bad, was it?' ''

Sergeant Bryan, who was born in Panama, came to the United States at age 21 with
his parents. His lawyer said that he was due to be promoted to sergeant major
this year, but the promotion has been stalled because of the charges.

In a February review, his superior, Capt. Jon Campbell, praised the sergeant's
''absolute and uncompromising adherence to enforcement of standards.''

Legal fees in the case have reached $30,000, family members said. Much of the
money for the defense has come from Panamanian families at Fort Bragg. A legal
defense fund has also been organized by The U.S. Veterans News and Report, a
publication in Fayetteville, N.C.

The Army's Criminal Investigation Command says it is looking into 24 other
reports of ''serious misconduct'' stemming from the Panama invasion.

While the case has brought recollections of the My Lai massacre of hundreds of
Vietnamese villagers by a company of American soldiers in 1968, it could
scarcely have been more different, Mr. Waple said. He likened such a comparison
to ''apples and raisins.''

Five men were tried in the My Lai killings, and the only one convicted was
Lieut. William L. Calley Jr., who was sentenced to life imprisonment and paroled
after three years.

From 1965 to 1973, there were 241 cases, not including My Lai, that involved
allegations of various war crimes against United States soldiers. Of those, 36
cases were brought to a court-martial. And 20 cases involving 31 soldiers
resulted in convictions.

In a court-martial, the defendent has three options: a military judge, a jury of
officers, or a jury composed of both officers and noncommissioned officers.
Sergeant Bryan selected the third option.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Sgt. Roberto Bryan (Associated Press)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              249 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 31, 1990, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Beijing Journal;
The Tears of the Helmsman and Other Scuttlebutt

BYLINE: By NICHOLAS D. KRISTOF, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1079 words

DATELINE: BEIJING, Aug. 30


Mao Zedong's image was one of half-emperor and half-god in the days when he
presided as Great Helmsman of nearly one-quarter of humanity. But now it turns
out that his wife could reduce him to tears.

''She sees that I'm on my last legs, so she's preparing for a future on her
own,'' the 79-year-old Mao complained after she visited him in 1972 and asked
for money.

Mao gave her 30,000 yuan, then equivalent to $13,500, but burst into tears after
she left. He complained, ''She's aiming to snatch my belongings and my
royalties.''

That tidbit comes from a booklet published late last year by the People's
Liberation Army Publishing Company, in a venture that appears to be aimed more
at raising money than spreading propaganda. It also seems authoritative, for the
authors cite specific quotations and precise dates so often that they must have
had access to Communist Party archives.

Wave of New Materials

The booklet is part of a wave of new historical material, much of it memoirs by
people who were close to the leadership, published in the last two years or so.
This new literature goes far beyond the previous Communist histories, which were
stale and so laced with saccharin that many readers found them nauseating.

There are still taboos, of course, but there is a wealth of new information
available to titillate readers and to provide a far more rounded portrayal of
China's leaders.

It was well known, for example, that Mao and his wife, Jiang Qing, did not live
together in the years approaching his death in 1976. But the army booklet
indicates that Ms. Jiang had to apply to the Communist Party General Office
whenever she wanted to see Mao. And sometimes he rejected her applications.

One new book indicates that Mao was often morose at the beginning of the 1960's,
when his policies led to a famine in which millions died. But the books do not
suggest any remorse during the Cultural Revolution, which Mao began in 1966 and
which led to the torture or death of many of his associates.

''Look at World War II, at Hitler's cruelty,'' Mao told two Politburo colleagues
in 1972, according to the army booklet. ''The more cruelty, the more enthusiasm
for revolution.''

So far, none of these books have been translated into English, but they are
readily available in bookshops in Beijing, and foreign scholars are poring over
them in delight.

'The Real Life Blood'

''From the literature that's come out, we're finding out how human many of these
people were, how they really exercised power, versus formal pronouncements that
we've heard about before,'' said Kenneth G. Lieberthal, a China scholar at the
University of Michigan.

''For the pre-1949 period,'' he said, ''we're learning some of the inside story
of the revolution: the controversies, the suggestions that were made that were
not adopted, Mao's desires that never came to fruition, and so there's a sense
of the real life blood of the revoluton. For the post-1949 it is not as rich,
but we're beginning to see beyond the officially documented story.''

Many of the recent memoirs are by bodyguards or assistants to the leaders, and
their recollections are generally very favorable. But there are a smaller number
of memoirs that are at least implicitly critical of Mao and of his Prime
Minister, Zhou Enlai.

One book, by a former Mao secretary named Li Rui, gives an inside account of the
famous Lushan conference of 1959, when Mao turned on his Defense Minister and
threatened to lead a new revolution unless his colleagues backed him in
dismissing the minister. Mr. Li shows how Mao manipulated his colleagues,
lobbying them one by one and winning support before denouncing the minister,
Peng Dehuai.

One of the clearest lessons of these books is the enormous importance of the
secretaries of the leaders. These secretaries, of whom Mao had four, were
well-connected aides who kept the Chairman informed and helped determine who
could see him. Because of their access to Mao, they became among the most
important people in China.

Decision by a Secretary

Once when Mao's entourage was in Shanghai for a trip, a secretary of his, Tian
Jiaying, received a phone call from a top party leader in Beijing, according to
a book of essays honoring Mr. Tian.

''The Prime Minister wanted me to ask you if our policy on the private economy
in the countryside should be more liberal,'' the caller said to Mr. Tian. He
agreed immediately, without checking with Mao.

By the 1970's, Mao was sending aides to take part in Politburo meetings on his
behalf. Other Politburo members normally could not meet the Chairman, but had to
send messages through his two closest female aides: Nancy Tang, his English
interpreter, and Wang Hairong, his assistant.

In 1973, an interpreter, probably Miss Tang, took part in talks between Henry A.
Kissinger and Zhou Enlai, the army book relates. The interpreter advised Mao
that Zhou had neglected to seek the Chairman's advice on some issues. Mao
believed the interpreter, not the Prime Minister, and called a Politburo meeting
to criticize Zhou for his misconduct.

A few books have delved into China's military operations. A history of China's
role in the Vietnam War, published this summer, records that China sent 300,000
volunteers in the ''war to assist North Vietnam and resist America,'' as it is
known here. Some 1,100 Chinese died and 4,200 were seriously wounded in that
war, the book reports.

The June 1989 Crackdown

Several books have also been published about the army's crackdown in June 1989
against the democracy movement, and although laced with propaganda, they include
some interesting nuggets. They point out that not only the army troops but even
their police guides were not Beijing natives - presumably because local people
could not be trusted to attack the crowds.

One booklet recounts how armed police officers were smuggled in civilian clothes
into the capital, and quotes from the lecture they were given after the martial
law headquarters began to issue orders at 5:50 P.M. on June 3 to mount the
attack.

''Comrades, the situation is grim, for the student movement has fallen into
chaos and now into rioting,'' a commander declared to the troops, mostly
unsophisticated peasants who knew little of what had been happening in Beijing.

''We must reach Tiananmen, and occupy the square,'' the commander said. ''We
must protect the party, the people, the national Government and the city of
Beijing itself.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: New historical materials available in China include literature
on Mao Zedong, which attracted a reader in a Beijing bookstore. Anecdotes in
some books appear to have been drawn from Communist Party archives. (Fumiyo
Asahi for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              250 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 31, 1990, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Mohawk-Canada Accord Collapses

BYLINE: By CHRIS HEDGES, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 595 words

DATELINE: OKA, Quebec, Aug. 30


An agreement between Mohawk Indians and the national and Quebec Governments to
dismantle barricades across a main bridge in Montreal fell apart today as Indian
leaders complained of continued harassment by the police.

''We are at a difficult impasse, and it is safe to say that we are not going to
be able to proceed as quickly as earlier thought,'' said Maj. Gen. Serge
Quenneville, a Canadian Army spokesman.

The abrupt reversal by Indian leaders today dimmed earlier hopes that a
settlement of the seven-week dispute was in sight.

In July, the Indians blocked the Mercier Bridge, one of four main bridges
leading into Montreal, after a gun battle between the provincial police and
Indians from the Kahnesatake community in Oka, 18 miles west of Montreal. One
police officer was killed.  Dispute Over Land The Indians at Oka had put up a
blockade a to prevent the town from extending a golf course onto land that the
Mohawks regard as sacred.. Other Indians closed the Mercier Bridge to show
support for the Indians at the Kahnesatake community.

Indian leaders agreed Wednesday night to help soldiers dismantle the blockade at
the bridge. They said today they were reneging because the police had refused to
allow food and medical supplies into their reserves.

''There is no food coming in; the police won't allow it to come in,'' said Billy
Two Rivers, an Indian leader from the Kahnawake Reserve, which lies on one end
of the Mercier Bridge. ''We can't cross to go to the negotiations by boat. I
would like the Government to live up to the basic promises that they made, that
they would allow food, medicine and access.''

Police Deny Reports

The Quebec Provincial Police say they kept their part of the deal and deny that
Indian leaders have been prevented from leaving the reserve. They also say that
people carrying food and medical supplies have not been denied entry to the
reserve.

About 1,400 Canadian Army troops in armored personnel carriers ringed the Indian
compound in Oka today, and manned positions across from the blocked bridge.
[Tonight, the Premier of Quebec, Robert Bourassa, renewed a request he made
earlier this week that the Canadian Army clear the Mohawk barricades at Oka,
Reuters reported. He cited the withdrawal of the Iroquois Confederation, which
includes the Mohawks, from negotiations.] Wary of using force to put down the
disturbances, army officials have said this week that they will refrain from
using violence for as long as possible. ''Our mission is to dismantle the
barriers in a peaceful manner,'' said Maj. Richard Larouche, the army spokesman
in Oka.

Indian leaders, who had been scheduled to meet with Government representatives
in the Dorval Hotel today, said they would hold out until the Government granted
their broader demands of independence.

''There is less tension now,'' a Mohawk spokeswoman, Jennie Jack, said as she
stood next to several well-armed Indians in Kahnesatake. ''But this doesn't mean
our barricades will come down. The Government has to recognize our nationhood
and sovereignty, and this is what chokes them in their throat the most.''

Behind two overturned police vans covered with earth and logs, men in olive drab
fatigues and kerchiefs over their mouths sat under towering pine trees today on
either side of the road. Many cradled AK-47 assault rifles in their arms. Each
Indian soldier had an eagle feather tied into his floppy jungle hat. On two
poles mounted at the barricade, the Vietnam veterans' flag and the Mohawk
Confederacy flag flapped in the afternoon breeze.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: A Mohawk Indian, left, watching as a barrier on the Kahnawake
Reserve near Ste. Catherine in Quebec was dismantled on Wednesday. Mohawks in
Oka, 18 miles west of Montreal, say their barricades will stay. (Associated
Press); map of New York and Canada showing location of Mercier Bridge.

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              251 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 31, 1990, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Hynes Criticized in Report on Boycott

BYLINE: By DON TERRY

SECTION: Section B; Page 3, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 801 words


A committee appointed by Mayor David N. Dinkins to investigate the bitter
black-led boycott of two Korean-owned grocery stores in Brooklyn released its
final report yesterday and criticized the Brooklyn District Attorney for moving
too slowly in the emotionally charged case.

The report said the District Attorney's efforts have ''contributed to the
cynical attitude of the parties and the public toward the fairness of the
justice system, and given an opening to charges of selective prosecution based
on race.''

But minutes before the report was officially released at a packed City Hall news
conference, the District Attorney, Charles J. Hynes, issued a lengthy rebuttal,
calling it ''flawed because of inaccuracy and an incomplete review of facts and
circumstances.''

The co-chairwoman of the eight-person committee that included both black and
Korean members, Laura Blackburne, a lawyer and longtime supporter of Mr.
Dinkins, fired right back. She said Mr. Hynes, who was praised by blacks for his
role as special prosecutor in the Howard Beach racial attack case in Queens, had
not cooperated with the committee.

'Look in the Mirror'

A lawyer for the store owners, Richard A. Izzo, said the report blamed every
city agency but the Mayor's office.

''They should look in the mirror,'' Mr. Izzo said. ''The report is the greatest
whitewash since Tom Sawyer's fence.''

The war of words illustrates just how politically sensitive the boycott has
become since it began last January. Mr. Dinkins has been under intense pressure
to end it.

An unrelated boycott of a Korean-owned store began on Saturday in the
Brownsville section of Brooklyn.

The Mayor said the report ''ought to reveal, to doubters and all, that a lot of
people have been working awfully hard.''

''Unlike Vietnam,'' he said, ''we cannot declare victory and get out.''

Charges and Countercharges

The report, which took four months to prepare and present, said that the boycott
was not racially motivated and that there was little the city could do until all
parties agreed to negotiate.

The boycott began on Jan. 19, the day after a confrontation between a Haitian
immigrant, Ghislaine Felissaint, and Korean employees of the Family Red Apple on
Church Avenue in the Flatbush section. Another Korean-owned store directly
across the street, Church Fruits, is also being boycotted. The protesters
contend that Church Fruits offered refuge to a Family Red Apple employee who ran
across the street after the confrontation.

Mrs. Felissaint charged that she was accused of shoplifting and then assaulted
by three employees during an argument over a purchase. The employees deny the
charge and say Mrs. Felissaint was simply restrained when she became unruly. #5
Months Before a Lineup The report said that Mrs. Felissaint and her lawyer,
Colin A. Moore, met with Mr. Hynes's office several days after the incident but
that no assistant district attorney was assigned to the case until the end of
March.

It said that at the meeting Mr. Moore proposed a police lineup because Mrs.
Felissaint had shopped at the store for three years and could identify her
attackers, but that five months passed before a lineup was held.

The report also said that a witness to the confrontation misidentified the owner
of Family Red Apple, Bong Jae Jang, as an attacker, and that investigators
failed to clear him as a suspect for five months, causing him great personal and
financial hardship.

In his rebuttal, Mr. Hynes said, ''A fair evaluation, using any reasonable
standard, would clearly reveal that this office has acted diligently, swiftly
and responsibly to conclude its responsibilities in this matter within
parameters allowed by law.''

The statement also said that his office had been ready to try Mrs. Felissaint's
assault case within ''just a few months'' of the incident, but that Mr. Moore
had repeatedly obstructed efforts to interview her and had withheld crucial
information.

A Diverse Group

It said that soon after the confrontation at Family Red Apple, Mrs. Felissaint
told Mr. Moore that Mr. Jang was not the person who assaulted her, but that the
lawyer had failed to pass that information to the District Attorney.

Mr. Moore said yesterday that Mrs. Felissaint did not tell him until May that
Mr. Jang was not involved in the assault, and that he immediately told the
District Attorney's office. He also denied preventing Mrs. Felissaint from
talking with the authorities.

A Korean member of the committee, Ben Q. Limb, a lawyer and president of the
Korean Institute for Human Rights, said the report had ''its share of
shortcomings,'' adding, ''Our work will be incomplete until we restore common
sense and human dignity.''

''We believe,'' he said, ''people on both sides have suffered enough.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: The Brooklyn District Attorney's office was criticized for
intervening too slowly in the black-led boycott of two Korean-owned grocery
stores. Above, Church Fruits, one of the stores being boycotted. (Dith Pran/The
New York Times)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              252 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 31, 1990, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Books of The Times;
The Many Similarities At the Ends of Centuries

BYLINE: By MICHIKO KAKUTANI

SECTION: Section C; Page 25, Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1024 words



Sexual Anarchy
Gender and Culture at the Fin de Siecle
By Elaine Showalter
242 pages. Viking. $19.95.

Elaine Showalter, the head of Princeton University's department of English,
begins her new book with a compelling comparison between the end of the 19th
century and the approaching end of the 20th. ''From urban homelessness to
imperial decline, from sexual revolution to sexual epidemics, the last decades
of the 20th century seem to be repeating the problems, themes and metaphors of
the fin de siecle,'' she writes.

She goes on to argue that the ends of centuries seem ''to intensify crises, as
the 1989 bicentennial of the French Revolution and the astonishing events in
Eastern Europe reminded us.'' Such crises, she says, ''are more intensely
experienced, more emotionally fraught, more weighted with symbolic and
historical meaning, because we invest them with the metaphors of death and
rebirth that we project onto the final decades and years of a century. Myths and
metaphors cannot be separated from our historical understanding of the fin de
siecle experience, for they are part of it, not merely decorative flourishes in
an objective historical description, but constitutive of the experiences
themselves.'' The specific myths and metaphors Ms. Showalter wants to discuss
are those related to changes in the sexual climate - changes, she says, that
characterized both the late 19th century and contemporary times. She points out
similarities between the upheaval in sex roles that occurred in the 1880's and
1890's in England (when the words ''feminism'' and ''homosexuality'' first came
into use) and the recent changes in America wrought by the women's-liberation
and gay-rights movements.

She draws parallels between the syphilis epidemic of the 1890's and the current
AIDS crisis. And she notes that both periods of ''sexual anarchy'' (a phrase
coined by George Gissing to denote the breakdown of laws governing sexual
identity and behavior) have led to a moral backlash, with calls for a return to
traditional values and a renewed idealization of the family. ''These responses
are also typical of the fin de siecle,'' she writes. ''In periods of cultural
insecurity, when there are fears of regression and degeneration, the longing for
strict border controls around the definition of gender, as well as race, class
and nationality, becomes especially intense.'' Having set up this interesting
thesis in her first chapter, Ms. Showalter unfortunately fails to develop it
fully in the remaining pages of her book. Instead, she spends the bulk of this
volume giving the reader a feminist reading of 19th-century changes in sexual
mores.

In response to what was perceived as the social threat embodied by the new
emancipated women, Ms. Showalter says, unflattering images of women began to
proliferate at the close of the 19th century: ''the angular spinster,'' ''the
hysterical feminist,'' ''the mannish woman orator,'' ''the sexually voracious
femme fatale.'' She interprets the obsession with the Jack the Ripper case of
1888 as ''a myth of warning to women of the dangers of lives outside the home''
- a myth not dissimilar to the one perpetuated by the proliferation of slasher
movies today.

As Ms. Showalter sees it, many of the classic novels written at the end of the
19th century reflected men's uneasiness with women. She regards Oscar Wilde's
''Picture of Dorian Gray'' as ''a kind of bible for male homosexuals'' that
rationalized homosexual desire as an esthetic experience, while at the same time
putting down women for having bodies that ''seem to stand in the way of
philosophical beauty.'' In another chapter, she argues that the popular
''masculine quest romances of the fin de siecle'' - including such celebrated
works as Kipling's ''Man Who Would Be King'' (1888), Conrad's ''Heart of
Darkness'' (1899) and H. Rider Haggard's ''She'' (1886) - revolved around the
theme of male bonding and the exclusion of women and constituted a kind of
response to the popularity of women writers and ''fears of manly decline in the
face of female power.''

Many of the novels written during this period by men, she adds, featured
''fantastic plots involving alternative forms of male reproduction or
self-replication: splitting or cloning, as in 'Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde';
reincarnation, as in Rider Haggard's 'She'; transfusion, as in 'Dracula';
esthetic duplication, as in 'The Picture of Dorian Gray,' or vivisection, as in
'The Island of Dr. Moreau.' These enterprises are celibate yet procreative
metaphors for male self-begetting. They reject natural paternity for fantastic
versions of fatherhood.''

Though such arguments are highly provocative, encouraging the reader to
re-examine traditional interpretations of such literary classics, other passages
in ''Sexual Anarchy'' underscore Ms. Showalter's willful insistence on judging
literary texts solely in terms of their social content; literary movements and
developments in terms of sexual warfare. She implies that after the death of
George Eliot in 1880, ''male professional jealousies'' led to the decline in
reputation of female novelists. She suggests that many male writers have
''needed to express superiority to Eliot'' because they are suffering from an
Oedipal reaction to a powerful mother figure.

She contends that the male narration and male-oriented subject matter of
Conrad's ''Heart of Darkness'' make it ''much more difficult for a woman reader
to identify with the process or themes of the quest.'' And she contends that
''Apocalypse Now,'' Francis Ford Coppola's movie version of that novel, set in
Vietnam, reproduces ''the flight from women characteristic of male romance,''
that ''the men have chosen the war as an escape from the world of marriage and
family.''

This sort of approach to criticism, with its arbitrary choice of examples and
its insistence on seeing everything in terms of sexual politics, ultimately
diminishes many of the works it seeks to illuminate: it substitutes ideology for
esthetics, and in doing so turns literature from a rich and ambiguity-filled art
form into a fuzzy branch of sociology.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Elaine Showalter (Jerry Bauer/Viking)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              253 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 31, 1990, Friday, Late Edition - Final

B.P.'s Outlook on Oil Prices

BYLINE: Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section D; Page 9, Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 218 words

DATELINE: LONDON, Aug. 30


The deputy chairman of the British Petroleum Company said today that he expected
the new OPEC production agreement to keep oil prices in the mid-$20's.

At a meeting with reporters, David A. G. Simon, also gave more details about
proposed plans for a strategic alliance between British Petroleum, the world's
third-largest oil company, and the much smaller Statoil, the state-owned
Norweigan oil and gas producer.

If it comes to pass, he said, the alliance could lead toward a reshaping of the
European oil and gas industry, whose members now include many national
companies.

Speaking about the OPEC agreement reached on Wednesday, Mr. Simon said it could
keep prices near the current level of about $26 a barrel, providing it resulted
in an extra daily production of two million to three million barrels.

''They'll stay in the mid-$20's unless there's a perception that there's a
deterioration in the political situation or a significant improvement,'' he
said.

Under the alliance with Statoil, which the companies announced on Tuesday, the
companies are considering cooperating on oil and gas exploration in West Africa,
offshore China, Vietnam and the Soviet Union. They also are discussing
transporting North Sea natural gas through existing and new pipelines and
marketing gas jointly in Britain.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              254 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 1, 1990, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Cambodia Gives Partial Backing To U.N. Plan for Ending the War

BYLINE: By FRANK J. PRIAL, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 2, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 633 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, Aug. 31


The Vietnamese-backed Cambodian Government today gave its qualified endorsement
to a new United Nations peace plan under which it would share power with the
three guerrilla groups it has been fighting for 11 years.

At the same time it also agreed to a major United Nations role in Cambodian
affairs during a period leading to elections, the official Cambodian press
agency said.

Cambodia's endorsement of the plan was announced in Phnom Penh as United States
officials met with Vietnamese diplomats here in New York to discuss the same
matter.

Until today, there was some question as to whether the Vietnamese-backed
Cambodian Prime Minister, Hun Sen, would go along with the peace proposals. They
require not only that he share power with the three other factions but that he
also turn over the administration of five of his most important ministries to
the United Nations.

The press agency quoted Cambodia's Deputy Prime Minister for Foreign Affairs,
Hor Nam Hong, as saying the United Nations plan ''could constitute a basis for
discussions among the Cambodian parties.'' He added, ''Certain points of the
documents are worth discussing in fuller detail in order to be able to reach an
overall solution to the Cambodia problem.''

The peace plan, first made public earlier this week, was drawn up over eight
months by the five permanent members of the Security Council: the United States,
the Soviet Union, China, Britain and France. It calls for the creation of a
Supreme National Council made up of the Phnom Penh Government and the three
guerrilla factions that have been fighting to overthrow it - the Khmer Rouge and
two non-Communist groups, the People's National Liberation Front and a group led
by Prince Norodom Sihanouk.

The three guerrilla groups have welcomed the peace plan.

In Beijing today, Prince Sihanouk said in a statement that the three guerrilla
groups ''fully support, without any reservation, the most recent proposals and
peace plan of the five permanent members.''

''We engage ourselves to implement it,'' he added. ''In Jakarta, the three
delegations of the Cambodian National Resistance shall make everything possible
to favor peace.''

All four factions are scheduled to meet in Jakarta, Indonesia, in September to
draw up plans for the Supreme National Council.

The plan calls for an interim United Nations administration in Cambodia, with
specialists from the world organization taking over five key ministries until
after elections are held. It also calls for the disarming of the guerrilla
factions by a peacekeeping force of as many as 10,000 troops under a United
Nations command.

Mr. Hor Nam Hong said in Phnom Penh Thursday that his Government accepts that
''a major role'' would be ''played by the United Nations in the transitional
period, notably the right to organize free and fair elections.''

''We also accept that certain important ministries may be supervised by the
United Nations,'' he said, ''so that the elections can take place in a neutral
political environment.''

According to some reports, however, Prime Minister Hun Sen still has
reservations about the plan. Reuters said diplomats in Phnom Penh said he was
concerned about sharing power and about the practical aspects of disarming the
guerrillas, particularly the Khmer Rouge.

After Thursday's talks between the United States and Vietnam at the American
Mission to the United Nations, Trinh Xuan Lang, the Vietnamese chief delegate to
the United Nations, said, ''We appreciate and welcome the talks led by the
permanent five in contributing to the search for an early solution to the
Cambodian issue.'' But he added, ''All matters relating to the internal affairs
of Cambodia as well as the subject of Cambodia must be decided and agreed upon
by the Cambodians themselves.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              255 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 2, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

GULF CRISIS CLOUDS ELECTION OUTLOOK IN U.S. CAMPAIGNS

BYLINE: By MICHAEL ORESKES, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 1, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1556 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 1


Taking to the stump this Labor Day weekend for the traditional start of the fall
campaigns, politicians are confronted with a terrain in which the two most
powerful forces shaping any election, peace and prosperity, could shift from
under them like Arabian sands.

It has been a long time, candidates and their aides say, since so many global
uncertainties have seemed so likely to shake up the political scene in the 66
days between now and Election Day.

Democrats had hoped this election would be about the sagging economy, the
savings and loan scandal, the environment, abortion and education. And they
continue to press those issues, as do some Republicans. But domestic concerns,
which normally dominate midterm elections, are suddenly being overshadowed by
the biggest international crisis in a generation.

As a result, the issues have shifted back toward foreign policy and national
defense, areas of traditional Republican strength, a development that
Republicans hope will hold through Election Day and protect them from the losses
that the President's party would be expected to suffer in a midterm election.

Expectations Upside Down

The Middle East crisis has confounded the expectations around which many
campaigns were built. Challengers who thought the anti-politician mood in the
land would make this a good year for them are struggling for attention. And
candidates in general are finding it hard to keep their political footing and
almost impossible to know what the political terrain will look like a few weeks,
or even a few days, ahead.

Will there be war in the Persian Gulf? If there is, how will it go? Will the
economy continue to deteriorate? Will the budget talks remain stalemated and
force politically unpalatable automatic across-the-board budget cuts just weeks
before the election?

These are among the major unknowns as candidates fan out in their quest for the
35 Senate seats, 435 House seats, 36 governor's chairs and 6,257 state
legislative seats at stake on Nov. 6.

The speed with which outside events have altered the scene can be seen in one of
the country's most hotly contested House races, in northwest Oregon.
Representative Denny Smith, a Republican, was on the ropes earlier this summer
as his Democratic opponent, Mike Kopetski, hammered him for his ties to a failed
savings and loan association.

Then on the day that Iraq invaded Kuwait, Mr. Kopetski said the United States
should avoid the use of military force and should work through the United
Nations to resolve the crisis. Now it is Mr. Smith who is on the offensive,
using radio advertisements that begin with Adolf Hitler screaming in German and
follow with an announcer who says, ''Mike, appeasement is wrong.'' Mr. Kopetski
now has to spend his time emphasizing that he supports President Bush's policy
in the gulf.

Few Real Contests

But even a major crisis in the Middle East could not change some realities of
American politics. The system has become so constricted that the outcome of many
races, particularly for Federal office, is already assured. The battle between
Mr. Smith and Mr. Kopetski is one of fewer than 50 races in the House and a
dozen in the Senate that will be truly contested this fall, as the advantages of
office - particularly the ability to raise money - make most incumbents
impregnable.

Yet both sides believe a lot is at stake. Republicans would like to make gains
in Congress, or at least prevent major losses, so they can make a major run at
the Democrats in 1992, when George Bush will be at the top of the ticket and
most House members will be running in districts newly drawn in the wake of to
the 1990 census. And there is far more national interest than usual in races for
state office this year, because governors and legislators elected in November
will draw the new Congressional districts.

Focus on Redistricting

Republicans see redistricting as their last chance in this century to break the
Democratic hold on the House, so they are pouring workers and money into races
for governor and state legislature. Democrats are responding in kind to protect
their 36-year hold on the House.

Democrats control 29 of the 50 governorships and say they are certain to pick up
more on Election Day. But in several crucial races, from Ohio to Florida to
California, the governors' contests could go either way.

The race for governor in California, the single biggest prize of this busy
election year, is rated a tossup between Dianne Feinstein, the Democrat, and
Senator Pete Wilson, the Republican.

While some consultants detect a greater resistance to negative campaigning, this
California race demonstrates the continuing nasty quality of American politics.
Ms. Feinstein and Mr. Wilson spent most of August trying to tie each other to
the savings and loan scandal. What resulted, a recent poll by The Los Angeles
Times indicates, was a considerable increase in the disapproval that
Californians expressed toward both candidates.

A Wilson adviser, Don Sipple, said the month had been a victory for Mr. Wilson
because his negative rating rose less than Ms. Feinstein's.

Rise in Campaign Spending

Although many candidates say the fear of economic hard times and the taint of
political scandal have made it harder to raise money, the figures show that the
amount of money being raised and spent on campaigns is still rising. House and
Senate candidates had raised $279 million by the end of June, up 3.3 percent
from the same point in 1988, and spent $191.8 million, a 5.8 percent increase,
according to the Federal Election Commission.

In many places taxes remain an important issue. Proposals to limit budgets or
lower taxes will be on the ballot from Massachusetts to California. So will
proposals to raise taxes, as legislators avoid a vote on raising taxes
themselves, instead asking the voters.

Frustration with the political system has also bubbled over in ballot proposals
to limit the terms that office holders can serve. Two initiatives affecting
state office holders are on the ballot in California, and in Colorado voters are
being offered a proposal that would limit not only the terms of state
legislators, but also those of the state's Congressional delegation. A 12-year
limit for state office in Oklahoma is on the primary ballot on Sept. 18.

Looking at Military Records

The gulf crisis has already thrown off many a campaign. Candidates who were
promising to pay for anything from health programs to tax cuts with the ''peace
dividend'' hoped for as a result of the easing of superpower tensions suddenly
find the money being spent in the gulf instead.

Other candidates find that the surge in support for the military has made their
own military record, or lack of one, more interesting to voters than it might
have been a few years ago. For example, Representative Roy Dyson, a five-term
Democrat from southern Maryland and a strong supporter of the military, found
himself under siege this week when it was disclosed that he had been a
conscientious objector during the Vietnam War.

Such an emphasis on military records has implications for national politicians
as otherwise different as Vice President Dan Quayle, who avoided Vietnam by
serving in the National Guard, and Gov. Mario M. Cuomo of New York, who had
student deferments during the Korean War.

An expert on Congressional races, Prof. Michael S. Lewis-Beck of the University
of Iowa, said basic forces, like the state of the economy and the standing of
the President, were a better guide to the outcome of the fall campaigns than
shifting events. Based on that, he and a colleague, Tom Rice, predict that the
Republicans will lose 18 seats in the House and 3 in the Senate.

A month ago many Republicans shared that pessimism. But the gulf crisis changed
that. ''If we were sitting here today debating the economy, or debating the S.&
L. crisis and debating abortion,'' said Edward Rollins, co-chairman of the
National Republican Congressional Committee, ''I'd say these are not exactly the
three campaign issues I want to run on.''

A New York Times/CBS News Poll in mid-August showed that the gulf situation had
helped divert some Americans' attention from issues on which the Republicans are
vulnerable, like the economy, to issues of foreign policy and defense, where the
Republicans are stronger.

More than one out of every five Americans in the poll said the gulf crisis was
the most important issue facing the country, and those were also considerably
more likely to say that Republicans were better at handling the issue.
Correspondingly, those who picked the economy as the most important issue tended
to favor Democrats to handle it better.

Frank Greer, a Democratic consultant to several candidates for senator and
governor, said public interest in Middle East would wane if the stalemate there
continued, allowing domestic issues to return to the fore by Election Day.

In the meantime, he said, Democrats are not helpless. Paul Hubbert, the party's
candidate for governor in Alabama, gets his biggest applause, Mr. Greer said,
when he calls on President Bush and the Republicans to crack down on price
gouging by the oil companies.

''This is a governor's race in Alabama,'' Mr. Greer said. ''People feel
Republicans are more on the side of oil companies.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: With the interest of voters focused on international affairs,
Dianne Feinstein, left, the Democratic candidate for governor of California, and
Senator Pete Wilson, her Republican opponent, have been criticized for dwelling
on issues like the savings and loan scandal (Photographs for The New York
Times); Representative Roy Dyson of Maryland, a staunch supporter of the
military, has been criticized because he was a conscientious objector in the
Vietnam War. (Associated Press, 1987); Chart: poll of adults whow say one
political party could do a better job of handling problems of crisis in Persian
Gulf, the economy, deficit or taxes, drugs. (Source: The New York Times/CBS NEWS
Poll) (pg. 30)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              256 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 2, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

U.S.-Vietnam Search For Remains Winds Up

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 3, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 180 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Sept. 1


American-Vietnamese teams have finished their longest joint search ever for the
remains of missing American servicemen, the official Vietnam News Agency said
today.

The search, conducted from Aug. 6 to 31, involved more teams and specialists
than ever before, said the report, monitored in Bangkok.

United States forensic experts examined 70 sets of remains that the Vietnamese
said they had previously found on their own searches. The Vietnamese agency did
not say what the outcome was. Any remains that might be those of Americans
missing from the Vietnam War are flown to United States military laboratories.

The American experts are from the Joint Casualty Resolution Center and the Army
Central Identification Laboratory, both Hawaii-based agencies that try to
account for the wartime missing.

The Pentagon lists 2,300 Americans missing from the war in Indochina, which
ended in Communist victories in 1975 in Vietnam, Laos and Cambodia. About 70
percent are missing in Vietnam.

The latest joint search was the 11th since the first one in September and
October 1988.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              257 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 2, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Edwin Reischauer, Diplomat and Scholar, Dies at 79

BYLINE: By EMERSON CHAPIN

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 40, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1273 words


Edwin O. Reischauer, a scholar who specialized in East Asian affairs and who
served as United States Ambassador to Japan from 1961 to 1966, died yesterday at
Green Hospital of the Scripps Clinic and Research Foundation La Jolla, Calif. He
was 79 years old and lived in Belmont, Mass., and La Jolla.

Dr. Paul J. Pockros, a gastroenterologist at the Scripps Clinic, said Mr.
Reischauer had died of complications from chronic hepatitis that he contracted
from a blood transfusion some years ago. Although he had been hospitalized
several times in the last year, Mr. Reischauer had continued to work on his 13th
book.

Edwin Oldfather Reischauer had two lifelong attachments: Harvard University and
Japan.

At Harvard his famed course on Japan, once familiarly known as ''rice paddies,''
removed much of the mystery from a far-off land for a generation of students.
His influence as an expert on Japan and a wider sphere of Asian affairs extended
nationally for more than a quarter of a century.

Speaking Their Own Tongue

In Japan, where he spent five and a half years as Ambassador at a critical time
in Washington-Tokyo relations, he was regarded as an ideal spokesman for the
United States who could address the Japanese in their own tongue and with a deep
understanding of their society and culture.

Mr. Reischauer was named to the post after he wrote an article for Foreign
Affairs in 1960 about what he termed the ''broken dialogue'' with Japan after a
crisis over the two countries' security treaty. The article came to the
attention of President John F. in Tokyo.

The professor acknowledged that he had some doubts about moving into the world
of diplomacy and administering one of the largest American overseas missions.
''But I felt I had written a good deal of criticism of our Asian policy,'' he
said later, ''and it was almost a case of put up or shut up.''

In Tokyo the lean, blue-eyed scholar quickly became a celebrity. He set
something of a precedent by bringing into the embassy a staff of experts on
Japan; he established good working relationships not only with leaders of the
governing conservative party but also with members of the leftist opposition and
the bureaucracy; and his name and face became known to almost everyone as a
result of his extensive travels and public appearances throughout the country.

A Buffer Against Criticism

At a time when Japanese opinion was strongly critical of the United States
involvement in Vietnam, the Ambassador deflected anti-American feelings by
reproving the Tokyo press for what he said was a lack of objectivity.

To idealistic exponents of pacifism he would say: ''To be neutral you must be
ready to be highly militarized, like Switzerland or Sweden.''

Despite his natural affection for Japan, where he was born and spent his early
life, he did not hesitate to speak out frankly on American policies that were
often at variance with Japanese views.

To a people with vivid recollections of World War II and hesitant about their
new international role and responsibility, the energetic Ambassador, with the
traditional prestige of the sensei, or teacher, preached encouragement and
assurance. And in the scholarly world Professor Reischauer was one of a handful
of foreigners who could lecture to experts in their own language on the history
and culture of their country.

Visitors to the embassy in Tokyo sometimes asked why Mr. Reischauer had not
become a missionary like his father, who was a professor of philosophy at Meiji
Gakuin, a Christian institution in Tokyo. ''Ah, but I am,'' was his smiling
reply.

At the end of his tenure, which won widespread praise, Mr. Reischauer expressed
satisfaction that the dialogue had been reopened. ''I was sent here,'' he said,
''because of the need to re-establish communication with the Japanese people on
a broad scale. That has been accomplished, and the problem is now of a different
nature.''

Son of a Missionary Family

Mr. Reischauer was born Oct. 15, 1910, in Tokyo and attended the American School
there. He graduated in 1931 from Oberlin College, where he was a member of Phi
Beta Kappa, and received a master's degree from Harvard the next year. From 1933
to 1938 he studied in France, Japan and China on a fellowship from the
Harvard-Yenching Institute of Oriental Studies.

During a three-month period in Seoul in 1938 Mr. Reischauer devised, with
another American scholar, George M. McCune, the phonetic system still most
commonly used in rendering the Korean language into Latin letters. He received
his Ph.D. in 1939 while an instructor at Harvard.

After the outbreak of war with Japan in 1941, he served as a lieutenant colonel
in intelligence and later as a special assistant in the State Department.

When the war ended he returned to Harvard to teach languages and history, write
books and serve as director, from 1956 to 1961, of the Harvard-Yenching
Institute. The Harvard team of Professor Reischauer and John K. Fairbank, a
pioneer in China studies, came to be regarded as pre-eminent in the field of
scholarship on East Asia.

Classics in Their Field

Two of Mr. Reischauer's books of that period, ''East Asia, The Great
Tradition,'' written with Professor Fairbank, and ''East Asia, The Modern
Transformation,'' with Mr. Fairbank and Albert M. Craig, were regarded as
classics in their field and became widely used textbooks.

Mr. Reischauer was married in 1935 to Adrienne Darnton, a fellow student at the
University of Paris. They had three children. Mrs. Reischauer died in 1955.

In 1956 Mr. Reischauer married Haru Matsukata, the granddaughter of a Japanese
Prime Minister. Educated in the United States, she had served as correspondent
for several American publications.

Though he was an effective spokesman for Washington's policies while in Tokyo,
Mr. Reischauer spoke out against the American intervention in Vietnam when he
returned to Harvard as a professor.

Recognition of China Urged

Mr. Reischauer, in articles and speeches, urged moves toward diplomatic
recognition of China, pressed for a prompt end of the United States occupation
of Okinawa and called for reconsideration of American policies in South Korea.

In 1974 he suffered a minor stroke but soon returned to his busy round of fund
raising for Harvard East Asia studies.

In 1970 Knopf published his ''Japan, the Story of a Nation,'' a revision of his
''Japan, Past and Present.'' A further updating, ''The Japanese,'' in 1977,
quickly came to be regarded as a definitive work. Reviewing it in The Times,
Richard R. Lingeman said: ''As a whole, 'The Japanese' is the masterly work of a
seasoned scholar, the culmination of years of study, the keystone in the
intellectual arch between Mr. Reischauer's two countries, which he has been
building so long and so well.''

On April 22, 1981, Professor Reischauer gave his final lecture at Harvard in the
course he had begun teaching 50 years earlier, in a crowded hall before an
audience that included colleagues, university officials and a television crew
from Japan. He took note of the growth of interest in his field, saying: ''As I
remember, there were only two graduate students interested in East Asian studies
when I first came here: myself and my brother.''

Mr. Reischauer is survived by his wife, Haru; two daughters, Ann Heinemann of
San Diego and Joan Simon of Larchmont, N.Y.; a son, Robert, who is director of
the Congressional Budget Office in Washington, and nine grandchildren.

In accordance with Mr. Reischauer's wish, there will be no funeral. A memorial
service will be held at Harvard at a date to be announced later.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Edwin O. Reischauer, the United States Ambassador to Japan, in
Tokyo with Crown Prince Akihito and Princess Michiko before a Mass in January
1963 to mourn President John F. Kennedy. (United States Information Agency);
Edwin O. Reischauer (John Goodman, 1981)

TYPE: OBITUARY

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              258 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 2, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

MESSAGE FROM SADDAM;
Curiously, a Dictator Forces the Middle East to Ponder Democracy

BYLINE: By THOMAS L. FRIEDMAN

SECTION: Section 4; Page 1, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 2090 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


DEMOCRACY has had many strange midwives.

Wars, social upheavals and economic dislocations have all at one time or another
given birth to democratic movements. And now maybe the strangest midwife of all
has appeared. A bizarre byproduct of Saddam Hussein's invasion of Kuwait is that
it has begun to stir a debate - both in the Middle East and in Washington -
about democracy in the Arab world. It is still a nascent and unformed debate,
and it may lead nowhere, as have other such stirrings in the past. But there is
no denying that the Arab nation, which has slumbered through glasnost and
perestroika and all the popular revolutions from Berlin to Bucharest, is asking
itself some new and fundamental questions precisely because of the storm
unleashed by the Iraqi dictator.

''There is no doubt that Saddam Hussein is the wrong man with the wrong method,
but he may have come at the right time,'' said Nawaf Salam, a prominent Lebanese
intellectual and Harvard University researcher who watched from his home in
Beirut as the Iraqi invasion unfolded. ''What his invasion of Kuwait did was put
all the fundamental and forgotten questions in the region on the table. First of
all: money. What you could see in Beirut this summer was a whole new awareness
of how much oil wealth some of these little gulf states really had amassed. If
you asked people a month ago what size were the fortunes of the emirs, they
could not tell you. But now people are aware. They talk about $900 billion in
petrodollars invested by the gulf states abroad, at a time when Egyptians are
hungry, Syrians are bankrupt and Lebanon is destroyed.''

This awarness, in turn, has raised more sharply than ever the questions of who
controls this great wealth and why. Said Mr. Salam: ''People are asking, 'Why
should 200 Kuwaiti princes control 20 percent of the world's oil?' No wonder
that one of the solutions Arabs are talking about for Kuwait is elections. If
real elections and a real democratic republic were the outcome in Kuwait, then
one could say that this was a welcome crisis. It could transform the whole
gulf.''

It may already have done so. Even if Iraq evacuated Kuwait tomorrow, few can
imagine the Emir of Kuwait, Sheik Jaber al-Ahmed al-Sabah - who fled to Saudi
Arabia by helicopter soon after the Iraqis invaded - returning to power with
business as usual, with the distribution of wealth in Kuwait the same, with the
Kuwaitis who stayed behind to fight and resist saying: ''Please, Mr. Emir, here
is your palace back. Thank you. Now we will go back to our tents.'' The poor
Arab states, such as Egypt and Syria, which have also fought for Kuwait, will
also present their bills for a new distribution of wealth. And if there is
change in Kuwait, what will be the spillover next door in Saudi Arabia, Bahrain,
Qatar, and the United Arab Emirates, all of which have even more conservative
feudal systems?

These questions are no less fundamental for the Bush Administration. President
Bush has declared that one of the four objectives of America's intervention in
the Persian Gulf is that ''Kuwait's legitimate Government must be restored,''
and he has several times specified that this meant a return to power of Kuwait's
exiled tribal monarchs, the al-Sabah family. But that is a position with which
many in Congress find themselves increasingly uncomfortable.

Representative Lee H. Hamilton, the Indiana Democrat who is chairman of the
House Foreign Affairs subcommittee on the Middle East, said: ''I know that I and
many of my colleagues are hesitant about lining up with tribal monarchies and
identifying our interests with them. I personally would not want to make it one
of the United States' objectives that we restore the al-Sabah family. That would
put us in conflict with the worldwide trend toward democracy, as well as with
our own democratic values. We have to recognize that one of the spinoffs of this
crisis is that it is going to put stress on all the traditional monarchies from
Jordan to Saudi Arabia.''

In fairness, the al-Sabahs have always been the most progressive of the gulf
monarchies. Historically, Kuwait, blessed with the only natural deep-water bay
in the Persian Gulf, was a desert outpost whose Bedouin tribesmen made their
living from pearl diving and fishing until oil was discovered at the outset of
World War II. Its local politics has been dominated by the al-Sabah clan since
1756. The al-Sabahs' ascent and continuation in power were partly products of
their own industry and partly products of their cooperation with the British,
who installed them as Kuwait's first independent rulers when Her Majesty's
Government relinquished its control there in 1961. Two years later, the House of
al-Sabah allowed the establishment of a National Assembly to advise it on
governing the country. The al-Sabahs also allowed for a relatively free press,
which rankled their gulf neighbors. But every time parliamentarians or editors
became too obstreperous the Emir would dissolve the assembly or shut down the
newspaper. Kuwait's independent Parliament, the only freely elected
representative body in the gulf region, was last suspended in 1986.

What Washington should do about the al-Sabahs is not purely a philosophical
question. If the gulf crisis continues to move from the battle lines into the
diplomatic bazaar, as it has been moving for the last week, it is likely that
the fate of the al-Sabahs will become a centerpiece of negotiations. It is
easily imaginable that at some point over the next few weeks or months, as
economic sanctions really begin to bite, President Hussein could say to his Arab
neighbors: ''My brothers, I am ready to withdraw my army from Kuwait, but you
don't expect me to leave empty-handed. You know I can't do that. I need some
compensation, something to save face.''

No doubt he would ask for an oil well and an island or two. No doubt these would
be rejected by the other Arabs and the West. But what if the Iraqi leader asked
only for a new ''popular'' government in Kuwait, one more representative of the
people and more sympathetic to Iraqi concerns? That is an offer that many Arab
governments might leap at in order to defuse this crisis, which, if it comes to
war, could topple them as well.

It is clear that such a possibility is already in the back of President Bush's
mind. Lately, he has refrained from mentioning the al-Sabahs, and last week he
even remarked that whether the Kuwaiti ruling family remains in power is ''a
matter for the Kuwaitis to decide.''

''If the Americans insist that the al-Sabahs must return, then what does that
say about Washington's committment to democracy?'' asked Samir Khalaf of
Princeton University, an expert on social change in the Arab world. ''But if
they don't support the return of the al-Sabahs, then how do they justify the
preservation of the House of Saud? The al-Sabahs have no fewer palaces than the
Saudis. If the only reason the Americans are involved in the gulf is oil, that
is bad. I hope it is more. I hope it is to create a political atmosphere there
to bolster democracy. I hope that they are at least listening to the voices that
Saddam Hussein has inadvertently given vent to.''

But that is a ticklish question. Among the President's four objectives in the
gulf there is no mention of promoting democracy. Besides rolling back the
Iraqis, restoring the Kuwaiti Government and protecting American lives, the
President said, the United States seeks to preserve the ''security and stability
of the Persian Gulf.'' In the last 50 years the United States, whatever its
oratory, has tended to support democracy when it serves the interests of
stability and to back away from insisting on it when it could destabilize an
area of national interest. At stake in the gulf is the stability of oil supplies
and the need to preserve the sanctity of borders so that the post-cold war world
will not devolve into chaos. American troops are not passing out Arabic
translations of the Constitution. To expect the United States to begin promoting
democracy in the Arab world may be a bit too much to ask.

''Let us be honest, democracy just isn't on the menu in the Arab world today,''
said Fouad Ajami, an expert on Arab intellectual thought at the Johns Hopkins
School of Advanced International Studies. ''What you have in the Arab world
today is either the rule of the monarchs or the rule of the tyrants, the rule of
kings or the rule of army officers. With Lebanon gone, there is no democractic
'third way.' In the monarchies like Kuwait, the social contract was that the
ruler ruled and the citizen made money and minded his own business. It was not
democracy, but it fit these tribal societies. There was a softness to them, a
respect for limits, and men led lives of dignity.''

In places such as Syria or Iraq the social contract was quite different. There,
Mr. Ajami said, ''the rulers ruled and the citizens cowered for their very
lives.'' While the emirs and sheiks just wanted to do business quietly, the
Saddam Husseins and the Hafez al-Assads were selling political utopias, Arab
nationalist visions, the pursuit of which justified mass murder. In the Syrias
and Iraqs, the presidential seals might as well read: Rule or Die. One man
triumphs, the others weep.

To think that the debate ignited by the Iraqi invasion could easily overturn
either of these systems - the monarchical or the dictatorial - and replace it
with pluralistic democracy would be naive. The resources of the modern Arab
state to survive in its two basic forms are enormous. Money, overlapping
intelligence services, brute force and cunning have produced a remarkably stable
generation of Arab regimes: Algeria's President Chadli Benjedid has been in
office since 1979, Egypt's Hosni Mubarak since 1981, Saddam Hussein since 1979,
Libya's Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi since 1969, Morocco's King Hassan II since 1961,
Syria's President Hafez al-Assad since 1971, Jordan's King Hussein since 1953.

But there is a difference in this crisis, and it may yet produce real change.
The discontent it has exposed is not simply something cooked up by
intellectuals. The crisis has put out of work thousands upon thousands of Arabs
- Egyptians, Syrians, Lebanese, Palestinians, Algerians - who had depended on
employment in Iraq and the gulf oil states. All have returned home nursing
grievances and starved for jobs. Combine their existence with the fact that all
the old Arab ideologies - socialism, fundamentalism, Nasserism - have been
discredited, and it makes a very potent force for social change.

The other new factor is the unprecedented involvement of the United States in
the Arab world. Americans find it easier to support non-democratic governments
when they are not fighting and dying for them. That was a big problem in
Vietnam. So if shooting starts in the gulf, or even if the United States finds
itself deeply and expensively involved there for months or years, Americans are
going to begin asking a lot of questions about these regimes for which they are
sacrificing. Before this crisis is over President Bush will probably have to
have a long talk with America's Arab allies, to let them know that Saddam
Hussein has served a warrant on their societies and that while the United States
does not expect them to become Jeffersonian democracies overnight, some sort of
change is necessary - for their own sakes as well as for Washington's. From that
perspective, the Saudis, Egyptians, Syrians and others might wind up more scared
of George Bush than of Saddam Hussein.

When Mr. Hussein invaded Kuwait, one of the first things he did was change the
name of the main hospital there from the Al-Sabah Hospital to the Saddam Hussein
Hospital. He has an affection for buildings named after himself, but then so too
did the al-Sabahs. Is the only choice in the Arab world really between these two
alternatives, the benevolent monarchs and the cruel dictators? For Americans,
such questions have been either nonexistent or tertiary. But for most Arabs on
the street, these are the real issues raised by the gulf crisis - not oil
prices, not the sanctity of borders and certainly not abstractions about the
post-cold war order.

If the Arabs can find a ''third way,'' then the gulf crisis will be remembered
by them as a catalyst for positive change. If they cannot, than it will only
serve to highlight a region that never changes. The desert poets will recite
that the storm came and the storm passed and the Arab East stayed the same.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              259 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 2, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THEATER REVIEW;
'Hair' Helps Recall Love And Anarchy of the 60's

BYLINE: By LEAH D. FRANK

SECTION: Section 12LI; Page 13, Column 5; Long Island Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 505 words


Aside from being a musical tribute to anarchy and self-gratification, ''Hair''
vehemently opposed American involvement in the war in Vietnam, and the plot's
loose structure revolves around a gentle young man name Claude who gets drafted
and killed in Vietnam.

The anger that war provoked is played out on stage in song, in demonstrations
and, in this production, with the visual assistance of a 60's slide show that is
shown on two large on-stage rear screens.

The authors also wrote scenes about environmental pollution that reflect today's
headlines as much as they did then. ''Hair'' is filled with intentionally
shocking language, nudity, reverse racism and blantant sexism wrapped in a
pretty psychedelic cloak of peace and love.

As musical theater, its themes seem bizarrely out of context with the current
political and social climate.

In the Gateway production, which has been skillfully directed by Joy Vandervort,
the anger and the ridiculous macho sensibilities of ''Hair'' take precedence
over the innocence and childlike spirit that marked the original production.

By making the choice to emphasize anger over sweetness, Ms. Vandervort has
targeted the rebellion-without-purpose that so accurately reflects the anarchic
nature of ''Hair.''

The large cast of singers and dancers is typical of summer stock groups. Most
are adequate singers, although the majority seem out of shape for dancers. If
the dimly lit frontal nudity scene is at all offensive, it is only because of
the overall unattractiveness of the cast.

The main exceptions to the mundane performance quality are Jim Newman, who plays
Claude, the frightened draftee; Leah Hocking, who plays Sheila, the woman who
lives with Claude and his crude friend Berger, and Scott McGowan, who
successfully undertakes a variety of cultural cameo roles ranging from Clark
Gable to Margaret Mead.

Mr. Newman poignantly portrays the confusion of so many young men like Claude
who did not want to serve in Vietnam, and yet who did not want to burn their
draft cards or flee to Canada. Mr. Newman manages to create a beatific Claude
whose death is both the show's and an era's tragedy.

''Hair'' is a period piece that still manages to stir ripples from a passionate
era. As theater, it was and continues to be a structural mess.

Its songs, however, have entered into mainstream musical culture even as its
politics have faded into history.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              260 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 3, 1990, Monday, Late Edition - Final

CAMBODIAN CITES LIMITS ON U.N. PLAN

BYLINE: By STEVEN ERLANGER, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 519 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Sept. 2


Mr. Heng Samrin is regarded as the Cambodian leader closest to Hanoi. He is
believed to have less influence than Chea Sim, the head of the National Assembly
and No. 2 in the party. But Mr. Heng Samrin is seen as a balancing influence
between Mr. Chea Sim and Hun Sen, the Prime Minister and Foreign Minister, who
does the negotiating.

The United Nations plan, negotiated over eight months by the five permanent
members of the Security Council, calls for the formation of a Supreme National
Council of representatives of Cambodian opinion to symbolize the country's
sovereignty. The United Nations itself would organize elections, monitor and
implement a cease-fire and be granted supervisory or controlling power over the
key ministries of government by the Council.

Reservations About Vagueness

The United Nations plan is vague about how the Council should be formed, and
about how supervisory power would be changed to controlling power, and under
what circumstances. These are among the Phnom Penh Government's main
reservations, since any power that will be ceded currently belongs to it. The
opposition coalition, composed of the Khmer Rouge and two smaller non-Communist
factions, have praised the outlines of the plan.

Mr. Heng Samrin called the plan ''a basic document for the future discussion on
the principles of respect for the independence, sovereignty and the right to
self-determination of the Cambodian people.'' Those words do not imply a
readiness to cede ''independence'' or ''sovereignty'' to the United Nations.

In the face of Khmer Rouge efforts to destabilize the country, in which they
have ''intensified the massacre of people and the destruction of the people's
property,'' he said, the Government will seek ''to maintain its status quo, both
politically and militarily.''

Foreign Ministry officials like the Deputy Prime Minister, Hor Nam Hong, have
said that the United Nations can organize and supervise elections and a
cease-fire, and can supervise the work of ''certain important ministries'' to
insure the impartiality of elections.

But officials also say the Phnom Penh Government refuses to dismantle itself. In
addition, it wants to split representation on the Supreme National Council with
the opposition coalition, while the Khmer Rouge wants each of the four factions
to have equal seats. Phnom Penh also wants the formation of the Council to be
linked to a cease-fire.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              261 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 3, 1990, Monday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

Expanding Archives: Library of Congress Is Not Just Books

BYLINE: By RICHARD F. SHEPARD, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 11, Column 5; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1185 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


The division's staff spends its days preserving and rejuvenating the antique and
cataloguing the new. Almost all of the sights and sounds of their endeavors are
accessible to scholars but not to the general public because of copyright
considerations (the reason many of these items wound up in the library to begin
with).

All Watergate Hearings

''Acquisition, preservation, cataloguing, storage: that is what we are about,''
said Robert Saudek, the chief of the division. ''This is one of the fastest
growing of the library's special collections. We have 100,000 motion picture
films, 80,000 television programs, a half-million radio broadcasts and more than
a million and a half sound recordings.''

The library's holdings include the complete television coverage of the Watergate
hearings. A catalogue called ''Vietnam on Film and Television'' lists more than
700 documentaries in the collection. Then there are the 14,000 television
programs made before 1979 that are listed in a hefty volume called ''Three
Decades of Television,'' an aggregation that has more than quintupled since
then.

Some of the 80 members of the division are nearing the end of a special job, the
cataloguing of 500 cans of nitrate film containing about 300 movies. The films
were part of a trove unearthed more than a decade ago in the permafrost of
Dawson City in the Yukon Territory in Canada, where they had been buried as
landfill. Working with the American Film Institute, the library found that the
films were made between 1910 and 1916 and had been disposed of by the operators
of a defunct movie house. The Only Known Copy Recently one of the salvaged
silent films, which had turned white along its edges, was being unreeled. The
cataloguer had not found a main credit listing at the top but was able to
ascertain through the titles that it was the only known copy of ''It's a Wild
Life,'' made in 1918 and starring Harold Lloyd and Bebe Daniels.

Mr. Saudek, a 79-year-old former television producer who was the founding
director of the Museum of Broadcasting in New York City before joining the
library six years ago, said some of the division's components were established
before the turn of the century.

The motion picture collection was begun in 1894 with a sneeze, practically a
film bite, ''Edison Kinetoscope Record of a Sneeze,'' or, ''Fred Ott's Sneeze.''
It was originally sent to the Copyright Office, which must receive a copy or two
when items are presented for registration. It usually turns material over to the
library.

The famous sneeze and other movies came to the office not as film but as reels
of paper, series of still photographs that reproduced them frame by frame. Until
1912 there was no provision for registering a movie as a distinct form. Today,
there are 3,000 titles in the library's Paper Print Collection. Among them is a
six- minute film of President William McKinley's funeral procession in 1901,
which is being transferred from a reel of 6,000 paper prints to videotape. The
Rising Flood What comes to the library's busy mail room these days is a
fantastic range of topics that hint at the extravagantly expansive interests of
video patrons. It is a hodgepodge that includes everything from ''Chinese-Cajun
Cooking'' to the complete speeches of Fidel Castro. In 1983 the library received
12,455 videos; now the annual influx is 103,180.

The division's records list 3.7 million items, more than double the number in
1983.

In the seven years since then, a half-million audio recordings were added for a
total of 1.8 million disks and tapes. As for film, 200,000 more cans joined the
collection, which now numbers a half-million reels, or about 80,000 movies. It
is the largest film collection in the world, according to Mr. Saudek. Until
1942, the library collected only descriptive materials about movies rather than
the films themselves, which then consisted of flammable nitrate stock. The
policy changed when Archibald MacLeish, then the librarian, decided that films
were important historical records and belonged in the collection. Preserving and
Restoring The importance of the collection is underlined by the fact that film
is highly perishable. The library's experts emphasize that at least 80 percent
of all films made before 1930 no longer exist and that half of those made before
1950 are gone. The negatives for ''King Kong'' and ''Citizen Kane'' do not
exist. The library has more than 20,000 movies made on nitrate film, about half
of those that survive in this country, and has converted more than half of them
to safety film in its laboratory in Dayton, Ohio.

The library is also concerned about restoration of color films made between 1935
and 1976, many of which are fading. The task looms as a preservation problem
equal in size to the conservation of nitrate film.

The library's Recorded Sound Reference Center actively pursues what it thinks it
should have.

Gerald D. Gibson, the head of the division's curatorial section, said: ''The
first recording we have is from 1903, a record of Kaiser Wilhelm's greeting to
Congress. We actively solicited recordings from companies in the 1920's, but
they didn't want to give us pop, didn't think it was worthwhile. We lost a
chance for a lot of Louis Armstrong and Bix Beiderbecke.'' Saving the Evening
News Today the library operates in a multitude of areas. It keeps the tapes
Vanderbilt University makes of network evening newscasts. The United States Navy
sends along its satellite taping of Soviet telecasts, which it uses to teach
Russian at the Naval Academy, in Annapolis. Early next year the library hopes to
begin testing an electronic system called American Memory, an index that will
help schools and other libraries identify documents, visual materials and audio
records available to researchers.

Meanwhile, the flood of audio and video materials continues to grow. Mr. Saudek,
who must decide what to keep and what to discard, observed that ABC television,
catching up with itself, recently registered every soap opera it has presented
in the last 20 years.

''Arrearages, that's the problem, not just for us, but for the whole library,''
Mr. Saudek said. ''There are backlogs of material not catalogued properly; there
are problems of storage.''

As the division chief outlined the special headaches of proliferation in his
department, an assistant sighed and said, ''It's enough to make you wish people
would go back to reading books.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: September 6, 1990, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

CORRECTION:

A picture caption on Monday about the Library of Congress misidentified the man
transferring film onto videotape. He was Jim Winther.

GRAPHIC: Photo: Robert Saudek, the director of the motion picture, broadcast and
reocrded sound division of the Library of Congress, examining film. (Bruce Young
for The New York Times) (pg,. 13); ''Fred Ott's Sneeze,'' a film bite that
started the motion picture collectionin 1894 (Musuem of Modern Art Film Studio);
Film being transferred onto videotape at the motion picture, broadcast and
recorded sound division of the Library of Congress, a division whose importance
is growing as rapidly as its collection. (Bruce Young for The New York Times)
(pg. 14)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              262 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 3, 1990, Monday, Late Edition - Final

ESSAY;
Mutt And Jeff And Me

BYLINE: By William Safire

SECTION: Section 1; Page 21, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 757 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


What did this youthful editor know about the comic-strip heroes of my salad
days? Confident of my memory, I reached for the Smithsonian history of the
comics; klong! - to my dismay, Mutt was indeed the tall one. My entire essay was
built on a metaphoric lie.

''Pickering,'' I said (you wonder why I act like 'enry 'iggins?) ''save me.'' In
the grand tradition of grace under editorial pressure, he electronically
substituted Mutts for all the Jeffs and Jeffs for Mutts throughout the piece.
For nine-tenths of the paper's run, and in all the papers taking the news
service, Mutt accurately became the tall one - no longer standing for Gorbachev,
but for Yeltsin, the tall one.

This episode shook my certitude. Not enough to reduce me to humility - bigfeet
don't cry - but enough to make me wonder about the enormous responsibility we
pundits bear.

For example, after a pop in this space at the way Li'l Hussein was toadying to
Big Hussein, the King of Jordan's kid brother took exception to the application
of the word ''toadies'' to the great Hashemite dynasty and wrote: ''the shreiks
of important media pundits have all too often a distressing way of shaping
public perceptions. . . .''

Two questions leap to mind. The first - does shreik rhyme with sheik and if not,
why not? - is not germane to my weekday work. The second -do pundits really form
public opinion? - is worth pondering in light of the widespread perturbation
known as The Split on the Right.

In case you were forming your own opinion and missed it, some right-wing sages
are ''in schism'' - that is, dissenting from the hawkish, interventionist hard
line of the majority of their regular bedfellows who see the Iraqi dictator as a
would-be Hitler.

Evans & Novak and Pat Buchanan, usually as jingoistic as the rest of us, sound
more like Senators Greuning and Morse in the early Vietnam era: they want no
part of policing the Persian Gulf or toppling Saddam Hussein. Jeane Kirkpatrick
also sees ''no distinctive U.S. interest'' in the gulf.

These are not lumpable as ''McGovernite hawks''; each heart has its particular
reasons. Rowley Evans has always been Lawrence of Arabia reincarnate; Pat was
and is a Goldwater True Believer eager to dissociate himself from conservatism's
Johnnies-come-lately; Jeane is steeped in the uses of diplomacy.

We righties come to our side's line of scrimmage with different mental sets, but
share a discomfort at being in the unsilent majority. We long for the luxury of
isolation, the blessed business of being besieged, the ecstasy of apostasy.
Splitting comes easier to us than to Yeltsin or Gorbachev; differences among the
denizens of the right are more ardent than the boring differences between
populist right and lukewarm left.

Does it matter? Why are the views of pundits given such weight? Answers: because
we have ready reactions and the Congress was out of town; and more important, we
are free to utter truths that politicians and diplomats, even when on duty,
cannot.

Take the essential point of our current national purpose, which right-wingers of
my ilk believe is to remove the world threat of a murderous aggressor soon to be
nuclear-armed. The President, to hold his international consensus together, must
limit his stated goal to the status quo ante approved by the Security Council.
Until Senator Richard Lugar became the President's designated real-purpose
hitter, that task of pointing out the real aim fell to the hawks of August in
the trenches of columny.

On the other side, those right-wing pundits opposing a strike deserve a hearing
because few in public office have militated against a just war. The exception is
Gen. H. Norman Schwartzkopf, our new McClellan, who arrogated to himself a
political decision usually reserved to an elected President when he stated:
''There's not going to be any war unless the Iraqis attack.''

Spoken with the certitude of a media biggie. We observers may be the shock
troops of dividing opinion, but the public-opinion battles are won by the
participants in the arena. I have this urge to whisper in our
sure-of-our-defensive-purpose general's ear, ''Mutt was the tall one.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              263 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 4, 1990, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

By Any Measure, Pol Pot Engaged in Genocide

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 855 words


By 1979, of the majority Khmers, 15 percent of the rural population had
perished, 25 percent of the urban. The most horrific slaughter was in the last
six months, after the politically suspect eastern zone bordering Vietnam was
directly taken over. My interviews with 87 survivors showed that in just 11
villages, center forces carried out 1,663 killings in 1978. Tens of thousands of
other villagers were deported to the country's northwest, where they were
massacred. The toll reached at least 100,000.

Pol Pot's Government attempted to eradicate Buddhism from Cambodia. Of 2,680
Buddhist monks from eight of Cambodia's 3,000 monasteries, only 70 monks were
found to have survived in 1979. Monasteries were, according to a 1975 Government
document, largely abandoned.

The largest ethnic minority groups in Cambodia were the Vietnamese, Chinese and
Muslim Chams, together more than 15 percent of Cambodia's population. The
regime's claim in 1977 that they now represented only 1 percent showed its
intent.

The Vietnamese community of 400,000 people was entirely eradicated. Half had
been expelled by the United States-backed Lon Nol regime in 1970 (with several
thousand killed in pogroms). More than 100,000 more were driven out by the Pol
Pot regime in 1975. The rest were murdered. In more than a year's research in
Cambodia, I could not find a Vietnamese resident who had survived the Pol Pot
years there.

The ethnic Chinese suffered the worst disaster ever to befall their community in
Southeast Asia. Of 425,000, only half survived. Ethnic Chinese, like other
evacuated city dwellers, were made to work harder and under much more deplorable
conditions than rural dwellers and succumbed en masse to hunger and malaria.
Discrimination extended to bans on the Chinese language, like all foreign and
minority languages.

The Muslim Chams numbered 250,000 in 1975. Their distinct religion, language and
culture, large villages and autonomous networks threatened the atomized, closely
supervised society that the Pol Pot leadership planned. Cham women were forced
to cut their hair short in the Khmer style; the traditional Cham sarong was
banned, as peasants were forced to wear only black pajamas; religious activity
was restricted.

In 1975, the new Pol Pot Government turned its attention to the Chams with a
vengeance. In one case, the authorities attempted to collect all copies of the
Koran. The villagers staged a protest demonstration, and Khmer Rouge troops
fired into the crowd. The Chams took up swords and knives, and slaughtered half
a dozen troops. The armed forces massacred many, pillaged their homes, evacuated
the survivors and razed their village. Turning to a neighboring village, they
massacred 70 percent of its inhabitants.

Soon the Pol Pot army emptied all 113 Cham villages in the country. About 90,000
Chams were massacred, and the survivors were dispersed in groups of families.
Islamic schools and religion, and the Cham language, were banned. Thousands of
Muslims were physically forced to eat pork. Many were murdered for refusing. The
perpetrator of these massacres remains a member of the United Nations,
represented under a new name by Pol Pot's hand-picked ambassador. Since 1979,
all Western countries have refused to challenge the Pol Pot regime's right to
speak for its victims. Most, including Britain and the United States, have
supported it. While still a member state of the United Nations, the Pol Pot
regime can be held accountable for its crimes in the World Court. But no legal
action has been taken, largely because of Chinese and United States opposition.
The United States now says it is prepared to help remove the Khmer Rouge from
Cambodia's United Nations seat.

If that fails this fall, a World Court case should follow immediately. The
United States can encourage such a move. Failure to do so would encourage future
genocidists in the knowledge that the convention will never be applied. The long
delay has buoyed Pol Pot's forces in their war to retake power.

BEN KIERNAN
New Haven, Aug. 17
  The writer, associate professor of history at Yale, is the author of ''How Pol
Pot Came to Power'' (1985) and other books on Southeast Asia.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              264 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 4, 1990, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

OBSERVER;
Presto! They Vanish

BYLINE: By Russell Baker

SECTION: Section A; Page 17, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 741 words


When things reach this stage people need something to chase their troubles away.
This is why the latest military expedition has been so refreshing. It has given
us some new news.

Not good news. Good news doesn't perk people up. People say they want good news
but they don't. For good news it's hard to beat the collapse of Communism and
the end of the cold war, yet millions got bored with it overnight. Good news
gets boring even faster than trouble.

What people really want is new news, and that's what Saddam Hussein's
impetuosity and President Bush's military response have provided. The savings
and loan problem has disappeared, as if by magic, the way headaches vanish
instantly when exposed to the sponsor's tablets. (''My savings and loan
catastrophe's gone! My savings and loan catastrophe's gone!'') It was new news
that did the job, and not just on that tiresome savings and loan business.
When's the last time you had one of those dreary conversations about the awful
plight of the homeless? Not since the news hawks abandoned the grates for the
desert, I'll bet.

Remember the budget problem? Of course you don't, and you're glad you don't,
aren't you? You'd been told about that budget problem for so long that you were
ready to scream with boredom, when, in the very nick of time, the problem ceased
to exist. (''It's gone! My budget problem's gone!'') No longer must Americans
plod tediously onward with their daily task of worrying whether the whole
country might have to be pawned to Japan, or Germany, or maybe Korea.
(Eventually maybe even to Vietnam, since it seems to be our old enemies-at-arms
who end up with the big money.) How did we make those awful old problems vanish?
We took one Hussein and one Bush, and presto! the world was a new world, thanks
to the miracle ingredient they contained: new news.

Sure it had once been fun to quake as the news recorded the daily swish of the
dreadful Gramm-Rudman automatic budget-slashing ax coming closer and closer and
closer, though after awhile it had got to be - what's that wonderful old
expression? - incredibly boring.

And no wonder. Night after night, week in and week out, turning on the telly,
picking up the paper, finding absolutely nothing new in the way of trouble - it
brought the spirit to the breaking point.

Savings and loan, homelessness, budget, Japanese pawnshop, hideous Gramm-Rudman
automatic slashing ax - one wanted to cry, ''Will no one free us of these stale
and tiresome old troubles?''

No, I do not believe that Saddam Hussein in faraway Baghdad heard bored America
screaming and decided to bring us the new news we desperately craved. I believe
him to be a man deficient not just in judgment and finesse, but also in the
sensitivity required to realize how desperately we yearned to be unburdened of
so much boring old news.

His adventurism probably just happened to coincide with the American public's
need for something completely different. And yes, of course this refreshing new
news is also bad news, and may become much worse news any day now.

Whenever the new news is military it tends to lose very quickly its power to
refresh this difficult audience, whose short attention span might make it yawn
at the imminence of doomsday itself after five consecutive nights of reporting
from Doomsday Headquarters.

The last two American military expeditions, into Grenada and Panama, ended so
swiftly that the news audience never had time to lose interest, much less get
sick and tired of them. The one that preceded those two, however, kept audience
attention focused on Vietnam so long that Americans still remember it as a
nightmare when even news about something as tiresome as the savings and loan
scandal would have seemed diverting.

The question is not how long people will continue absorbing news about sand and
heat without feeling the need for some newer news. The question is whether some
newer news will turn up to solve our Middle East troubles as effectively as our
Middle East troubles have solved the savings and loan, homelessness and budget
problems.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              265 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 4, 1990, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Q&A

SECTION: Section C; Page 5, Column 1; Science Desk

LENGTH: 378 words


The process involves breaking down the DNA strands into segments, he explained.
These are then subjected to an electrical current and tagged with a lightly
radioactive substance. The electrical current makes the strand behave so that
''each one takes its own autoradiograph,'' leaving a trace something like an
X-ray as it moves on a substance sensitive to radiation.

Each sequence is very clearly labeled, he said, and if the sequences from both
samples match exactly, an identification is made.

The laboratory, which has been called upon to identify bodies recovered after
the Vietnam War, says the best way to do so is still through the teeth,
especially if they were repaired, by matching up restorations and dental X-rays.

''In the absence of that,'' he said, ''we try to determine the biological nature
of the individual at the time of death, like age, sex, race, stature, old
surgical procedures and fractures that have healed, and the circumstances at the
time of death, such as cut marks, fractures or gunshot wounds.

''By comparing all these things with what is known about the individual,'' he
said, ''we can often come up with a very high probability, if not a positive
identification, because we can exclude almost everyone else.''

Readers are invited to submit questions about science to Questions, Science
Times, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y. 10036. Questions
of general interest will be answered in this column, but requests for medical
advice cannot be honored and unpublished letters cannot be answered
individually.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Question

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              266 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 4, 1990, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;
15-Second Spots: Help or Hindrance?

BYLINE: By Kim Foltz

SECTION: Section D; Page 9, Column 3; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 790 words


The report by the New York-based industry group was a response to numerous
questions about the effectiveness of the commercials.

First and foremost, the report said, 15-second commercials are ''here to stay.''
Since they were introduced on network television in 1983, the number of such
spots has steadily increased, and the report predicted that by the end of the
decade they would account for more than half of all commercials.

This fall, for example, K-Mart will begin a television campaign that consists of
dozens of short spots that quickly pitch a product on sale. Another big
advertiser, RJR Nabisco, has increasingly used 15-second commericals for
products like Ritz crackers and Oreo cookies.

But the report warned that advertisers who continued to rely too much on
15-second commercials - whose messages almost seem as though they are over
before they begin - run the risk of damaging the brand equity that has been
established for their products through longer commercials.

Recently some agency executives have speculated that the clutter caused by the
proliferation of 15-second spots would eventually cause a movement toward longer
ones. During the last year, a few advertisers, like American Telephone and
Telegraph and Porsche Cars North America, have broadcast spots that were at
least two minutes long.

Creative executives prefer longer commercials because the format allows more
time for spectacular effects or riveting emotional appeals. As some creative
directors have lamented, 15-second spots do not win awards.

But the short spots remain attractive to advertisers because they cost about
half as much as a 30-second commercial, which averages about $120,000 on
prime-time television. Research has also shown that the shorter commercials are
60 percent to 80 percent as effective as 30-second spots, in terms of recall or
the ability to persuade consumers.

But the report warned that 15-second spots may be far less of a bargain in the
future. Some networks are already charging premiums for the commercials when
broadcast during the most popular television programs, and the report forecasts
that prices in general will continue to rise.

The report concluded that 15-second commercials were most effective when used
with 30-second ones for the same product. And not surprisingly, the report
underscored the well-established belief that 15-second spots were best when used
to hammer home the names of well-known brands.

The researchers also said that original 15-second spots were more effective in
reaching consumers than short commercials that were simply ''cut-down'' versions
of 30-second ads. In making a 15-second spot that is ''lifted'' from a longer
verson, the report said, the message that reinforces the sales pitch is
inevitably cut or dropped and the commercial will therefore ''not be
effective.''

The report recommended that advertisers not use 15-second spots to introduce
products, because the spots offer too little time to fully explain a product's
benefits.

One way of making 15-second commercials more effective, the report said, was to
use them as ''bookends'' - splitting in two a commercial for one product and
separating the parts by spots for other products. In one for Exedrin, for
example, the first 15-second spot shows a woman talking about her headache and
then taking two Excedrin tablets. When she reappears in the final segment after
a couple of unrelated commercials, the woman happily announces that the pain has
passed.

As 15-second commercials become more commonplace, the report concluded,
30-second ones will become far more valuable by the sheer nature of their
uniqueness.

Although the report did not speculate on the fate of already scarce 60-second
spots, these anachronistic ads clearly seem destined to pop up only occasionally
during special events, like the annual Super Bowl telecast, when advertisers
traditionally show their most spectacular commercials.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              267 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 6, 1990, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

U.S. to Open Talks With Cambodian Communists

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Page 7, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 236 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 5


On July 18, Mr. Baker announced that Washington would begin talks about Cambodia
with Vietnam, Mr. Hun Sen's major backer. At the same time, he withdrew
recognition of an alliance of guerrilla movements fighting the Hun Sen
Government. The coalition is dominated by the Khmer Rouge, which is blamed for
the deaths of more than a million people when it held power in Cambodia in the
late 1970's.

Mr. Baker said he was encouraged by efforts of the five permanent members of the
United Nations Security Council to work out the framework for a possible
cease-fire.

Under the Security Council's plan, the four warring factions would establish a
Supreme National Council before new elections are held. The plan, the topic of
talks this week in Jakarta, Indonesia, urges the Council to cede much of its
administrative authority to the United Nations until the vote.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              268 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 6, 1990, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Confrontation in the Gulf;
Excerpts From Iraqi Statement Declaring War of 'Right Against Wrong'

BYLINE: Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 19, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1383 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 5


It is now your turn, Arabs, to save all humanity and not just save yourselves,
and to show the principles and meanings of the message of Islam, of which you
are all believers and of which you are all leaders.

It is now your turn to save humanity from the unjust powers who are corrupt and
exploit us and are so proud of their positions, and these are led by the United
States of America.

Foremost among these Arabs in response to the initiative for the victory of Iraq
are the people of the Palestinian intifada, the people of the stones who are
fighting the Zionists in their own land, for the occupation is always injust and
therefore weak. For in Yemen, Tunis and Libya and Sudan and Mauritania, these
are all believers who believe in the Arab world and in Islam. And they know
where the truth lies for this will be extended to believers outside the Arab and
Islamic world and therefore, this battle will take a human aspect.

As for the naval and air troops of the United States and all that have
accompanied them, it will not - never frighten our rulers, or leadership, or
even our people, instead, it will just make us believe more in the route that we
have chosen for the victory of our people and of our nation and of humanity. It
will never frighten us, the use of their modern weapons or their high technology
because we believe in our principles for social justice and the rejection of
injustice and weakness.

Fighting U.S. Presence

The slogan of believers is, never to turn back. We are sure of victory and we
will never let it go of our hands. And through our struggle, many heads will be
lost, for God has written this in his holy books. Dear brothers, dear Arabs,
dear Muslims everywhere, Fahd and Hosni, who have always been known to be injust
and corrupt, have increased their injustice and their evil according to what
they're doing to their peoples.

For, as we know out of a story from the Holy Koran, the rulers, the corrupt
rulers, have always been ousted by their people for it is a right on all of us
to carry out the holy jihad, the holy war of Islam, to liberate the holy shrines
of Islam. While the ruler of Saudi Arabia called himself the custodian of the
two holy shrines, while in fact he is an agent, for he has given away his land
to the foreigners.

We call upon all Arabs, each according to his potentials and capabilities within
the teachings of Allah and according to the Muslim holy war of jihad, to fight
this U.S. presence of non-believers and to fight the stance taken by the Arab
agents who have followed these foreigners. And we hail the people of Saudi
Arabia who are being fooled by their rulers, as well as the people of dear
Egypt, as well as all the people of the Arab nations who are not of the same
position as their leaders, and they believe in their pride and their
sovereignity over their land. We call on them to revolt against their traitors,
their rulers, and to fight foreign presence in the holy lands. And we support
them, and more important, that God is with them.

Dear brothers, the children of Iraq will prove, I repeat that the deprived
children of Iraq - they are deprived of their milk - they will prove to all the
greedy people of the West that children are more capable and stronger. And those
who have betrayed their people and their land and their religion, they will be
embarrassed to find the children of Iraq struggling and resisting the
deprivation of milk. . . .

Dear brothers, you may have known, according to the date I have mentioned
previously, that these foreigners are depriving the people of Iraq from food and
medicine. And you also know who tried to let the people of Iraq die of hunger.
And you also know that this took place at the time of the Nazis, and this is
inhumane for it cut out medicine from a whole population and a whole population
suffered from this deprivation.

And as you may know, the children in Iraq are dying because of a foolish
decision taken by certain people. The children of Iraq are dying because they're
being deprived of their milk and their food and their medicine. And this was
adopted by the United States of America and they were always backed and
supported by the Zionists, for they have always encouraged them to do so. They
are backed by Zionist media and Zionist finances.

Call for Holy War

And you will not ever forget their evil actions against Arabs and against Iraqis
who are supported by all Muslims in the whole world, when all humanity will wake
up from its deep sleep and know where the truth lies. The children of Iraq
before its people - I repeat, the children of Iraq before its people refuse that
we borrow milk for them from the non-believers and the evil and their - the
girls of Iraq will suffer and sacrifice for their case.

The land of Iraq will always respond to its people, for it has never let its
people down. It was always - the land of Iraq has always offered help to any
fighter, to any believer throughout history. They will be capable of defeating
any foreign intervention, even if they stay as they are, or even if more troops
are added to them, for Iraqis, as you all know, you will never imagine the will
of the Iraqi people, for it is not convenient for believers to be frightened
away from such numbers or such troops.

And this is a recitation from the Holy Koran calling for holy jihad. How then,
if we know that the number of Iraqi volunteers who've offered themselves and
sacrificed themselves for the sake of the principles of their nations is more
than 5 million Iraqis, who are all willing to participate - and this is in
addition to the 1 million Iraqi armed forces - for if the non-believers want to
fight us they must know that they should be more than this number, for they
might even be 12 million, at least.

But as you know, dear brothers, the air forces cannot ever carry out a battle in
land despite its modern technology. And this is the law of all the traditional
wars that have taken place throughout history. And the last power that fought
this were the people of Vietnam and the Americans have transferred southern
Vietnam to a U.S. base for their own good to fight the North Vietnam.

They turned it into a comfortable base for their soldiers and they are doing the
same thing in the holy lands of Najd and Hijaz in Saudi Arabia, as you probably
know.

How, therefore, if they face Iraq under different circumstances and conditions -
for the people of Vietnam, like the people of Iraq, have a strong will and can
live up to any of these battles. For at the level of the Arab rulers, and Arab
sheikhs, and the Muslim people, who are all believers and sons of the Islamic
nations, they all stand foremost among the poor nations who are exploited by the
Americans and others. And before all of this, God is with them and backing them.

They will regret their involvement and they will be badly defeated if they ever
start a military battle.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Text

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              269 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 7, 1990, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Sihanouk and Hun Sen Agree To Join Talks on Cambodia

BYLINE: Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 7, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 138 words

DATELINE: JAKARTA, Indonesia, Sept. 6

After appeals from Foreign Minister Ali Alatas of Indonesia, with help from
Beijing and Washington, the two men acceded.

Mr. Hun Sen's decision was said to be aided by the American announcement on
Wednesday that Washington would hold direct talks with the Phnom Penh Government
through American diplomats in Laos. Washington decided to begin direct talks
with Vietnam in mid-July, when it withdrew diplomatic support for the opposition
coalition, nominally headed by Prince Sihanouk but dominated by the Khmer Rouge,
in the United Nations.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              270 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 7, 1990, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Confrontation in the Gulf;
As Forces in Gulf Build, U.S. Weighs Its Options

BYLINE: By R. W. APPLE Jr., Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 9, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1579 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 6



A Decision on the Sanctions

At some point, certainly before the end of the year, Mr. Bush will have to
decide whether economic sanctions have been effective. If the answer is no, he
will face a decision about whether to use military force and if so, when, where,
how much and to what end.

At this point, much of the military advice the President is getting urges him to
rely on air power and technological superiority and avoid a land war to the
degree possible.

Most analysts do not expect Mr. Hussein to force Mr. Bush's hand by launching an
offensive of his own before mid-October. If the Iraqis did strike, American
forces would lack a land force with heavy equipment sufficient to throw back an
all-out assault by the 265,000 Iraqi troops based in the southern half of Iraq
and in Kuwait.

By some estimates, the United States, the Saudis and the rest of the
international force would be hard pressed to prevent damage to the Saudis' main
oilfields. But they are confident that an Iraqi offensive could eventually be
stalled and contained, while air assaults on stategic targets in Iraq would
eventually batter Iraq's military capacity and morale.

The Potential Scenarios

After mid-October, according to high-ranking Defense Department and White House
officials, who spoke on condition that they not be identified, the President's
options for offensive action would range from attacks on dams and roads as a way
to step up economic pressure, through an attempt to kill or kidnap Mr. Hussein,
the Iraqi leader, to an extensive military campaign to push the Iraqis out of
Kuwait - and perhaps to continue to move into Iraq itself, perhaps all the way
to Baghdad.

Such a campaign might well involve a drive north by Army units on the left
flank, marines on the right, and an amphibious assault, not unlike those at
Anzio and Inchon, by other marine forces now held in floating reserve.

Fighting could begin in one of three basic ways. Iraq could attack Saudi Arabia,
which American experts, both inside and outside the Government, now consider
extremely unlikely. President Bush could decide that the sanctions would not
suffice, in a reasonable length of time, and order an offensive. Or a war could
grow out of a small incident, like an inadvertent clash between American and
Iraqi warplanes or some grievous mistreatment of hostages.

The fabrication or exaggeration of a pretext for action by either side is not
unthinkable, as the manipulation of the Gulf of Tonkin incident at a key moment
in Vietnam shows.

A Technological Edge

If war began, American planners would seek to make the most of their
technological capacity, which includes such elements as electronic deception to
complicate Iraqi air defense, laser- and radar-guided missiles and, above all,
an arsenal of weapons and devices that should enable American troops to fight
effectively at night, something the Iraqis are not yet able to do.

The planners would also seek to exploit vastly superior American air power to
minimize the huge Iraqi superiority in troop and tank strength. Even when the
United States deployment as now envisaged is complete, Baghdad is expected to
have at least a two-to-one advantage in men and tanks, officers said.

Even the battleship Wisconsin could come into play, launching its cruise
missiles at important targets like command and control centers.

By using missiles fired from afar, the Pentagon strategists would hope to limit
American casualties and avoid the kind of ''Arab-Israeli desert blood bath,'' as
one general put it, that took place in 1973. More than 20,000 soldiers were
killed or wounded in the two-week war that year.

''The numbers are scary, especially their infantry and artillery strength,''
said Bernard E. Trainor, a retired Marine general and former New York Times
military correspondent who heads the national security program at Harvard
University's Kennedy School of Government. ''But in the end, numbers don't
count, if you have a concept that exploits your enemy's vulnerabilities. The
Germans were outnumbered 10-to-1 in 1940, but they still overran France.''

The Need for Troop Strength

Col. Harry Summers, a retired Army officer who writes and lectures on tactics,
is much less sanguine.

''You can certainly punish him with air power,'' Colonel Summers said of Mr.
Hussein. ''You can destroy his air force. But that's not decisive if what you
want to do is forcibly eject Saddam Hussein from Kuwait and make it hard for him
to return. That takes troops on the ground, and I wouldn't want to try it with
any less than 10 armored divisions, which you could only get by moving most of
the Seventh Army down from Europe.''

A first step in any offensive operation would be the destruction of Iraqi
fighters and bombers, either on the ground or in aerial combat, and the
elimination of the 36 SCUD-B missile launchers.

Anthony Cordesman, the author of ''The Lessons of Modern War,'' a history of the
Iran-Iraq conflict, said that ''we have the ability to win air superiority very
quickly.''

The Iraqi Air Force's planes - a few top-notch Soviet-built MIG-29's but mostly
older MIG-23's and French-built Mirages - are considered inferior to the best
American hardware.

Available to American commanders would be Awacs radar planes to help fighter
pilots spot enemy aircraft, EF-111 and EC-130 electronic jamming planes to
confuse Iraqi electronic systems, and a huge arsenal of fighters,
fighter-bombers, ground-attack planes and bombers - F-15's, F-16's, A-10's and
Harriers in Saudi Arabia, F-111's and F-117's in Turkey, F-14's, F/A-18's and
A-6's on board the carriers Independence, Saratoga and Eisenhower, and even B-52
bombers based on Diego Garcia island in the Indian Ocean.

For Iraqi forces in the desert, there would be no jungle to provide cover, which
greatly reduced the value of American air superiority in Vietnam.

Talk of 'Surgical Strikes'

In theory, the economic pressure could be tightened through the limited use of
air power. Mr. Hussein's fragile domestic economy, strained by the embargo on
food shipments, could be further disrupted through attacks on bridges, highways
or even the two big dams just west of Baghdad and other hydroelectric plants.

There is much talk in Washington of ''surgical strikes'' from the air, but the
experience of the Vietnam War, when pilots found it tremendously difficult to
hit even large targets like the Paul Doumer bridge in Hanoi, makes some
observers skeptical. A former naval pilot who flew dozens of missions over Hanoi
and Haiphong said recently, ''Surgical strikes exist only in think-tanks and
mental institutions.''

In addition, the American military establishment, starting with Gen. Colin L.
Powell, the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, is firmly opposed to gradual
escalation or limited offensives, having concluded that the Vietnam War was lost
precisely because of a limited application of force.

''Once you get air superiority, they will want to flatten Baghdad,''
Representative Aspin commented.

Flattening Baghdad would inevitably entail thousands of civilian casualties -
Muslims killed by Christians - and that might put intolerable pressure on the
coalition of western and Arab countries lined up against Iraq.

''We ought to play to our strength, which is air power,'' said Senator Sam Nunn,
the Georgia Democrat who heads the Senate Armed Services Committee. ''But if we
use military force in a way that alienates a lot of our partners in this
operation, we will lose the embargo, and we will have that erode very rapidly,
in which case we will be counterproductive to our own aims.''

One Military Solution

Finally, an extensive campaign of air bombardment would threaten the Western
hostages who have reportedly been dispersed to strategic targets around Iraq to
act as ''human shields.''

Asked what he would do if told that a military solution was needed, a leading
Congressional expert on Mideast warfare commented: ''Establish air superiority,
launch air attacks on civil and military targets away from population centers,
especially in the southern desert, then try to push into and through Kuwait,
stopping on a line curving northwest from Basra, where the fertile land ends and
the major highways leading south from Baghdad peter out.''

Such a plan, which was mentioned in interviews with several other experts, would
be dependent for its long-term success on either inducing the downfall of a
humiliated Saddam Hussein or a continued program of air interdiction to prevent
the effective resupply of Iraqi troops and thus to make a major counterattack
impossible.

''Even that,'' said the expert, who described himself as a hawk, ''would be
quite a difficult proposition.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: U.S. Army tank commanders sitting in the shade of an Abrams M-I
Wednesday as they reviewed tactics during maneuvers in the Saudi desert.
(Associated Press)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              271 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 7, 1990, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Iran-Contra Witness Testifies on Bank Account

BYLINE: By DAVID JOHNSTON, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 14, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 674 words

DATELINE: BALTIMORE, Sept. 6


Mr. Fernandez, a former C.I.A. station chief in Costa Rica, was accused of
making false statements to investigators about his role in efforts to supply the
Nicaraguan rebels, or contras, after Congress banned direct military assistance
to them in 1984.

Testimony on Bank Practices

In the Clines case, the chief prosecutor, Stuart E. Abrams, struggled through
hours of testimony today as he introduced dozens of financial documents to
explain the network of foreign companies and Swiss bank accounts used in the
operation to supply the rebels.

In his testimony, Mr. Zucker explained the intricacies of Swiss banking, how
shell companies were formed in Panama and Liberia and how funds were
electronically transferred to and from accounts identified by number or by an
alias.

Mr. Zucker is the head of a Swiss financial management concern, Compagnie de
Services Fiduciaries, or CSF, which supervised the finances of the companies and
accounts set up to conduct the secret arms shipments to the contras.

On Wednesday, the Government's first witness, Richard V. Secord, said the CSF
records pertaining to the arms sales had been falsified. But Mr. Zucker
testified today that the company's documents had been maintained in accordance
with standard Swiss accounting procedures.

Charges on Income Reporting

In an interview after he had testified, Mr. Secord declined to say who he
believed had altered the documents or to explain the motive for such an act.
Congressional investigators who examined many of the same records in their
inquiry into the Iran-contra affair concluded in a November 1987 report that the
records were largely accurate.

Mr. Clines is charged in a four-count indictment with underreporting his
earnings from the arms sales to the rebels and falsely stating on his income tax
forms that he controlled no foreign bank accounts. If convicted he faces a
maximum penalty of 16 years in prison and fines of $1 million.

Mr. Clines was hired by Mr. Secord to join the supply operation after he had
retired from the C.I.A. He served in the C.I.A in a variety of covert
assignments, including one in Laos during the Vietnam War, when he met Mr.
Secord.

Denial From Lawyer

Money for the supply operation came from donations, from contributions of other
governments and from the proceeds of arms sales to Iran.

Mr. Clines's lawyer has denied that Mr. Clines knew that he controlled a foreign
bank account, but Mr. Zucker testified that he discussed the details of the
account at a meeting with Mr. Clines in early 1986.

At the meeting, Mr. Zucker said, it was Mr. Clines who said, '' 'Let's go ahead
and open an account under an assumed name.' I sat there and thought for a
minute, and I proposed the name C. Tea.''

During the Congressional hearings into the affair in 1987, another business
partner of Mr. Secord, Albert A. Hakim, said that by December 1986 the C. Tea
account contained $990,000, which he said was later withdrawn by Mr. Clines.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              272 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 7, 1990, Friday, Late Edition - Final

At the Movies

BYLINE: By Lawrence Van Gelder

SECTION: Section C; Page 11, Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 720 words


''On this drive,'' he said, ''naturally, the head cowboy dies. The cook goes
crazy. We end up in the middle of nowhere with 300 head of cattle we have to
drive ourselves.''

Mr. Kirby said the character he plays is a fellow who's having a very hard time
growing up. He is also the sort of character Mr. Kirby likes to portray.

''I like characters that start off in one place and end up in another place
emotionally; he grows from this experience,'' said Mr. Kirby, whose films also
include ''Tin Men,'' ''This Is Spinal Tap,'' ''The Godfather, Part II,''
''Modern Romance'' and ''Good Morning, Vietnam.''

''All I've ever wanted to do,'' Mr. Kirby said, ''is play interesting characters
and work in projects I've believed in.'' Now that he's been in some hit movies,
he said, some people ask if he isn't dissatisfied: Doesn't he want more?
''Yes,'' he said. ''I would like to carry any picture where I played an
interesting character. Just personality work doesn't interest me. Sometimes the
leading man in a film has the least interesting character to play. I consider
Robert De Niro and Dustin Hoffman great character actors. These people carry
interesting films playing interesting characters.''

Mr. Kirby said when he was first approached by the producer Mike Lobell and the
director Andrew Bergman about playing the role of the petty scam artist Victor
Ray in ''The Freshman,'' he went off to a meeting in a hotel having read the
screenplay.

''Did you like the script?'' he remembers being asked. ''What do you think of
Vic?'' ''A wonderful character,'' he replied.

''Let us tell you who we have,'' he remembers someone saying. ''We've got Marlon
Brando and Matthew Broderick.'' Mr. Kirby said: ''I looked at these guys and
figured I'd better humor them. I said, 'That's wonderful.' '' But it was also
true. And, he said, ''Eventually they said, 'Come and be in our movie.' ''

As for the future, Mr. Kirby said, ''I have what I call a 3 o'clock in the
morning list, and that means if Rob Reiner or Barry Levinson or Scorsese or
Coppola - if any of these guys called me at 3 o'clock in the morning and said:
'We really don't know what we're going to do. We're down here on the corner with
a camera. Do you want to come down here and be a part of it?' I'd say I'd be
there in a minute. That's all I know. I don't know what I'm going to do next. I
just hope to do interesting work.''

Glenn Close, Diva

David Puttnam, who produced the Academy Award-winning ''Chariots of Fire,'' and
Istvan Szabo, who directed the Academy Award-winning ''Mephisto,'' have joined
forces on a new film starring Glenn Close, who drew more than a little attention
as the vengeance-bent fury in ''Fatal Attraction.''

The new production, being filmed for Warner Brothers in Budapest and Paris, is
''Meeting Venus,'' a comedy about the chaos surrounding the effort to stage an
opera in Paris with a multi-national company.

Ms. Close, fresh from Franco Zeffirelli's film version of ''Hamlet,'' is playing
the role of an internationally renowned soprano (soundtrack voice by Kiri Te
Kanawa). Other members of the cast include Niels Arestrup and Erland Josephson.
The music, from Wagner's ''Tannhauser,'' will be performed by the Philharmonia
Orchestra and the Ambrosian Singers, conducted by Marek Janovski.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              273 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 8, 1990, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Credit Reagan for Destroying Social Programs

SECTION: Section 1; Page 22, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 333 words


Yet, Mr. Butler argues that the distribution of vouchers for day care, housing
and education to the poor would enable them to solve their own problems; he
talks about a poverty industry making a comfortable living off the poor, and he
opposes centralized Federal planning. Even if vouchers were a good idea, how
plausible is it to distribute purchasing power when there are no services to
buy? Since 1980, funds for housing, day care, medical and educational services
have been significantly reduced and, in some cases, eliminated.

The so-called new poverty industry is the result of privatization of formerly
Government-operated services by conservative Administrations. Washington has
asked the nonprofit sector to do much more with much less. Only if the Federal
Government puts dollars where it previously has given lip service can we give
coherent direction to the antipoverty war, and see results.

The Great Society was not America's domestic Vietnam. Indeed, the analogy is
ridiculous. What Vietnam should have taught us is that without full commitment,
wars eventually are lost.

RALPH NUNEZ
  New York, Aug. 21, 1990

The writer is president of Homes for the Homeless, an interfaith project of the
Cathedral of St. John the Divine.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              274 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 8, 1990, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Books of The Times;
Familiar Characters And Tricks of Vonnegut

BYLINE: By Christopher Lehmann-Haupt

SECTION: Section 1; Page 16, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 951 words


But what may be modestly alarming is the almost affectionate mordancy with which
Matsumoto's experience is described: ''When the bomb was dropped, he was playing
soccer during school recess. He chased a ball into a ditch at one end of the
playing field. He bent over to pick up the ball. There was a flash and wind.
When he straightened up, his city was gone. He was alone on a desert, with
little spirals of dust dancing here and there.''

Of course, it isn't Mr. Vonnegut who describes this frightening scene. It is one
Eugene Debs Hartke, who, according to an introductory editor's note by K. V.,
wrote the whole of ''Hocus Pocus'' on little scraps of paper while waiting to be
tried for some crime that will eventually be divulged by his narrative.

Eugene Debs Hartke, too, is a familiar Vonnegut creation. Not only is he hated
by his children, who have promised never to speak to him again for innocently
marrying a woman with insanity in her genes, he is also loathed by himself for
all the killing and lying he did in Vietnam. So if there's anything you don't
like about Eugene, he has probably beaten you to it. Besides, he has
tuberculosis. In ''Hocus Pocus,'' as usual in Mr. Vonnegut's fiction, there is a
contest between comedy and despair, between the vaudeville curtain and the
apocalyptic cloud. In the author's more recent novels these elements have
finished in a tie, with the darkness of the author's vision balanced by the
lightness of his style. Something was bound to give.

The lightness is there in ''Hocus Pocus'': the diagrams in Mr. Vonnegut's hand,
the typographical tics, the cute tag lines. Opposite the title is a page filled
with silhouettes of little men to illustrate the narrator's remark, ''If I were
a fighter plane instead of a human being, there would be little pictures of
people painted all over me.''

There are lines separating passages within the novel's chapters to indicate
where one scrap of paper ends and the next begins. As K. V. writes in his
editor's note, ''The shorter the passage, the smaller the scrap.'' Typical
scraps end with lines like: ''What a planet,'' ''There went the ball game,''
''What a story!'' ''Too late now'' or ''So now I have tuberculosis. Cough,
cough, cough.''

There are even funny passages in ''Hocus Pocus,'' like the scene in which
Eugene's long lost illegitimate son shows up and asks a series of questions
based on lies Eugene told the boy's mother during their one-night stand; or
Eugene's account of the perpetual-motion machines built by the founder of the
college for the learning-disabled wealthy, where Eugene used to teach: ''The
longest my students and I could get the best of them to run was 51 seconds. Some
eternity!'' But darkness and despair seem to have inched ahead in ''Hocus
Pocus.'' True, many of Eugene's blacker lines can be dismissed as excessive. Of
the notorious Donner-party cannibalism incident he writes, ''People who can eat
people are the luckiest people in the world.'' And some of the shorter scraps of
the novel have entries like: ''And the worst flaw is that we're just plain dumb.
Admit it! You think Auschwitz was intelligent?'' or ''How embarrassing to be
human.''

Still, Eugene's tortured conscience can sneak up and whack you one. One of his
students recalls how as a boy he got stuck between floors in a Bloomingdale's
department-store elevator. He ''believed himself to be at the center of a major
event in American history.'' He was sure that everyone from his parents up to
the President of the United States was aware of his problem. But after the
elevator jolted upward and the doors slithered open, there were only customers
waiting impatiently for the riders to get out so they could in. To which Eugene
responds that what the student has described ''to perfection'' is what ''it was
like to come home from the Vietnam War.''

Elsewhere, Eugene reads an article called ''The Protocols of the Elders of
Tralfamadore'' in a magazine, Black Garterbelt. In it, an anonymous sci-fi
writer describes how the wise inhabitants of Mr. Vonnegut's imaginary planet
once dreamed of spreading life forms throughout the universe. They concluded
that the most practical space travelers would be germs, but none were yet tough
enough to make the trip. The elders decided it was up to earth's people to
develop strong enough germs. So they fed a counterfeit line into the earthling's
Creation myth: ''Fill the Earth and subdue it; and have dominion over the fish
of the sea and over the birds of the air and over every living thing that moves
on the Earth.'' ''Cough.'' And there's Eugene's description of those ''little
dust devils'' that Hiroshi Matsumoto saw spinning in the ''blank tableland''
when he picked his soccer ball out of that ditch.

But if you find yourself succumbing to the author's nuclear apoplexy, you need
only to think about this atomic scene as carefully as Mr. Vonnegut seems to want
you to do. Of course it isn't real. No one would have survived a nuclear
explosion by ducking into a ditch. It is a cartoon conception, with the dust
devils out of some ''Roadrunner'' short.

Similarly, all of Mr. Vonnegut's prose techniques are so worn and slick from use
that they bounce away harmlessly. His vision may have darkened but he has been
at his games too long to make one take him seriously.

''Hocus Pocus'': it's a trickster's phony incantation. Most depressing of all
are the holes in this performer's gloves.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Kurt Vonnegut (Jill Krementz/G. Putnam's Sons)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              275 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 8, 1990, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

CONFRONTATION IN THE GULF;
Opponents to U.S. Move Have Poverty in Common

BYLINE: By ANDREW H. MALCOLM

SECTION: Section 1; Page 6, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1169 words


As they have historically in similar foreign crises, virtually every poll shows
overwhelming initial support for the Administration's movement of troops into
Saudi Arabia. The New York Times/CBS News Poll of 1,422 Americans conducted by
telephone Aug. 16 to 19 found that 77 percent supported the action.

But who are those who oppose the policy? According to political scientists and
polling experts, opposition in this crisis closely follows classic public
opinion patterns in conflicts in Korea, Vietnam and even the unsuccessful
invasion of Cuba at the Bay of Pigs.

'It's a Class Thing'

''Quite simply, it's a class thing,'' said George C. Edwards, professor of
political science at Texas A&M University and author of ''The Public Presidency:
The Pursuit of Popular Support'' (St. Martin's Press). ''And what determines
your economic class is your education.''

Of those in the Times/CBS News Poll who did not graduate from high school, 22
percent opposed the troop deployment; 12 percent of college graduates opposed
it. Of those earning less than $15,000, 27 percent were opposed; of those
earning more than $50,000, 8 percent were opposed. The trends reflected in the
Times/CBS News Poll continue to be picked up in polls by other organizations,
including a Gallup Poll over the weekend.

To some degree, a division along class lines also means a division along racial
lines: 35 percent of blacks in the Times/CBS News Poll oppose the sending of
United States troops to Saudi Arabia, as against 15 percent of whites.

Professor Edwards and others did not rule out the lingering influence of social
alienation among blacks, who made up a large portion of military draftees and
casualties in Vietnam and whose leaders, including the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther
King Jr., blamed that war for draining resources from domestic social programs.

The experts also noted that blacks tend to be Democrats and are thus predisposed
to opposing Republican military policy.

Although the polling data indicate that poor, uneducated blacks oppose the
military deployment in greater proportion than do poor, uneducated whites, the
experts nonetheless said the split was really one along class lines.

Following News Was Key

Because blacks are disproportionately represented among the less educated and
the less affluent, a larger percentage appears to oppose such military moves.

Samuel Kernell, professor of political science at the University of California,
San Diego, said, ''The uneducated, who by and large do not follow current events
closely, are simply not responsive to the same positive stimuli as the
better-educated and more affluent, who do tend to follow the news.''

He added: ''At the moment, Republican and Democratic leaders, the nation's
cue-givers, are in agreement and supportive. And informed citizens have no
independent flow of contradictory information.''

John E. Mueller, a political scientist at the University of Rochester and author
of ''War, Presidents and Public Opinion'' (Wiley & Sons), said: ''This is a new
incident, but an old phenomenon. It's the follower phenomenon. The well-educated
support the President at first, whatever he's doing. When President Johnson
stopped bombing North Vietnam, his support went up. When he started bombing
again, his support went up. The decline tends to come later.''

Professor Kernell said he expected support to dip by Thanksgiving as political
leaders began dividing along party lines and individuals accumulated their own
evidence. ''Gas prices may hit them hard,'' he said. ''A relative or friend may
be killed or wounded. They'll see the costs, but not the benefits. The erosion
will set in.''

Those new opponents will swell the existing minority, who do not seem
susceptible to persuasion, in part, because they are not listening. The
63-year-old Miss Birdsong, for example, estimates that she watches 10 hours of
television a day in her Troy, Ohio, apartment. But like many opponents in the
Times/ CBS News Poll in follow-up interviews, she will not watch the news.
''When that Iraq news comes on, I switch, unless it's interrupting a soap
opera,'' she said.

The poll, which had a margin of sampling error of plus or minus three percentage
points, found that of those following the news closely, 85 percent supported the
deployment of troops to Saudi Arabia, while among those who did not follow the
news closely, 59 percent supported it.

Eugene Patrick, a 52-year-old school bus mechanic in Florence, Miss., who has a
sixth-grade education and who does not read, said that he voted for Mr. Bush and
that he still believed Mr. Bush was a good president. ''That Iraq guy doesn't
need to be there,'' said Mr. Patrick. ''But we have no business there either.''

Mr. Patrick, who is black, was unaware of the involvement in the Iraq crisis of
prominent blacks, including the Rev. Jesse Jackson, who helped arrange the
release of some hostages from Iraq, or Gen. Colin L. Powell, Chairman of the
Joint Chiefs of Staff. But he said he thought there was a racial motive to
American military involvement.

''I believe a lot of people are worried the blacks are going to take over, and
sending them is some slick way of thinning the blacks out,'' he said.

According to the Department of Defense, as of June 30, the United States
military, excluding the Coast Guard, had 421,211 blacks (20.6 percent) among its
2,040,676 troops.

Kenneth Garnsey of Denison, Tex., a 51-year-old unemployed handyman who did not
attend high school, sees the Iraqi confrontation as ridiculous for another
reason. ''We're going to blow them up,'' said Mr. Garnsey, who is white. ''And
then we're going to pay to rebuild them. That's what we always do. We should
just bomb Iraq a little bit, like we did with Libya a few years ago. You don't
hear any more about them making trouble.''

Sandra Robertson, a Florence, Colo., housewife, agrees with Miss Birdsong's
opposition. ''We're always more interested in helping people in other countries
when we have poor and homeless here at home,'' she said.

Professor Edwards sees the confrontation's duration as the key factor in any
opinion shift this fall. ''The U.S. position may be the right one,'' he said.
''But it's difficult to defend over time. A war for cheap gasoline? The reasons
must resonate with the American public. Americans do not have a history of
making military sacrifices for economic gain. To fight, it has always been a
question of 'morality.' A Soviet attack on Western Europe? Yes. An invasion of
Cambodia? No. An invasion of Kuwait? I don't know.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Sandra Robertson, Housewife in Florence, Colo. ''We're always
more interested in helping people in other countries when we have poor and
homeless here at home.'' (Bruce McAllister for The New York Times); Kenneth
Garnsey, A handyman in Denison, Tex. ''We're going to blow them up, and then
we're going to pay to rebuild them. That's what we always do.'' (Mark Perlstein
for The New York Times); Eugene Patrick, A mechanic in Florence, Miss. ''I
believe a lot of people are worried the blacks are going to take over, and
sending them is some slick way of thinning the blacks out.'' (Hubert Worley Jr.
for The New York Times); Table listing U.S. citizen support of sending troops to
the Middle East.

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              276 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 8, 1990, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Phnom Penh Journal;
A New, Old Hotel Symbolizing Tragedy and Hope

BYLINE: By STEVEN ERLANGER, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 2, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 965 words

DATELINE: PHNOM PENH, Cambodia


He started in Taiwan, he said, a raw and noisy place that he did not find to his
liking, and having come here as a tourist in April, ''I discovered the builders
working on this hotel.''

Short-Term Commitments Only

He asked for a job, and was hired as manager of guest services on a one-year
contract. Commitment to anything longer in Cambodia is something of a matter of
faith.

Mr. Bertron soon discovered the oddity of this enterprise, which is not limited
to its distinction of having the only decent toilet paper in Cambodia, let alone
being the only hostelry in all of Indochina that provides little foil packets of
French shampoo in bathrooms of impeccable plumbing.

Construction began some 25 years ago under Prince Norodom Sihanouk, the former
King of Cambodia, who had been selected for the throne by Cambodia's colonial
masters, the French. The Prince insisted upon the setting, a lovely spot
overlooking the confluence of the Mekong, Tonle Sap and Bassac Rivers, and upon
the installation of a casino. By the time he was overthrown, in 1970, only the
casino was functioning.

Less then five years later, with the Khmer Rouge guerrillas pressing at Phnom
Penh, the roofless outer walls of the Cambodiana and its enormous grounds served
as a giant refugee camp for Cambodians fleeing the war.

Abandoned City, Forgotten Hotel

With the victory of the Khmer Rouge in April 1975, Phnom Penh was evacuated and
abandoned, a symbol to the Khmer Rouge of the decadent influence of an urbanized
West upon the pure spirit of the Cambodian peasantry.

Prince Sihanouk's Hotel Cambodiana, a weathering concrete shell, went unfinished
and unremarked. The Khmer Rouge had their own grand project, the purification of
Cambodia, which resulted in the deaths of more than a million Cambodians, more
than a seventh the population, in less than four years.

The Vietnamese expelled the Khmer Rouge in 1979 and installed a Government, now
led by Prime Minister Hun Sen, that slowly and largely by hand, with aid only
from the Communist world, has restored a semblance of normality to Phnom Penh.

In the last two years, the Government has been shedding the economic attributes
of Communism, never understood here in any intellectual sense, like an
ill-fitting, Vietnamese-made suit. While it has insisted, like Vietnam, on
preserving the single-party nature of the regime, it has tried to open itself to
Western aid, trade and investment, and it has made particular efforts to get
Cambodians who live in the West to visit and invest.

Plenty of Trade

Of trade, there has been plenty. Thais and Singaporeans, whose Governments
regard this one as illegitimate and as a puppet of Hanoi, swarm over the country
like ants on a sugar pile, looking for profits in everything from teak and gems
to used motorcycles and canned beer.

But except for a few projects, like a Japanese sawmill, there has been little
investment, in large part because of an American-led embargo. Singapore, in
particular, has been especially vocal in its ban on investment here and in
Vietnam.

Singaporeans have managed to shut their ears, however, and in fact represent the
major investors in the Hotel Cambodiana. Along with a wealthy Cambodian living
in Hong Kong, Singaporean investors have put more than $20 million into
finishing the hotel. But their participation is a delicate topic, with the
semi-official Straits Times newspaper in Singapore normally deleting any
reference to Singaporean investment in Cambodia in any articles it reprints.

One hundred rooms are open now, largely to journalists and an increasing number
of tourists, with work continuing on 280 more rooms. The only restaurant open is
a cavernous Chinese place that turns into a disco at night for wealthy
Cambodians. But Mr. Bertron said a coffee shop for Western breakfasts will soon
be finished, as well as ''a smaller, quieter restaurant,'' to be called the
Mekong and serving Continental cuisine, ''for a romantic dinner in the evening,
overlooking the river.''

Lighted Up Like Disneyland

If the interior furnishings and fittings seem rather more ''internationalized''
and bland than the swooping, gilded Cambodian roofs of the exterior, and the
lobby, with its polished marble floor, seems more Hong Kong than Phnom Penh, the
completion of the hotel itself is an extraordinary gesture of faith in the
future, as the Khmer Rouge continues its war in the countryside.

At night, the hotel is lighted up like Disneyland, and Cambodians come to gaze
upon it from the gates. When it was suggested to Mr. Bertron that the Khmer
Rouge might try to come up the river one night and loose a rocket at all this
splendor, he shrugged and said smoothly: ''Of course, these are the risks. I
prefer not to think about it and to be optimistic.''

Of the eager and numerous Cambodian staff, he has only praise. ''In the
beginning,'' he said, ''I simply wasn't prepared for all the kindness and trust
the Cambodians put in us.''

He gestured to the city beyond, saying: ''There is so much suffering in one way,
and so much beauty, too. It's built like paradise, but it's still living through
hell.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: One hundred rooms are open in the Hotel Cambodiana in Phnom Penh
and work continues on another 280 after construction began about 25 years ago.
Pedicab drivers waited for guests outside the hotel's gates. (Steven
Erlanger/The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              277 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 9, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Saying Luther's Goal Was One Church, Noted Lutheran Turns to Catholicism

BYLINE: By PETER STEINFELS

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 26, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1174 words



Pilgrimage of Changes

For Mr. Neuhaus, the break with Lutheranism was another step in a long political
and spiritual pilgrimage. Since the early 1970's he has moved from the front
lines of the civil rights and anti-Vietnam War movements to a monthly column in
The National Review, from the pastorate of a largely black Lutheran parish in
Brooklyn to an office in midtown Manhattan decorated with citations from Ronald
Reagan.

But in a recent interview, he emphasized that his decision to leave the church
was theological, not political. Mr. Neuhaus has long been identified with a
strand in Lutheranism that calls itself ''evangelical catholic,'' with a small
c. This group stresses that Luther's Reformation was aimed not at establishing a
separate church but at bringing a united Christian church into line with the
Reformers' view of the Gospel.

That 16th-century split may have been tragically unavoidable, Mr. Neuhaus said,
but it must not become a purpose in itself; it was justified only until Roman
Catholicism accepted the lessons of the Reformation.

That moment arrived, Mr. Neuhaus said, with the Second Vatican Council 25 years
ago and the growth of agreement between Catholics and Lutherans since then.

Discouraged by Merger

But though he had hoped that Lutheranism might restore its ties with
Catholicism, he had concluded that the Lutherans were like ''a people driven
into exile who did so well and found themselves so comfortable that they forgot
about returning to their home country.''

He became particularly discouraged when several Lutheran churches merged in 1988
to form the Evangelical Lutheran Church in America, a merger he said was not
guided by any ''ecumenical vision'' or theological theory. ''It was like merging
Macy's and K Mart,'' he said, ''a wiring together of interest groups.''

Mr. Neuhaus said his shift reflected the strengths as well as the weaknesses of
the ecumenical movement. Calling it ''a decision I've been wrestling with and in
some ways really resisting,'' he added:

''I have long believed that the Roman Catholic Church is the fullest expression
of the church of Christ through time. But I took very seriously a sense of
vocation that you should generally stay where God put you and do your duty
there. For me that was as a Lutheran and a Lutheran pastor.''

Mr. Neuhaus said he saw no problem in identifying himself with the statements of
Pope John Paul II. ''Over the last 20 years I have probably taken the teaching
statements of the Roman Catholic Church more seriously than many Roman Catholic
theologians,'' he said.

Departure Had Been Rumored

Lutheran theologians expressed dismay at Mr. Neuhaus's departure, which had been
rumored for months, but they said they did not expect it to lead to other
defections from the church or to strain relations between the Lutheran and
Catholic Churches.

William H. Lazareth, who has been Mr. Neuhaus's bishop in the Evangelical
Lutheran Church, said Mr. Neuhaus had been ''a trustworthy pastor in our
communion,'' and added, ''I wish Richard God's richest blessing in his
pilgrimage of faith.''

Other Lutherans, including some who share many of Mr. Neuhaus's premises, said
they did not agree with his reasoning. One of his oldest friends, Robert L.
Wilken, a professor of church history at the University of Virginia, said that
over the last century, ''there has been a gradual deepening in Lutheranism of
Catholic character and practices and self-understanding.'' Any setback from the
recent Lutheran merger ''is a passing phenomenon,'' he said, ''and the deeper
change will out.''

Gerhard Forde, who teaches theology at Lutheran Northwest Seminary in St. Paul,
Minn., says Catholics and Lutherans have moved closer together but have not yet
reached a solid consensus on the meaning of justification by faith. That idea, a
central concept for Luther and the Reformation, is that people are saved through
their belief in Jesus rather than through good works.

Mr. Neuhaus ''thinks we can best address this by being one church,'' Mr. Forde
said. ''I think it's not a matter of getting married first and talking
afterwards.''

Another theology professor at the same seminary, Lee E. Snook, went further.
''Richard John Neuhaus interprets the Reformation as a temporary blip,'' he
said. ''I see it as a permanent feature of Christianity.''

Mr. Neuhaus said he was ''painfully aware'' that some Lutherans might feel
distressed or even betrayed by his decision, but he added that most had been
very supportive, ''not in the sense that they agree but that they understand.''
He added that he regretted that some ''triumphalist'' Catholics might cheer his
decision as proof ''that any serious Christian will become a Roman Catholic.''

Mr. Neuhaus has written a score of books on Christianity and public life. In
recent years he has emerged as a leading theological spokesman for the
neoconservative movement, which broke with liberalism in the 70's and 80's over
issues like Communism and affirmative action. In 1984 he became director of the
Center on Religion and Society, a study group in Manhattan financed by the
conservative Rockford Institute.

In May 1989, in a dispute that led him to accuse the parent institute of
insensitivity ''to the classic language of anti-Semitism,'' he was locked out of
his office and his staff was dismissed. He is now head of Religion and Public
Life, another neoconservative Manhattan study center.

In recent works he has concentrated on arguing that American democracy needs,
and American religion should provide, a morally informed public philosophy. In a
1987 book, ''The Catholic Moment'' (Harper & Row), he wrote that the Catholic
Church's tradition, size and resources uniquely equipped it to fill this need.

In earlier works he accused the mainline Protestant churches of abdicating the
task by adopting liberal outlooks. But he said his religious shift was not
related to these political concerns. ''This is very much a theologically driven
decision,'' he said, adding: ''Liturgically, aesthetically - dare I say
musically, in particular - I was placed in Lutheran contexts that were extremely
rich. There was grace galore in Lutheranism that I had not begun to tap.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: The Rev. Richard John Neuhaus, a nationally known Lutheran
theologian, said he was ''painfully aware'' that some Lutherans might feel
distressed or even betrayed by his decision to become a Roman Catholic and seek
ordination as a Catholic priest. (Eddie Keating for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              278 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 9, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

CONFRONTATION IN THE GULF;
Recalling Kissinger's Visit, and Parades That End Abruptly

BYLINE: By THOMAS L. FRIEDMAN, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 15, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 936 words

DATELINE: TAIF, Saudi Arabia, Sept. 7


While in 1973 the Saudis took the windfall oil dollars they earned from the
United States and recycled them by depositing the money in American banks, this
time around they are recycling some of their profits by paying for the American
troops guarding their kingdom from President Saddam Hussein of Iraq.

Mr. Baker seems to enjoy having to ask the Saudis for money no more than Mr.
Kissinger enjoyed pleading with them to turn the oil tap back on. But business
is business. Shortly before Mr. Baker landed in Jidda last Thursday to begin his
10-day fund-raising tour to Europe and the Middle East, members of his traveling
press party presented him with an engraved tin cup. On it were written the
words, ''Nothing less than a billion, please.''

Mr. Baker accepted the tin cup with a good-natured laugh, but said what he would
really like is a new airplane to replace his aged Boeing 707, which cannot even
fly to Europe without stopping to refuel in Ireland.

A Good Election Lasts

While Mr. Baker met Friday in a mountain resort in western Saudi Arabia with the
exiled Emir of Kuwait, Sheik Jabar al-Ahmed al-Sabah, two Kuwaiti ministers
briefed reporters on their views of the situation in the gulf. Most of the
Kuwaiti Cabinet and ruling family fled Kuwait a few steps ahead of the advancing
Iraqi Army and are now ensconced in the Taif Sheraton.

One of the questions that Minister of Housing Yahya al-Sumait was repeatedly
pressed on was whether the ruling Sabah family would be prepared to submit to an
election in Kuwait as part of a peace settlement. Mr. Sumait said a new election
was not necessary because the Sabahs had already won a recent election - well,
sort of recent.

''I know Kuwaitis,'' the minister said. ''I can say openly that no one in Kuwait
will want any leadership other than the Sabah family. We have elected them in
1756, and they have been our leaders since.''

An Ominous Welcome

Whatever the private thoughts of Saudis about the American presence, for now
their public demeanor could not be more welcoming. Mr. Baker visited a Saudi air
base in the western part of the country, and reporters traveling with him were
allowed to interview some of the American troops.

Bryan Westey, a 25-year-old airman first class from St. Paul, said that whenever
he goes into town, ''the Saudis really treat us kindly.''

''You feel like you are in a parade when you walk down the street because so
many people are always waving at you,'' he said.

For reporters who served in Beirut, Lebanon, during the American Marine
deployment there between 1982 and 1984 that parade imagery brought back some bad
memories. The marines who went to Beirut to keep the peace also reported during
their first few months that they felt as though they were in a parade whenever
they walked down the boulevards of Beirut. Lebanese would throw rice and shower
them with candy. But that changed, tragically for many of the Americans. A
suicide truck bomb blew up the Americans' barracks on Oct. 23, 1983, killing 241
servicemen.

Such experiences seemed to be on the minds of some of the American troops based
in Saudi Arabia. Of those gathered at the air base to meet with Secretary Baker,
to a man they seemed to back the President's decision to send them to protect
the desert kingdom.

But to a man they also seemed concerned about the depths of domestic support in
the United States. The first questions many asked was: ''What do people back
home think about what we're doing here? Do they still support it?'' They all
seemed to be infected to some degree or another with that post-Vietnam wariness
that any American military operation that lasts more than a week will see its
domestic support eroded daily.

'Lets Do Something'

Either consciously or unconsciously, Mr. Baker seemed to be reading the
soldiers' minds when he stood next to an F-111 fighter jet parked in a desert
hangar to address the several hundred men.

''We are at a point in the development of world affairs where we are facing the
first world crisis of the post-cold war era,'' Mr. Baker said. ''How the United
States reacts is extraordinarily important in determining the nature of the
world order to come. I can't tell you the degree to which world opinion supports
what you are doing.''

David Black, a 28-year-old airman with the 48th Tactical Fighter Wing, took in
Mr. Baker's words and applauded him along with his colleagues. He then turned
and said:

''No new news. Same old thing. It won't last long. I don't think everyone is
going to take it forever. I mean, if we are just going to sit here in a
stalemate, that isn't good. I think everyone is going to ask what we are sitting
out here for. Is it for the oil companies? Is it for America? Is it for Saudi?
Is it for Kuwait? I mean we are just getting kind of tired sitting around. Let's
do something.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: A United States Air Force sentry, whose face was shielded from
sun by a scarf and sunglasses, guarding a Saudi air base last week. (Pool Photo
via Reuters)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              279 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 9, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Sihanouk Makes Concession on Cambodian Talks

BYLINE: By STEVEN ERLANGER, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 4, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 655 words

DATELINE: JAKARTA, Indonesia, Sept. 8


In a statement, issued in Beijing, Prince Sihanouk announced that he would make
a concession of his own and agree to an even division of the interim body,
called the Supreme National Council, between the rival claimants in Cambodia, as
Mr. Hun Sen has demanded. The council is intended to embody Cambodian
sovereignty until elections.

Early in June, Mr. Hun Sen and Prince Sihanouk agreed to such a council, but the
Communist Khmer Rouge, the strongest military faction in the opposition
coalition, refused to participate. The Prince then withdrew.

But today, after discussions with the Chinese Prime Minister, Li Peng, Prince
Sihanouk said the coalition he heads would be content with six seats, the same
number as the Government in Phnom Penh.

If the council chose to have a chairman, it could pick a 13th member. The United
Nations has expressed its preference for Prince Sihanouk.

The United Nations plan envisions international administrators in charge of the
main government ministries, diplomats said. If the council agreed on particular
matters, the United Nations would go along. But if agreement were lacking,
officials from the international organization would decide.

Mr. Hun Sen is likely to have reservations about ceding so much control, but he
had no reaction tonight.

Prince Sihanouk said he had discussed his proposal at length with Mr. Li. Asian
diplomats suggested that Mr. Li had pushed the Prince to compromise on the
council. The diplomats said the Chinese and Vietnamese had discussions this week
through Beijing's ambassador in Hanoi.

Pushing Their Proxies

It is clear that the big powers are pushing their proxies to come to some
arrangement here. The United States announced that it would talk directly to
Phnom Penh; the Soviet Union then said it would talk to Prince Sihanouk. And the
Chinese, diplomats say, have been helpful in pushing the Prince and the Khmer
Rouge to endorse the United Nations plan.

In his statement, Prince Sihanouk said ''serious health problems, which have
intensified in the last 24 hours,'' prevented him from coming here. The problem,
his aides said, was kidney stones.

But Prince Sihanouk's son and representative here, Prince Norodom Ranariddh,
hinted at another reason. He said his father would not have acted in the same
way if Mr. Hun Sen had not made recent remarks ''not very friendly to
Sihanouk.''

In a broadcast on Friday, Mr. Hun Sen urged Prince Sihanouk to participate in
the talks here and compared him to a superstar soccer player, like Pele or Diego
Maradona.

Remarks like that, Prince Ranariddh said, ''amounted to sabotage.''

Prince Sihanouk, who is 69 years old and once ruled Cambodia, is known to
dislike being put on the same footing with the 39-year-old Mr. Hun Sen. Mr. Hun
Sen grew up as a peasant and his Government was originally installed by the
Vietnamese, after they drove out the Khmer Rouge in 1979 and occupied the
country.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              280 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 9, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

FILM;
Why We Love the Mafia in the Movies

BYLINE: By PETER MAAS; Peter Maas's new book, ''In a Child's Name,'' will be
published in November by Simon & Schuster. It is not about the Mafia.

SECTION: Section 2; Page 23, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1818 words


Then, whatever success ''The Valachi Papers'' enjoyed was immediately dwarfed by
Mario Puzo's novel ''The Godfather'' and Francis Ford Coppola's two epic movie
presentations in 1972 and 1974, the first based on the book and the second a
totally cinematic extension of it.

More than that, Puzo cum Coppola crystallized a national need that apparently
had escaped our usually alert seers of popular culture - something of mythic
proportions to replace the western saga. And suddenly, there it was: the Mafia!

Unlike the English, who in an identity crisis can always comfort themselves with
thoughts of Camelot, the Knights of the Round Table and good old Lancelot, or,
say, the Germans with their Nibelungenlied (which, come to think about it, may
not be all that comforting, at least to the rest of the world), we are a young
country with fashionable myths produced for the most part, suitably enough, in
that great American dream factory - i.e., Hollywood.

The western, for example, had a pretty good run. ''Go west, young man,'' said
Horace Greeley to a nation gripped by the fervor of the frontier spirit, but it
was Hollywood that engendered and cultivated the myth, imbedding it so deeply in
the American psyche.

Who of a certain age cannot remember the clock ticking away in ''High Noon'' as
Gary Cooper bravely strides alone down the street to confront a gang of
cutthroats arriving on the noon train while craven townsfolk hide behind locked
doors? Or the chill you felt when Alan Ladd as the mysterious stranger in
''Shane,'' on behalf of defenseless, God-fearing homesteaders, gamely takes on
the villainous Jack Palance, a hired gun for the cattle barons - dressed all in
black, in case we don't get the message - with his terrible, death's head grin.
Or ''Bad Day at Black Rock,'' a western in modern guise, in which one-armed
Spencer Tracy, another mysterious stranger, steps off a train in an isolated
community, to give a World War II Silver Star to the father of a young
Japanese-American soldier killed in combat under his command in Europe, only to
learn that the locals have murdered the father in a burst of post-Pearl Harbor
patriotism.

These films not only were marvelously directed and acted, but as befitted their
influential place in our collective unconscious, they often invited serious
public controversy. Was ''Shane'' too idealized a portrait of what we as a
people were all about? Wasn't ''High Noon'' underneath really a seductive paean
to fascism, with the strong man stepping forward to do what ordinary citizens
can't or won't do for themselves? And ''Bad Day at Black Rock,'' released in the
middle of the McCarthy witch-hunt era, was roundly attacked as being crafted by
sinister Communist forces in Hollywood bent on undermining American virtue.

All at once, though, it was academic. By the early 60's the western, for any
practical purpose, had become obsolete. Irrelevant. At the first sight of
sagebrush, audiences right and left began nodding off.

The only new frontier was John F. Kennedy's. Real life wasn't so simple, so
black and white. America, to coin a phrase, had lost its innocence. A shootout
at the O.K. Corral didn't resolve anything for anyone anymore. Among other
items, there was Vietnam. The Woodstock generation. The civil rights movement.
Etc.

I like to think, though, that Hollywood itself hammered home the final nail in
the coffin in 1974 with the hilarious western sendup ''Blazing Saddles.'' Maybe
the thought of a black sheriff cleaning up things, a black railroad gang
suddenly crooning Cole Porter songs, triggered laughter that was, well, a little
too nervous. Uh, chickens coming home to roost.

Enter now the Mafia to embody and reflect our deepest anxieties, yearnings,
wonderment and, most important, our imagination. What better mirrors fierce free
enterprise with everyone's (shiver) life literally on the line, the
resourcefulness of a nation ever on the move, constantly plunging into
innovative and profitable technologies (like, say, casino gambling)? Who among
us, having been wronged, has not fantasized about calling upon brothers in blood
to wreak suitable vengeance - an ice-picked body, perhaps, trussed like a turkey
bobbing up somewere?

Even the late Joe Valachi, who was the first member of the Mafia to reveal its
innermost secrets, had a great idea for the opening scene of a movie, which he
described during one of my interviews with him. We are in the murky depths of
New York's East River. A scuba diver slowly wends his way downstream along the
botton. All around him is a forest of bodies, upright in ''concrete overshoes,''
or held down by chains and anchors, twisting in the current. Was this art
imitating life? Or was it the other way around? After all, Valachi himself had
been a party to the placement of many such bodies during his long mob career. In
this instance, his problem was that he couldn't figure out where the plot would
go from there.

The funny thing is that when both ''The Valachi Papers'' and then ''The
Godfather'' first appeared, there were instant and pretty vociferous outcries
that ''the Mafia was a myth,'' which only goes to prove the old adage that it
takes a myth to make one.

Indeed, whipped up by the real Mafia, a then insecure Italian-American political
establishment got the White House under Lyndon Johnson to try to suppress ''The
Valachi Papers'' on the grounds that (I'm not kidding) the book was ''injurious
to law enforcement.'' On the other hand, I still remember Mario Cuomo, currently
the Governor of New York, telling me way back when he was entering politics that
he refused to allow his children to see ''The Godfather'' because it ''glorified
gangsters.''

The other funny thing is that amid all the furor about whether or not there was
a Mafia, one studio head rejected ''The Valachi Papers'' because he didn't want
to worry about what might happen when he started his car in the morning. And I
still vividly recall listening to an undercover F.B.I. tape recording a somber
gathering of Mafiosi. The subject under prolonged discussion was the casting of
''The Godfather.'' Everyone's favorite (to play himself, naturally) appeared to
be Paul Newman. ''Hey, I got blue eyes, don't I?''

Slices of reality like these are essential to myths. Otherwise, how are we to
relate to them? Otherwise, it's back to the O.K. Corral.

The fictional ''Godfather'' wrought what a nonfiction Valachi never could. It
was myth-making at its most magical. Puzo's wonderful characters brought to life
through Coppola's directional genius took an intricately structured ''other''
world that was, and remains, in fact without the slightest hint of social
redemption and reinvented it, populating not with good guys and bad, but with
people you could root for and against - and, man and woman, identify with.

Its heroes are flawed, not superhuman projections of good over evil. Its
personas are caught in destinies not of their own making. Never mind that
loyalty and honor play no part in the actual Mafia. Perceived reality is what
counts here. The ''Godfather'' saga contains everything that concerns and
excites us: family, romance, betrayal, power, lust, greed, legitimacy and, yes,
salvation. And it is all played out on a grand stage, with death, inevitable and
most often violent, waiting in the wings. Its roots are foreign, yet the
battlefield is as American as apple pie. We are, as always, a nation of
immigrants.

The dividing line is drugs, our national scourge, the same line that real
Mafiosi vainly fall back on to try to differentiate themselves from one another.
Once that was established, venality is simply a matter of degree. What's the
difference, after all, between someone out to control private garbage collection
with the judicious use of baseball bats on kneecaps and a cabal of ostensibly
upright savings and loan bank officials bilking the public out of billions of
dollars?

Comes at long last, after a lapse of some 18 years, ''Godfather III.'' We live
in volatile times and in the interim there have been any number of Mafia movies.
There has even been an echo of ''Blazing Saddles.'' In one recent film, ''The
Freshman,'' Marlon Brando marvelously satirized himself as Don Corleone. The
running gag in the film is the sudden shock of confused recognition by various
characters when they encounter him. But when I saw it, I felt that the audience,
in fact, in their suspension of disbelief, shared this very same shock and at
heart were truly comforted to see the old don as they would like him to be -
all-powerful, naturally, no one to cross, but kind of benign and quirky, kind
of, well, grandfatherly.

As they say in Hollywood, the big question is, does the myth have legs? One
undeniable reality is its price tag. According to available statistics, the
first ''Godfather'' came in at about $7 million. ''Godfather II'' was about
twice that. ''Godfather III'' appears to come close to tripling the first two
films combined in production costs, a rather large gamble by any standard.

My bet is that it's going to be a ticket you can't refuse. Along with Coppola,
returning to familiar turf, there's Al Pacino, Diane Keaton, et al. And from
what I can gather, the themes remain comfortably, and operatically, the same:
father/son relationships, the pull of traditional values, the desire for
legitimacy, all under the shadow of the knife, the gun and the garrote.

Let the English have Lancelot, the Germans their Siegfried, the Arabs Ali Baba.
I'll take Michael Corleone. He's a lot more relevant. I mean, there's a fellow
who's got problems.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Al Pacino as Michael Corleone in ''The Godfather Part
III''-people to root for and against, and even to identify with (Paramount
Pictures) (pg. 23); Al Pacino, in foreground, as Michael Corleone, in Sicily
during the filming of ''Godfather III'' (Steve Schapiro/Paramount Pictures) (pg.
45)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              281 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 9, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THE ANNOTATED CALENDAR: FILM

BYLINE: By CARYN JAMES

SECTION: Section 2; Page 48, Column 5; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 3282 words


''WHITE HUNTER, BLACK HEART.'' Shot in Africa, based on Peter Viertel's bitter
yet adoring 1955 novel about a film director suspiciously like John Huston
making ''The African Queen.'' Clint Eastwood directs and stars, with Marisa
Berenson as the fictionalized Katharine Hepburn and Jeff Fahey as the Viertel
stand-in. Got mixed reviews at Cannes. Friday. ''GOODFELLAS.'' No director is
better than Martin Scorsese, and few are as good. ''Goodfellas'' is his mature
return to the ''Mean Streets'' material that made him famous, and should be one
of the season's best. Ray Liotta, as Henry Hill, fulfills a boyhood dream and
becomes a mobster, with Robert De Niro, Joe Pesci and Paul Sorvino as part of
his crime family. Watch for delightful small acting roles by Catherine and
Charles Scorsese, the director's parents, the stars of his documentary
''Italianamerican.'' Based on Nicholas Pileggi's nonfiction book ''Wiseguy.''
Sept. 19.

''FUNNY ABOUT LOVE.'' A first-rate cast in this romantic comedy about a
cartoonist, played by Gene Wilder, who's thinking about becoming a father.
Christine Lahti and Mary Stuart Masterson are his love interests. Directed by
Leonard Nimoy, who has a track record for popular comedies (''Three Men and a
Baby''). Sept. 21. ''MILLER'S CROSSING.'' A stylish, richly photographed
gangster story laced with moral ambiguity, made by Joel and Ethan Coen, whose
two previous films are the wonderfully bizarre ''Blood Simple'' and ''Raising
Arizona.'' Here Gabriel Byrne and Albert Finney compete for a woman, and clash
over whether Mr. Finney should kill the woman's brother. Opening-night feature
at the New York Film Festival, Sept. 21.

NEW YORK FILM FESTIVAL. The festival opens with ''Miller's Crossing'' on Sept.
21 and closes on Oct. 7 with the German director Michael Verhoeven's black
comedy ''The Nasty Girl,'' about a Bavarian student who writes a touchy essay
called ''My Town During the Third Reich.'' Highlights in between include ''A
Tale of Springtime,'' Eric Rohmer's story of philosophy and friendship, opening
commercially in January; Jean-Luc Godard's ''Nouvelle Vague,'' and a restored
version of Jean Vigo's 1934 film ''L'Atalante.'' Also on the schedule are two
works by the young Finnish director Aki Kaurismaki - ''The Match Factory Girl''
and the English-language ''I Hired a Contract Killer,'' starring the Truffaut
actor Jean-Pierre Leaud. The Soviet ''Taxi Blues,'' opening commercially in
November, is the story of a taxi driver and a jazz saxophonist, for which Pavel
Lounguine won the best director's prize at Cannes. And from the Taviani brothers
will come ''Night Sun,'' a lavishly photographed adaptation of Tolstoy's story
''Father Sergius,'' set in the 18th century and starring Julian Sands and the
dazzling young French actress Charlotte Gainsbourg (''The Little Thief''). Alice
Tully Hall.

''KING OF NEW YORK.'' A visually explosive and thoughtful story of a drug lord
(Christopher Walken) who spends five years in prison reading philosophy and
sociology, then re-enters the world to consolidate his empire and spread the
wealth to the poor. Abel Ferrara directed the films ''China Girl,'' about gang
warfare, and ''MS 45,'' about revenge for a rape, but his most widely seen work
may be for television's ''Crime Story.'' Originally given an X rating by the
M.P.A.A. and changed to an R on appeal, this work is bound to be violent, and,
according to the New York Film Festival (where it will screened on Sept. 23),
it's also art.

''PACIFIC HEIGHTS.'' Michael Keaton moves out of the Batcave and rents a San
Francisco home from Matthew Modine and Melanie Griffith in this psychological
thriller from John Schlesinger (''Midnight Cowboy''). Opens Sept. 28.

''TEXASVILLE.'' Sequel-time in Texas. Set 30 years after ''The Last Picture
Show,'' Peter Bogdanovich's film is again taken from a Larry McMurtry novel.
Jeff Bridges, Cybill Shepherd, Cloris Leachman and Timothy Bottoms return as
characters who are older but possibly no wiser. Opens Sept. 28.

October

''ALICE.'' The annual, secretive Woody Allen film. This one is a comedy starring
Mia Farrow as, we're told, a wife with a crisis. Who knows what kind of crisis?
And does it matter? Mr. Allen can make anything intriguing, including the cast:
Alec Baldwin, Blythe Danner, Judy Davis, William Hurt, Judith Ivey, Joe
Mantegna, Bernadette Peters, Cybill Shepherd, Gwen Verdon.

''AN ANGEL AT MY TABLE.'' From Jane Campion, the young New Zealander who
directed the oddball, touching black comedy ''Sweetie.'' This is adapted from
Janet Frame's strange, dramatic autobiography about childhood poverty, years in
a mental hospital and success as a novelist.

''AVALON.'' Barry Levinson, last heard from with ''Rain Man,'' returns to his
hometown of Baltimore (the setting of ''Diner'') with this nostalgic,
autobiographical story about an extended Jewish-American family from 1915 to
1968. Stars Elizabeth Perkins, Joan Plowright, Leo Fuchs, Lou Jacobi, Aidan
Quinn.

''DESPERATE HOURS.'' Directed by Michael Cimino, still trying to live up to
''The Deer Hunter'' and to live down ''Heaven's Gate.'' Anthony Hopkins tries to
protect his family from Mickey Rourke as a sadistic killer. Mr. Cimino is
unpredictable; the casting sounds too predictable.

''HENRY AND JUNE.'' Steamy atmosphere and erotic entanglements when Anais Nin
meets Henry Miller and his wife, June, in Paris in the 30's. Fred Ward is
Miller, Uma Thurman is June, and Maria de Madeiros is Nin. Based on her diaries,
and directed by Philip Kaufman (''The Unbearable Lightness of Being''). The film
makers are appealing an X rating from the M.P.A.A.

''THE KRAYS.'' From Peter Medak, whose ''Ruling Class'' is a phenomenally funny
social satire, this is the fact-based story of twin brothers who became
notorious criminals in London. Starring real-life brothers Gary and Martin Kemp,
better known as the pop-music duo Spandau Ballet, with Billie Whitelaw as their
mother. This was a huge hit in England, but will the story translate for
American audiences?

''LENINGRAD COWBOYS GO AMERICA.'' From the prolific young Finnish
writer-director Aki Kaurismaki, a dark comedy about a rotten Soviet rock band on
tour in the United States. The drummer dies, but they keep him on ice in their
van. Made largely in English and shot in this country, it could be a commercial
breakthrough for Mr. Kaurismaki, whose work has largely been shown on the
festival circuit.

''MEMPHIS BELLE.'' David Puttnam returns to producing, after his short,
unspectacular run as head of Columbia Pictures. This is the story of a squadron
of World War II fliers trying to survive their last mission in the B-17 called
the Memphis Belle. Young guns include Matthew Modine and Eric Stoltz; John
Lithgow and David Strathairn are also featured. Sounds inspirational, like
''Chariots of Fire'' with wings. Directed by Michael Caton-Jones (''Scandal'').

''REVERSAL OF FORTUNE.'' Jeremy Irons is Claus von Bulow, accused of trying to
murder his wealthy wife, Sunny (Glenn Close). The film is based on the book by
Alan Dershowitz, who successfully defended Mr. von Bulow. Ron Silver plays the
attorney. The film doesn't say whether Mr. von Bulow is guilty or not, but there
should be plenty of lurid, Eurotrash atmosphere. Directed by Barbet Schroeder,
whose last unsavory characters were the much grungier Mickey Rourke and Faye
Dunaway in ''Barfly.''

''ROSENCRANTZ AND GUILDENSTERN ARE DEAD.'' Tom Stoppard went to Yugoslavia to
direct the screen version of his play that turns Hamlet's bit-part friends into
tragic stars. Gary Oldman and Tim Roth as the title characters. This marks Mr.
Stoppard's first time as a film director, though his track record as
screenwriter for other people includes Steven Spielberg's ''Empire of the Sun''
and this season's ''Russia House.''

''TO SLEEP WITH ANGER.'' Charles Burnett is a MacArthur ''genius award'' winner
whose previous films (such as ''Killer of Sheep'') have been small, arty
critical successes. This will very likely be his breakthrough film - a
multilayered, folkloric but extremely modern story about a middle-class black
family in Los Angeles whose life is turned upside down by Danny Glover, a friend
from the South who reappears after 25 years and jinxes everyone. With Mary Alice
and Carl Lumbly. A success at the Sundance United States Film Festival and
Cannes, it will be shown at the New York Film Festival before its commercial
run.

''TUNE IN TOMORROW . . .'' The new soap-opera title for the film version of
Mario Vargas Llosa's novel ''Aunt Julia and the Scriptwriter'' is the only
discouraging sign. In New Orleans in 1951, a radio scriptwriter (Peter Falk)
draws his material from the romance of a young man (Keanu Reeves) and his aunt
by marriage, an older woman played by Barbara Hershey. High-powered artistic
credentials, including a script by the novelist William Boyd. Directed by Jon
Amiel, who directed television's ''Singing Detective,'' and whose own first
film, ''Queen of Hearts,'' was a beautifully made story of an Italian family in
England.

November

''C'EST LA VIE.'' The latest in the French director Diane Kurys's rich and
nostalgic autobiographical series that includes ''Peppermint Soda,'' about
adolescence, and ''Entre Nous,'' the story of a warm friendship between two
women, one of them based on the director's mother. ''C'est la Vie'' offers a
young girl's view of her parents' marital breakup at a French resort in 1958.
Nathalie Baye plays the mother.

''CYRANO DE BERGERAC.'' Or: Gerard Depardieu grows a long nose and wins the best
actor award at Cannes. This is, of course, the classic tale of the 17th-century
cavalier whose letters woo the love of his life; unfortunately, they're signed
by a friend and rival. Mr. Depardieu is versatile, but can he possibly match
Steve Martin's touching and comic turn in ''Roxanne''?

''DANCES WITH WOLVES.'' Kevin Costner becomes the latest star to use his clout
and direct himself in this Civil War-era drama about how white men usurped the
Indian lands. Mr. Costner is a Union soldier who goes West and comes to
comprehend the evil of the white man's ways.

''THE GRIFTERS.'' A grifter is a con man, and this one is played by John Cusack,
one of the best actors of the twentysomething generation. Stephen Frears, the
always-intriguing director of ''Dangerous Liaisons'' and ''My Beautiful
Laundrette,'' takes on the story of the grifter, his mother (Anjelica Huston)
and his girlfriend (Annette Bening). Updated to the present, this is yet another
adaptation of a novel by the hard-boiled 1950's writer Jim Thompson, who is
certainly more successful dead than alive.

''JACOB'S LADDER.'' Adrian Lyne follows the golden Hollywood rule, ''Always copy
your own success,'' coming back after ''Fatal Attraction'' with another
thriller. This one about a Vietnam veteran (Tim Robbins, the goofy Nuke Laloosh
in ''Bull Durham'') whose terrifying hallucinations won't let go. The film was
written years ago by Bruce Joel Rubin, the screenwriter responsible for this
summer's surprise hit, ''Ghost.''

''MR. AND MRS. BRIDGE.'' Though it's set in Kansas, this one has ''Masterpiece
Theater'' written all over it. Paul Newman and Joanne Woodward star in a
Merchant Ivory film based on Evan S. Connell's novels about an enduring
marriage, set between the two world wars. ''PREDATOR 2.'' Danny Glover is no
Arnold Schwarzenegger, and maybe that's just as well as he takes over as the
leading alien-fighter in this sequel. The creature has moved up to 1997 and from
Vietnam to Los Angeles, where its other targets include Gary Busey, Ruben Blades
and Maria-Conchita Alonso. The original director, John McTiernan, is gone, too,
replaced by Stephen Hopkin, who did one of the lesser ''Nightmare on Elm
Street'' films (it was 5, but who's counting?). Mr. Glover has said this is
''more cerebral'' than the original; it would have to be.

''ROCKY V: THE FINAL BELL.'' Sylvester Stallone returns and discovers - no
kidding - that Rocky has permanent brain damage. Will anyone notice?

''THE SHELTERING SKY.'' Following ''The Last Emperor,'' Bernardo Bertolucci goes
to northern Africa for a more pared-down but equally exotic atmosphere in this
adaptation of Paul Bowles's semi-autobiographical novel. Debra Winger and John
Malkovich are two-thirds of a romantic triangle based on Mr. Bowles and his
wife, Jane, in 1947. Sex, jealousy, lust and foreign locations - the perfect
Bertolucci brew.

''VINCENT AND THEO.'' Those wild and crazy van Gogh brothers in Robert Altman's
story of the last nine years of Vincent's life. With the little-known actors Tim
Roth (also starring in ''Rosencrantz and Guildenstern'') as Vincent and Paul
Rhys as Theo. Mr. Altman's recent films have been critical and commercial flops,
but where there's ''M*A*S*H'' and ''Nashville'' there's hope.

December

''AWAKENINGS.'' One of the most fascinating of this season's films, at least on
paper. Robert De Niro is a modern Rip van Winkle, a man who has been in a
sleeplike trance - alert but unable to speak or move - for 30 years. When he
awakens, he's much luckier than most men. He has Robin Williams as his doctor,
Penny Marshall (''Big'') as his director, and a script based on a book by Oliver
Sacks. The stars and director sound like a quirky enough match to make this
work.

''BONFIRE OF THE VANITIES.'' Tom Wolfe's novel for people who love to hate New
York and Wall Street yuppies seems dated already, but here comes the big-star
Brian De Palma movie. A major dramatic role for Tom Hanks as Sherman McCoy, the
cheating husband who takes his girlfriend (Melanie Griffith) for a ride and
accidentally runs down a black youth. Bruce Willis is a snide journalist, and
Morgan Freeman is the judge who throws the book at Sherman. The big question is
what it will do for Mr. De Palma, whose last film, ''Casualties of War,''
brought in more critical respect than dollars.

''DADDY NOSTALGIE.'' The second of Bertrand Tavernier's films to appear this
season (after ''Life and Nothing But''), this is a more personal story. A
middle-aged woman (Jane Birkin) rushes to see her dying father (Dirk Bogarde)
and reassesses their relationship. Shot in the south of France, it was well
received at Cannes.

''EDWARD SCISSORHANDS.'' Tim Burton has never gone for ordinary heroes. After
''Pee-wee's Big Adventure,'' ''Beetlejuice'' and ''Batman,'' he directs the
story of Edward Scissorhands (Johnny Depp), whose creator (Vincent Price;
perfect casting) dies too soon, leaving Edward with blades for hands. Edward is
a great little gardener, but lonely until the Avon lady (Dianne Wiest) happens
to call. Soon her daughter (Winona Ryder of ''Heathers,'' who doesn't have the
world's most conventional taste, either) and Edward are an item. A stylish
fable, to love or hate.

''THE GODFATHER PART III.'' Here they are again. This is Francis Coppola's big,
risky sequel to the best work he's ever done. With Al Pacino as the dying don
and Andy Garcia as his ambitious nephew. Can the Corleones go straight? Can Mr.
Coppola redeem his fading reputation? Can Sophia Coppola (the director's
daughter and last-minute substitute in a major role) really act? Photographed,
as the previous ''Godfathers'' were, by Gordon Willis. Whether this is work of
brilliance or yesterday's warmed-over stew is anybody's guess.

''GUILTY BY SUSPICION.'' The well-known producer Irwin Winkler (''Raging Bull''
and the Rocky series) directed and wrote this drama set in Hollywood in 1951.
Robert De Niro plays a movie director obsessed with his work, until a H.U.A.C.
investigation puts life in perspective.

''HAMLET.'' Don't laugh. It's Mel Gibson, all right, but anyone who remembers
him from ''The Year of Living Dangerously'' must admit that he's got a fighting
chance here. Directed by Franco Zeffirelli, who beautifully directed the 1968
screen version of ''Romeo and Juliet,'' and who bastardized ''The Taming of the
Shrew'' for Taylor and Burton. Glenn Close plays Gertrude.

''HAVANA.'' Robert Redford and the director Sydney Pollack are together again,
after ''Out of Africa'' and ''The Way We Were.'' Set in Cuba in the final days
of Batista's Government, this film uses politics as the backdrop for a love
affair between Mr. Redford, as a smooth gambler, and Lena Olin (the sexy wife in
''Enemies, a Love Story'') as the wife of a rich revolutionary. Also starring
Alan Arkin and Raul Julia.

''MERMAIDS.'' A couple of directors came and went before Richard Benjamin began
shooting this story, in which Cher plays the mother of Winona Ryder, as a Roman
Catholic schoolgirl who falls for the caretaker at her convent school. Bob
Hoskins is Cher's love interest.

''THE RUSSIA HOUSE.'' Shot in the Soviet Union, this adaptation of John le
Carre's best-selling spy novel stars Sean Connery and Michelle Pfeiffer. She's a
book editor who helps smuggle a physicist's manuscript out of the country.
Directed by Fred Schepisi (''Roxanne'') and written by Tom Stoppard.

''SCENES FROM A MALL.'' The season's most delicious casting idea. Woody Allen
and Bette Midler celebrate their 15th wedding anniversary, with angst. Homage to
Bergman or what? Paul Mazursky, director of a nearly flawless tale of tangled
relations, ''Enemies, a Love Story,'' and of ''An Unmarried Woman'' seems the
perfect choice to chronicle this marriage. ''THREE MEN AND A LITTLE LADY.'' Ted
Danson, Steve Guttenberg and Tom Selleck return to the idea that made them all
movie stars in this sequel to ''Three Men and a Baby.'' The original's director,
Leonard Nimoy, is missing, replaced by Emile Ardolino (''Dirty Dancing'').

Early 1991

''THE DOORS.'' Oliver Stone, who can't seem to get the 60's and 70's out of his
system, chronicles the life, music, groupies and death of Jim Morrison (Val
Kilmer). The supporting cast includes Kyle MacLachlan, Kevin Dillon, Meg Ryan
and Billy Idol.

''EVERYBODY'S FINE.'' Get out your handkerchiefs. From Giuseppe Tornatore, the
director of the wonderfully sentimental ''Cinema Paradiso,'' this is another
heartwarming film. Marcello Mastroianni as an aging Sicilian who travels through
Italy visiting his grown children. The kind of autumnal role Mr. Mastroianni
handles shamelessly well.

''THE SILENCE OF THE LAMBS.'' The director Jonathan Demme - innovative,
satirical and stylish in such wonders as ''Melvin and Howard'' and ''Married to
the Mob'' - turns serious in this thriller adapted from Thomas Harris's
best-selling novel. Jodie Foster is the rookie F.B.I. agent who tracks down a
serial killer with the help of a psychopathic prisoner (Anthony Hopkins).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Melanie Griffith and Tom Hanks in ''Bonfire of the Vanities.''
(Tri-Star Pictures); Mel Gibson in ''Hamlet,'' directed by Franco Zeffirelli.
(Keith Hamshere/Warner Brothers)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              282 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 9, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THE ANNOTATED CALENDAR: TELEVISION

BYLINE: By BILL CARTER

SECTION: Section 2; Page 50, Column 3; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 2716 words


''EVENING SHADE.'' Burt Reynolds stars in a comedy, written by Linda
Bloodworth-Thomason (''Designing Women''), about a pro football player who
returns home to Evening Shade, Ark., to coach the high school team. With a
strong supporting cast, including Elizabeth Ashley, Ossie Davis, Charles
Durning, Marilu Henner, Hal Holbrook and Michael Jeter. Fridays at 8, CBS.

''THE FAMILY MAN.'' A comedy about a widowed fireman raising four children. With
Gregory Harrison. Saturdays at 8, CBS.

''THE FANELLI BOYS.'' A broad comedy - from the lead writers of ''The Golden
Girls'' - about four Italian brothers from Brooklyn who move back in with their
Mama. Wednesdays at 9, NBC.

''FERRIS BUELLER.'' Charlie Schlatter (''18 Again'') stars in the title role,
based on the 1986 film about a teenager trying to scheme his way through high
school. One of many shows this season about kids defying authority. Mondays at
8:30, NBC.

''THE FLASH.'' An action-adventure drama series based on the fleet-footed
comic-book character. From Warners, the studio that made ''Batman,'' the program
will use expensive special effects in trying to appeal to young viewers. But
it's slotted opposite ''The Cosby Show'' and ''The Simpsons.'' Thursdays at 8,
CBS.

''FRESH PRINCE OF BEL AIR.'' The season's most anticipated new comedy, thanks to
the year's best-received pilot. A young rap singer from Philadelphia (Will Smith
of DJ Jazzy Jeff and the Fresh Prince) goes to live with his rich relatives in
the elegant Los Angeles neighborhood. Produced by Quincy Jones. Mondays at 8,
NBC. ''GABRIEL'S FIRE.'' James Earl Jones plays a prisoner under life sentence
for murder who is freed by an activist socialite lawyer. He then goes to work as
her special investigator, a perhaps too predictable premise for even the
extraordinary acting talent of the star. Thursdays at 9, ABC.

''GET A LIFE.'' Chris Elliott (''Late Night With David Letterman'') plays a
30-year-old paperboy who lives atop his parents' garage and makes fun of people
who really work for a living. With Bob Elliott (Chris's father), of Bob and Ray
fame, and June Lockhart. Sundays at 8:30, Fox. ''HULL HIGH.'' Singing and
dancing students at a Los Angeles high school; featuring choreography by Kenny
Ortega (''Dirty Dancing''). Lots of sexy teachers, and moon-eyed students.
Sundays at 7, NBC.

''LAW AND ORDER.'' Michael Moriarty stars as a prosecutor in this dark drama,
shot in New York, which covers a criminal investigation in its first half hour
and the trial in its second half hour. With George Dzundza. Tuesdays at 10, NBC.

''LENNY.'' Starring the veteran stand-up comedian Lenny Clarke as a blue-collar
worker in Boston. Wednesdays at 8, CBS.

''LIFESTORIES.'' An innovative and daring anthology series using case studies of
illnesses as seen through the experiences of the patients, with serious medical
information incorporated into the drama. Different stars each week; Robert
Prosky narrates. Sundays at 8, NBC. ''PARENTHOOD.'' A comedy, based on the 1989
film, about the joys and tribulations of raising children in America these days.
The series uses the film's entire behind-the-cameras creative team, including
the director, Ron Howard. The huge cast is headed by Ed Begley Jr. and William
Windom. Saturdays at 8, NBC. ''PARKER LEWIS CAN'T LOSE.'' A sitcom starring
Corey Nemic (''I Know My First Name Is Steven'') as Parker Lewis, an ingenious
charmer very akin - probably not accidentally - to the Ferris Bueller character
of the NBC series. Sundays at 7:30, Fox. ''TRIALS OF ROSIE O'NEILL'' - A drama
starring Sharon Gless as a courtroom lawyer who becomes a public defender after
her husband leaves her. Produced by Barney Rosenzweig, who worked with Ms. Gless
on ''Cagney & Lacey.'' Mondays at 10, CBS.

''TRUE COLORS.'' A sitcom about an interracial couple who move into a house with
the children from their previous marriages. The family also includes Nancy
Walker as the bride's highly opinionated mother. Created by Michael Weithorn,
the writer-producer of ''Family Ties.'' Sundays at 7, Fox.

''UNCLE BUCK.'' Based on the 1989 film about a boisterous, sloppy but loving
uncle who is forced to take over his brother's family. Starring Kevin Meaney
trying to emulate John Candy. With Audrey Meadows. Mondays at 8, CBS.

''WIOU.'' A dramatic series set in the newsroom of a big-city TV station; with
John Shea as the hard-working but cynical news director, Harris Yulin as the
high-paid, low-intellect anchorman, Dick Van Patten as the clownish weatherman
and Helen Shaver as the dedicated street reporter. Produced by Grant Tinker.
Wednesdays at 10, CBS.

''WORKING IT OUT.'' A sitcom starring Jane Curtin and Stephen Collins as
romantically involved divorced adults. Five-time Emmy winner Bill Persky (''The
Dick Van Dyke Show,'' ''Kate & Allie'') is executive producer, writer and
director. Saturdays at 8:30, NBC.

TV Movies and Specials

''ANGELS WITHOUT WINGS.'' Dana Delany (''China Beach'') stars in a drama,
inspired by a true story, about a Cape Cod family who find four orphans on their
doorstep. NBC. ''BEST INTENTIONS: THE EDUCATION AND KILLING OF EDMUND PERRY.''
An intense drama based on a true story of a black scholarship student from an
elite prep school who is killed committing a robbery. Richard Wesley wrote the
teleplay based on the book by Robert Sam Anson. NBC.

''BLOOD RIVER.'' A western directed by one of the film world's masters of gore,
John Carpenter (''Halloween''), about a man seeking vengeance for his parents'
murder. Starring Rick Schroder and Wilford Brimley. CBS. ''CALL ME ANNA.'' Patty
Duke portrays herself in a film version of her autobiography, which covers her
troubled childhood and her growing awareness of her manic-depression. With Karl
Malden as her psychiatrist. Nov. 11, ABC.

''DEADLY INTENTIONS . . . AGAIN?'' The bizarre sequel to the 1985 mini-series
about a doctor convicted of plotting to murder his wife. Released from jail, he
seeks vengeance after seeing himself portrayed in an earlier TV-movie based on
the original murder. Starring Joanna Kerns and Harry Hamlin. ABC. ''DECORATION
DAY.'' James Garner and Judith Ivey (''Down Home'') star in this
sure-to-be-prestigious Hallmark Hall of Fame presentation about a retired judge
who delves into the mystery behind an elderly black farmer's refusal to accept
the Medal of Honor from Congress. NBC.

''THE DREAMER OF OZ: THE L. FRANK BAUM STORY.'' John Ritter, Rue McClanahan,
Annette O'Toole, Charles Haid and David Schram star in this drama based on the
life of L. Frank Baum. NBC.

''GARWOOD.'' Martin Sheen and Ralph Macchio star in the true story of Robert
Garwood, the Vietnam P.O.W. who was court-martialed for having ''conversations''
with the enemy. Among the season's most controversial subjects. Teleplay by John
Pielmeier (''Agnes of God''). ABC.  ''GOOD NIGHT, SWEET WIFE: A MURDER IN
BOSTON.'' A dramatization of the massively publicized 1989 murder in Boston of a
pregnant woman, in which her husband, Charles Stuart (played by Ken Olin of
''Thirtysomething''), first tried to pin the blame on a black man and then died
in a plunge from a bridge. With Margaret Colin. Sept. 23, CBS. ''THE GUYS.'' An
offbeat story about two Hollywood writing partners, one of whom is a smoker, and
what happens when the nonsmoking partner contracts lung cancer. Written by
William Link, whose partner Richard Levinson (they were co-creators of
''Columbo''), a heavy smoker, suffered a heart attack and died. ABC.

''HOME VIDEO.'' By escaping into home videos, a teenager tries to make sense of
the accidental death of his mother. The script was written by the
''Thirtysomething'' team of Ed Zwick and Marshall Herskovitz. NBC.

''THE LAST BEST YEAR OF MY LIFE.'' Mary Tyler Moore and Bernadette Peters play
women whose relationship grows from a professional patient-doctor one to best
friends in a heart-tugging drama about accepting death. Nov. 4, ABC.

''LUCKY DAY.'' Olympia Dukakis plays the mother of a mentally retarded daughter
who abandons her to the care of another daughter (Amy Madigan), only to return
when the retarded daughter wins a lottery. ABC. ''LUCY & DESI: BEFORE THE
LAUGHTER.'' The courtship and marriage of Lucille Ball and Desi Arnaz, featuring
look-alikes selected in a nationwide search. Could be worth watching just to see
the impressions. CBS. ''THE MESSENGER.'' A horrifying tale of twins who become
medical guinea pigs for Dr. Joseph Mengele. Gerald Green (''Holocaust'') wrote
the teleplay. NBC.

''OUR SONS.'' Two very different women are brought together when the son of one
of them is dying of AIDS. Story by William Hanley (''Something About Amelia''),
produced and directed by Robert Greenwald (''Burning Bed''). ABC.

''THE PERFECT TRIBUTE.'' A Southern boy played by Lukas Haas (''Witness'') helps
President Lincoln (Jason Robards) understand the importance of the Gettysburg
Address. With Jose Ferrer. ABC.

''THE QUEEN OF MEAN.'' The rise and fall of Leona Helmsley (played by Suzanne
Pleshette), based on the book by Ransdell Pierson. With Lloyd Bridges. CBS.

''RED HOT AND BLUE.'' To celebrate his 100th birthday, some of Cole Porter's
best-known songs are updated by post-modern directors - among them David Lynch,
Pedro Almodovar, Jim Jarmusch and Wim Wenders - and sung by such performers as
David Byrne, Sinead O'Connor and Fine Young Cannibals. Dec. 1. ABC.

''SARAH.'' Glenn Close plays a lonely New England spinster who answers a
classified ad from a Kansas widower with two children. A Hallmark Hall of Fame
presentation. CBS.

''THE STORY LADY.'' Jessica Tandy is a woman whose talent for reading children's
stories attracts an exploitive ad agency. NBC.

''TRIUMPH OVER HATE: THE MORRIS DEES STORY.'' Corbin Bernsen stars in this
drama, based on a true story, about one of the founders of the Southern Poverty
Law Center who wages war against the K.K.K. Directed by John Korty (''The
Autobiography of Miss Jane Pittman''). NBC. ''WHAT EVER HAPPENED TO BABY JANE?''
An updated version of the 1962 horror film, which starred Bette Davis and Joan
Crawford, with Vanessa and Lynn Redgrave playing the faded movie-star sisters,
one of whom terrorizies the other, an invalid. ABC. ''WHEN YOU REMEMBER ME.''
Fred Savage (''The Wonder Years'') plays a youngster with muscular dystrophy who
fights for better care for the disabled. With Ellen Burstyn. Oct. 7, ABC.
Mini-Series ''OLDEST LIVING CONFEDERATE WIDOW TELLS ALL.'' Joyce Eliason's
(''Small Sacrifices'') four-hour teleplay, based on Allan Gurganus's novel about
the years between the end of the Civil War and the present, as seen through the
eyes of a 90-year-old woman. NBC.

''SEPARATE BUT EQUAL.'' Sidney Poitier portrays Thurgood Marshall, arguing the
1954 Supreme Court decision that outlawed school segregation. With Burt
Lancaster. ABC.

''SON OF THE MORNING STAR.'' A four-hour adaptation of Evan S. Connell's best
seller about Custer's debacle at Little Bighorn. Starring Gary Cole, Rosanna
Arquette and Dean Stockwell. The screenplay is by Melissa Mathison (''E.T.'')
ABC.

''STEPHEN KING'S 'IT.' '' A four-hour adaptation of one of Mr. King's most
chilling stories: Six friends return to Maine to destroy an evil entity. The
cast includes Dennis Christopher, John Ritter and Richard Thomas. Begins Nov.
18, ABC. Public Television ''THE CIVIL WAR.'' In an 11-hour historical overview,
the producer-director Ken Burns attempts a definitive documentary history of the
war. Among those who provide voices for the central characters are Sam
Waterston, Julie Harris, Jason Robards, Morgan Freeman and Garrison Keillor.
Begins Sept. 23.

''HEAT OF THE DAY.'' Patricia Hodge plays a widow with a lover (Michael York)
and Michael Gambon (''The Singing Detective'') is a blackmailer in this two-hour
Masterpiece Theater presentation, adapted by Harold Pinter from the Elizabeth
Bowen novel. Sept. 30. ''THE GINGER TREE.'' A collaboration by the BBC, NHK of
Japan and WGBH, Boston, this four-part Masterpiece Theater presentation is the
first major drama shot entirely for high-definition television. The story tells
of an English woman whose illegitimate child is adopted by a Japanese family.
Begins Oct. 14. ''MOTHER LOVE.'' Diana Rigg stars as a woman who is obsessed by
her son (James Wilby) and despises her husband (David McCallum). Season opener
for the Mystery! series, Oct. 25.

''RACE TO SAVE THE PLANET.'' A 10-part series about international environmental
issues. Begins Oct. 4.

''HAMLET.'' A Great Performances presentation, starring Kevin Kline in a video
version of the production he recently directed for the New York Shakespeare
Festival; with Dana Ivey as Gertrude, Brian Murray as Claudius and Diane Venora
as Ophelia. Nov. 2.

''JEEVES AND WOOSTER.'' A five-part comedy based on the well-known P. G.
Wodehouse characters. Stephen Fry and Hugh Laurie star. Nov. 11.

''AFTER THE WARMING.'' A two-hour special from James Burke (''The Day the
Universe Changed''), using computer technology, to examine various scenarios
about the possible effects of global warming. Nov. 21. ''BEATRIX POTTER'S
'TAILOR OF GLOUCESTER.' '' A Great Performances presentation, starring Ian Holm
in a musical adaptation. Dec. 21. ''SCOOP.'' A Masterpiece Theater adaptation of
the Evelyn Waugh satire; with Michael Maloney, Denholm Elliott, Donald Pleasence
and Nicola Pagett. Dec. 30.

''UNCLE VANYA.'' A Great Performances presentation of Gregory Mosher's
production of the Chekhov play, adapted by David Mamet. Early '91. Cable
''MANIAC MANSION.'' A comedy series centering on a far-out family, co-produced
by the Family Channel, Atlantis Films of Canada and by Lucasfilm Ltd. TV, and
starring Joe Flaherty along with other Second City TV alumni. Begins Friday at 7
P.M.

''ORPHEUS DESCENDING.'' Vanessa Redgrave re-creates her Broadway performance in
the Tennessee Williams drama. Sept. 24, TNT.

''CAMPAIGN '60.'' John Chancellor is the host of a block of programs examining
the 1960 Presidential campaigns of John F. Kennedy and Richard M. Nixon,
including the national political conventions and the Kennedy-Nixon debates.
Sept., A & E. ''VIVIEN LEIGH: SCARLETT AND BEYOND.'' Jessica Lange narrates this
documentary on the stage and film star, with comments by Sir John Gielgud,
Claire Bloom, Douglas Fairbanks Jr. and Kim Hunter. Oct. 22, TNT. ''WHICH WAY
HOME.'' Cybill Shepherd plays a nurse who journeys with five orphans from a Thai
refugee camp to Australia after the fall of Saigon. Nov. 5, TNT.

''BEST HOTEL ON SKID ROW.'' Charles Bukowski's portrait of drifters, day
laborers and prostitutes. Dec., HBO.

''THE JOSEPHINE BAKER STORY.'' Large-scale biographical drama about the famed
black entertainer. With Lynn Whitfield, Craig T. Nelson, Ruben Blades, David
Dukes and Lou Gossett Jr. Feb., HBO. ''THE GREEN MAN.'' A three-part BBC
mini-series written by Malcolm Bradbury from the Kingsley Amis novel about an
alcoholic innkeeper (Albert Finney) who sees ghosts. Begins May 1, A & E.
''CAPTAIN PLANET AND THE PLANETEERS.'' An animated series about environmental
activists who battle villains out to destroy the planet. Voices by Whoopi
Goldberg, Meg Ryan and Jeff Goldblum. TBS and on WNEW-TV.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: John Shea in ''WIOU'' (CBS); Hugh Laurie in ''Jeeves and Wooster''
(Mobil Masterpiece Theater)

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              283 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 9, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THE ANNOTATED CALENDAR: THEATER

BYLINE: By MEL GUSSOW

SECTION: Section 2; Page 48, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 2823 words


''IVANOV.'' William Hurt plays the title role in the Chekhov play. The staging
is by Oleg Yefreymov, the artistic director of the Moscow Art Theater, making
his American debut. Sept. 21, Yale Repertory Theater. ''MACHINAL.'' Put Franz
Xaver Kroetz in a time machine and out comes this 1928 Sophie Treadwell play. In
her Expressionist view, women are savaged by an industrialized society. Staged
by Michael Greif, one of three young directors in residence this year at the New
York Shakespeare Festival. Sept. 25, Public Theater.

''THE CAUCASIAN CHALK CIRCLE.'' The Brecht epic opens the 40th anniversary
season at the Arena Stage in Washington, the final year the theater will be
under the direction of Zelda Fichandler. The staging is by Tazewell Thompson.
Sept. 26. (A separate production of this play will be performed at the Public
Theater in New York in November.)

October

''ABUNDANCE.'' Beth Henley, who won the Pulitzer Prize for ''Crimes of the
Heart,'' moves her sights away from tightly knit families in the South to the
wide open West. In this cowboy comedy Lesley Ann Warren and Amanda Plummer play
mail-order brides. Directed by Ron Lagomarsino, Oct. 2, Manhattan Theater Club,
City Center.

''ENDANGERED SPECIES.'' Shifting from the lavish pictorial and choreographic
canvases of ''The Garden of Earthly Delights'' and ''Vienna: Lusthaus,'' Martha
Clarke is reinventing the circus as performance-art. This socially conscious
music-theater piece features a cast of actors and animals, including, as star,
Flora the elephant. The words are by Walt Whitman and the music by Richard
Peaslee. Opening the Brooklyn Academy of Music's Next Wave Festival Oct. 2, at
the Majestic Theater, 651 Fulton St., Brooklyn, 718-636-4100. ''MICHAEL
FEINSTEIN: PIANO AND VOICE.'' Mr. Feinstein returns to Broadway in another
mellow evening of Gershwin, Rodgers and Hart and Berlin. Oct. 2, Golden Theater.

''THEME AND VARIATIONS.'' A Soviet play (by Samuil Alyoshin) opens the season,
Oct. 3, at Geoffrey Sherman's new Off Broadway company, Chelsea Stage. ''ABOUT
TIME.'' A new play by Tom Cole, author of ''Medal of Honor Rag.'' James Whitmore
and Audra Lindley (husband and wife in real life) star in a production opening
Oct. 3 at the John Houseman Theater, 450 W. 42d St., N.Y., 564-8038. The play
will be joined in repertory, Oct. 15, by William Gibson's two-character ''Handy
Dandy.''

''STAND-UP TRAGEDY.'' A teacher confronts the unteachable in a school besieged
by inertia. Bill Cain's live-wired show, a hit in several regional theater
productions, arrives in the city that is its setting. Directed by Ron Link. Oct.
4 at the Criterion Center Stage Right, B'way and 45th St., N.Y., 764-7070. ''THE
VOYSEY INHERITANCE.'' A new adaptation of the play by Harley Granville-Barker,
Shaw's contemporary and frequent associate. In the American version the setting
is transplanted from London to Boston. Directed by Arvin Brown. Oct. 4, Long
Wharf Theater, 222 Sargent Dr., New Haven, 203-787-4282.

''OUR COUNTRY'S GOOD.'' Timberlake Wertenbaker's prize-winning London play
(based on Thomas Keneally's novel ''The Playmaker'') focuses on a group of
British convicts rehearsing ''The Recruiting Officer'' in newly settled
Australia. Oct. 5, Hartford Stage. (Separate productions will be presented
subsequently at the Arena Stage and at the Repertory Theater of St. Louis.)
''GONZA THE LANCER.'' A domestic tragedy by the 18th-century Japanese playwright
Chikamatsu Monzaemon. Translated by Donald Keene and directed by David
Greenspan. Begins performances Oct. 9, Public Theater. ''HAPPY DAYS.'' Old times
in a prolonged marriage are recalled in this Samuel Beckett play, the first New
York revival of a major work by the playwright since his death last December.
Charlotte Rae, best known as a comic actress, portrays Winnie (who is buried up
to her neck in earth) and Bill Moor is her devoted husband. Carey Perloff's
production opens the season, Oct. 10, at the CSC Repertory.

''THE MISER.'' Philip Bosco will look for laughs as Moliere's mean, hard-hearted
skinflint. The production, directed by Stephen Porter, also stars Carole
Shelley. Oct. 11, Circle in the Square, 1633 B'way, N.Y. Telecharge: 239-6200.
(Next year, Mr. Bosco is scheduled to play ''King Lear'' at the Folger, opening
April 29.) ''WORDS, NO MUSIC.'' A new one-man show by the humorist and abashed
stand-up performer Calvin Trillin. Oct. 11, American Place Theater.

''THE SUM OF US.'' An Australian play by David Stevens (co-author of the film
''Breaker Morant'') about a father and son. Tony Goldwyn re-creates the role he
played in the Williamstown Theater Festival production. Opens Oct. 11, Cherry
Lane Theater, 38 Commerce St., N.Y., 989-2020.

''JACKIE MASON: BRAND NEW.'' Jackie Mason, Part 2, more jokes. Oct. 11, Neil
Simon Theater, 250 W. 52d St., N.Y., 757-8646.

''CERCEAU.'' The English-language premiere of the Soviet play by Viktor Slavkin,
that was a hit several seasons ago at the London International Theater Festival.
With candidness the author probes the relationships of a group of middle-aged
friends who spend a weekend in a country house. Directed by Liviu Ciulei. Oct.
17, Arena Stage.

''ONCE ON THIS ISLAND.'' A Caribbean fairy-tale musical by Lynn Ahrens and
Stephen Flaherty, with direction by Graciela Daniele, first presented in a
successful short run last season at Playwrights Horizons. Oct. 17, Booth
Theater, 222 W. 45th St., N.Y. Telecharge: 239-6200. ''KING LEAR.'' Hal Holbrook
stars in the Great Lakes Theater Festival production, directed by Gerald
Freedman. Previews start Oct. 19, Roundabout. ''SUBFERTILE.'' A new comedy about
infertility by the actor-author Tom Mardirosian, set at the American Museum of
Natural History. Oct. 19, Playwrights Horizons.

''THE COLORADO CATECHISM.'' A new play by a new playwright, Vincent Cardinal,
about an artist in a rehabilitation clinic. Oct. 21, Circle Repertory Company.

''LAKE NO BOTTOM.'' A new play by Michael Weller, that astute portraitist of
generations last represented in New York by ''Spoils of War.'' Previews begin
Oct. 23 at Second Stage, 2162 B'way, at 76th St., N.Y., 873-6103.

''THE WASH.'' Philip Kan Gotanda's (''Yankee Dawg You Die'') drama about the
breakup of a 25-year-marriage. (Mr. Gotanda also wrote the screenplay for the
well-received 1988 movie version of ''The Wash.'') Directed by Sharon Ott. Oct.
23, Manhattan Theater Club, City Center.

''OH, KAY!'' David Merrick returns to Broadway with a revival of the 1926 George
and Ira Gershwin musical. The show, based on last year's production at the
Goodspeed Opera House, has a black cast and a narrative relocated from Long
Island to Harlem. Oct. 25, Richard Rodgers Theater, 226 W. 46th St., N.Y.
Ticketron: 246-0102.  ''LUCKY COME HAWAII.'' Ron Nakahara directs a comedy by
Jon Shirota, about a pig farmer on the eve of Pearl Harbor. Oct. 26 at the Pan
Asian Repertory Theater, 47 Great Jones St., N.Y., 505-5655.

''SIX DEGREES OF SEPARATION.'' An imposter reveals the frayed social values of
the modish life of fast-track New Yorkers in this acclaimed play by John Guare,
author of ''The House of Blue Leaves.'' Directed by Jerry Zaks, the play moves
to the Vivian Beaumont Theater on Oct. 30. Courtney Vance joins Stockard
Channing and John Cunningham, who were in the original cast. Lincoln Center
Theaters.

''DAY TRIPS.'' Jo Carson's look at several generations of women in one family
struck by illness. Oct. 30, presented by the Women's Project at the Judith
Anderson Theater, 422 W. 42d St., N.Y. Ticket Central: 279-4200. ''GROTESQUE
LOVE SONGS.'' The WPA begins its season in October with a new play by Don Nigro
about a matriarch in the Midwest. 519 W. 23d St., N.Y., 206-0523.

November

''ELEPHANT MEMORIES.'' A new experimental theater piece by Ping Chong. Nov. 1,
La Mama.

''BUDDY: THE BUDDY HOLLY STORY.'' The long-running London musical about the life
and death of the rock singer. Opens Nov. 4 at the Shubert Theater, 225 W. 44th
St., N.Y. Telecharge: 239-6200. ''MARCH ON RUSSIA.'' David Storey, author of
''In Celebration'' and ''The Contractor,'' returns to northern England for
another poignant look at the chasm between working-class parents and their
educated offspring. Nov. 7, Chelsea Stage.

''SHADOWLANDS.'' William Nicholson's stage adaptation of his television play
about the late-in-life marriage of C. S. Lewis (Nigel Hawthorne) and Joy
Davidman (Jane Alexander) and the tragedy that befalls them. Elija Moshinsky
re-directs the popular London show, opening Nov. 11 at the Brooks Atkinson, 246
W. 47th St., N.Y., 719-4099.

''THE CAUCASIAN CHALK CIRCLE.'' A revival of the Brecht play, directed by George
C. Wolfe at the Public Theater. Previews begin Nov. 13.

''MONSTER IN A BOX.'' Spalding Gray, who is reliving his life vicariously on
stage, is back with a new monologue about interruptions he endured while writing
his novel, ''Impossible Vacation.'' Directed by Renee Shafransky. Nov. 14, at
the Mitzi E. Newhouse. Lincoln Center Theaters.

''MRS. KLEIN.'' Olympia Dukakis, the Academy Award-winning actress, stars in
Nicholas Wright's National Theater drama about the Viennese psychoanalyst
Melanie Klein. Nov. 14, on Broadway.

''SHOGUN.'' A shipwrecked British navigator (Richard Chamberlain played the TV
mini-series version) is washed ashore in 17th-century Japan. This musical
adaptation of the James Clavell best-selling novel has music by Paul Chihara,
book and lyrics by John Driver, direction and choreography by Michael Smuin. The
theater has been officially blessed in a Shinto ceremony, an unusual way to
insure success on Broadway. Nov. 15, Marquis Theater, 211 W. 45th St., N.Y.,
382-0100.

''FIDDLER ON THE ROOF.'' A musical tribute to l'chaim, this long-running
Broadway show gave Zero Mostel his greatest role as Tevya, the singing-dancing
milkman of Anatevka. Now Topol, who played Tevya in the film version, stars in a
new production of the Jerry Bock-Sheldon Harnick-Joseph Stein show. Nov. 18,
Gershwin, 222 W. 51st St., N.Y., 586-6510.

''A BRIGHT ROOM CALLED DAY.'' Tony Kushner's play, set in Berlin in 1933, deals
with the rise of Nazi Germany. Directed by Michael Greif. Begins performances
Nov. 20, Public Theater.

''BRIAN BEDFORD IN 'THE LUNATIC, THE LOVER AND THE POET.' '' Mr. Bedford directs
and stars in a Shakespeare anthology. Nov. 28. Presented by the York Theater
Company at the Mazur Theater, 555 E. 90th St., N.Y., 534-5366.

''SEARCH AND DESTROY.'' Howard Korder, who amusingly depicted the peer pressures
of young men in New York in ''Boys' Life,'' takes a more inclusive look at the
wages of tax-dodging. Nov. 30, Yale Repertory Theater.

''I STAND BEFORE YOU NAKED.'' A new play by Joyce Carol Oates. November,
American Place Theater.

December

''DEAD CLASS.'' A revival of Tadeusz Kantor's image-filled journey through
20th-century Poland. Dec. 4 at La Mama.

''THE AMERICAN PLAN.'' Yuppies lived and died in Richard Greenberg's incisive
''Eastern Standard.'' Now the playwright views a summer romance in the Catskills
in the 1960's, in a play directed by Evan Yionoulis. Dec. 4, Manhattan Theater
Club, City Center.

''HERSELF AS LUST.'' A comic love story from Albert Innaurato. Dec. 5, Circle
Repertory Company.

''TOWNSHIP FEVER.'' A new South African musical written and directed by Mbogeni
Ngema (''Sarafina''). Opens Dec. 6, Lincoln Center Theaters.

''PETER PAN.'' James M. Barrie's favorite frequent flier (now played by Cathy
Rigby) swoops into New York. The musical is by Carolyn Leigh, Moose Charlap,
Betty Comden, Adolph Green and Jule Styne. Dec. 11, Lunt-Fontanne Theater.

''ASSASSINS.'' Stephen Sondheim, Broadway's foremost composer, returns with a
musical about Presidential assassins - a stark contrast to his last show ''Into
the Woods,'' a reinvention of fairy tales. The book is by John Weidman, who last
collaborated with the composer on ''Pacific Overtures.'' Jerry Zaks directs.
Previews begin Dec. 18, Playwrights Horizons. ''THE COUNTRY GIRL.'' Karen Allen
stars in a revival of the Clifford Odets backstage drama (in the role that won
Grace Kelly an Academy Award). Dec. 26, Roundabout.

January

''THE GLASS MENAGERIE.'' Timothy Hutton and Shirley Knight star in a revival of
the Tennessee Williams play, beginning Emily Mann's first season as head of the
McCarter Theater in Princeton, N.J. Opens Jan. 18.

''NICK AND NORA.'' In this ''Thin Man'' musical, Barry Bostwick and Joanna
Gleason are Dashiell Hammett's suave detective team. Book by Arthur Laurents,
music by Charles Strouse and lyrics by Richard Maltby Jr. Previews begin Jan.
28. St. James, 246 W. 45th St., N.Y., 398-0280.

February

''THE SNOW BALL.'' A. R. Gurney's adaptation of his novel of the same name, with
ballroom dancing choreographed by Graciela Daniele. A co-production of the Old
Globe Theater in San Diego and Hartford Stage, the play opens Feb. 9 in Hartford
and then moves in May to San Diego. Direction is by Jack O'Brien. ''THE
RESISTIBLE RISE OF ARTURO UI.'' John Turturro plays the title role in Brecht's
savage comic parable of a Hitler-like dictator. Feb. 12, CSC Repertory.

''THE ROAD TO NIRVANA.'' Arthur Kopit's diabolical spoof of Hollywood. The show
was first produced in an earlier version by the Actors Theater of Louisville
under the title ''Bone-the-Fish.'' Directed by Jim Simpson. Feb. 13, Circle
Repertory Company.

''MULE BONE.'' The previously unproduced folk comedy by Langston Hughes and Zora
Neale Hurston, with music by Taj Mahal, originally promised for last season.
Feb. 14, Lincoln Center Theaters.

''THOSE THE RIVER KEEPS.'' The world premiere of a play about betrayal and
vengeance, written and directed by David Rabe (''Streamers,'' ''Hurlyburly'').
Feb. 15, McCarter Theater, Princeton, N.J.

''UNDERGROUND.'' Joshua Sobol, author of ''Ghetto,'' returns to 1941 Lithuania.
Feb. 22, Yale Repertory Theater.

March

''THE SUBSTANCE OF FIRE.'' A new play by Jon Robin Baitz (''The Film Society'')
about a gentleman publisher. March 1, Playwrights Horizons.

''THE WAR IN HEAVEN'' AND ''STRUCK DUMB.'' Joseph Chaikin will act in two plays,
the first co-written with Sam Shepard, the second with Jean-Claude van Itallie.
March 18, American Place Theater.

''EDDIE GOES TO POETRY CITY.'' A performance piece written and directed by
Richard Foreman. March 28, La Mama.

''PUBLIC AFFAIRS.'' Two one-act comedies by A. R. Gurney. March 31, Playwrights
Horizons.

''FAME: THE MUSICAL.'' The musical version of the popular film and TV series
about New York's High School of Performing Arts. Ambassador, 219 W. 49th St.,
N.Y. Telecharge: 239-6200.

April

''CASANOVA.'' Constance Congdon's new treatment of the famous Lothario.
Performances begin April 2, the Public Theater. ''A FUNNY THING HAPPENED ON THE
WAY TO THE FORUM.'' A York Theater Company revival of the 1962 Tony
Award-winning musical romp. April 2, Church of the Heavenly Rest, 2 E. 90th St.,
N.Y., 534-5366.

''BETSEY BROWN.'' A musical by Ntozake Shange and Emily Mann, with music by
Baikida Carroll. April 5, the McCarter Theater, Princeton, N.J. ''MISS SAIGON.''
Maybe, maybe not. As of early September, negotiations were continuing as to
whether the West End musical hit by Claude-Michel Schonberg and Alain Boublil
(authors of ''Les Miserables'') that retells the ''Madama Butterfly'' story in
war-torn Vietnam will come to Broadway starring Jonathan Pryce. If the show
arrives, it is scheduled to open April 11, Broadway Theater, B'way at 53d St.,
N.Y. Telecharge: 239-6200.

May

''THE RADIANT CITY.'' Theodora Skipitares's music-theater puppet play on Robert
Moses. May 3, American Place Theater.

''BLACK EAGLES.'' Leslie Lee's play about black pilots in World War II. May 21,
Manhattan Theater Club.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Hal Holbrook is King Lear in Gearld Freedman's production at the
Roundabout in October (Roger Mastroianni/Roundabout Theater Company); Jack
Coleman stars as a beleagured teacher inthe drama ''Stand-Up Tragedy.'' (Jay
Thompson/''Stand-Up Tragedy)

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              284 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 9, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

New & Noteworthy

BYLINE: By GEORGE JOHNSON

SECTION: Section 7; Page 42, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 959 words


IN SOUTHERN LIGHT: Trekking Through Zaire and the Amazon, by Alex Shoumatoff.
(Vintage, $9.95.) After traveling up the Amazon in search of its namesake, the
legendary tribe of giant women, Alex Shoumatoff headed to Zaire to look for
pygmies. ''Mr. Shoumatoff achieves the difficult task of getting beyond that
sector of the country that faces West and into the lives of the 95 percent or so
of its residents who ordinarily live out of the sight of visitors,'' Edward
Zuckerman said here in 1986. Vintage has recently reissued two other Shoumatoff
books. Published in 1985, THE MOUNTAIN OF NAMES: A History of the Human Family
($10.95) explores the genealogical impulse, describing among other things an old
Sumatran who can chant 70 generations' worth of his family tree and the Mormon
Church's 1.5 billion-name data base, which it keeps in a bombproof vault inside
a mountain. In RUSSIAN BLOOD ($12.95), published in 1982, Mr. Shoumatoff traces
his own ancestry back to 15th-century Russia.

BAUMGARTNER'S BOMBAY, by Anita Desai. (Penguin, $7.95.) For Hugo Baumgartner, a
reclusive German Jew who fled to India to escape the Holocaust, Bombay is just
one more place where he doesn't feel at home. ''Ms. Desai is a superb observer
of the human race, achieving coloratura runs where most writers would have
managed only a gasp or a gape,'' Paul West said here last year. ''Like all
serious novelists she puts her best energy into fingering the texture of
someone's life, getting a few solid answers to the incessant question 'What is
it like to be them?' ''

LEARNING ALL THE TIME, by John Holt. (Addison-Wesley, $8.95.) John Holt, the
author of ''How Children Fail'' and many other books on early education,
believed that nothing is more natural than learning and that the best thing a
teacher can do is gently to encourage nature to take its course. In February our
reviewer, L. Elisabeth Beattie, said this posthumously published book ''serves
as a capstone'' to his career.

THE CHASE, by Alejo Carpentier. Translated by Alfred Mac Adam. (Noonday/Farrar,
Straus & Giroux, $7.95.) Like counterpoint melodies, the stories of two young
men in Havana - a rebel and a student working at a concert hall - play off each
other, finally coming together during the climax of Beethoven's ''Eroica''
Symphony. Carpentier ''was one of the early giants of modern Latin American
literature, a man whose writing helped shape and define the period of 'magic
realism,' '' James Polk said here last year. ''Without 'The Chase,' which was
first published in 1956, the work of Carpentier's more widely known successors
would be vastly different.''

IT DID HAPPEN HERE: Recollections of Political Repression in America, by Bud
Schultz and Ruth Schultz. (University of California, $12.95.) In this oral
history of Americans who have been punished for their beliefs, the authors show
that political repression didn't occur only in the McCarthy era. ''For all the
outrages described in this book, it is not defeat that resounds but a steadfast
defiance and the knowledge that the fight for civil liberties is a continuous
one,'' Suzanne MacNeille said in The Book Review in 1989.

KISS IN THE HOTEL JOSEPH CONRAD: And Other Stories, by Howard Norman. (Penguin,
$7.95.) One of these stories about the loneliness of the far north describes an
Eskimo woman who is convinced that her missing son is trapped inside a jukebox.
Howard Norman ''delineates these inarticulate lives with tenderness and
compassion,'' Michiko Kakutani said in The Times last year.

MURDER IN THE OVAL OFFICE, by Elliott Roosevelt. (Avon, $4.50.) In a novel
written by her son, Eleanor Roosevelt helps figure out how an Alabama
Congressman was killed inside the President's office. ''The resourceful First
Lady shows spunk and wit, and also considerable charm, in her amateur
investigation,'' our reviewer, Marilyn Stasio, said last year.

GOD HUNGER, by Michael Ryan. (Penguin, $9.95.) This collection of poems shows
how the stories of people's lives ultimately turn out to be fictions. ''These
are poems obsessed with narrative and the impossibility of sequential
narrative,'' Carol Muske said here last year. Michael Ryan has ''broadened the
expression of his poetic gift immeasurably.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Thomas Keneally (Russell McPherson/Associated Press for The New
York Times)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              285 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 9, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Still Asking the Embarassing Questions

BYLINE: By JAY MCInerney; Jay McInerney is the author of the novels ''Bright
Lights, Big City,'' ''Ransom'' and ''Story of My Life.''

SECTION: Section 7; Page 12, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1590 words


Like many of Mr. Vonnegut's novels, ''Hocus Pocus'' is a retrospective
first-person narrative in which several time and story lines gradually converge.
It is told by one Eugene Debs Hartke and purportedly written in prison on scraps
of paper, each scrap a thought, story or digression unto itself - a form ideally
suited to Mr. Vonnegut's thumbnail essayistic bent and his high-speed forward-
and reverse-narrative time travel.

Hartke is a graduate of West Point and a veteran of the Vietnam War, a
thoughtful but not tormented man who killed many human beings on the orders of
his Government and dispensed many official lies as an information officer. After
leaving Vietnam and the Army he becomes a teacher at Tarkington College in the
Finger Lakes region of upstate New York, a gentle institution that specializes
in nurturing the dyslexic and moronic sons and daughters of the ruling class.

After years of pleasant academic rustication, Hartke is fired from the college
at the behest of a right-wing television demagogue who feels that Hartke is too
pessimistic. Pessimism, as everyone knows and as the board of trustees reminds
him, is un-American and probably even anti-American. A physics teacher, Hartke
has made the mistake, among others, of informing his students that the idea of
perpetual motion is a pipe dream. Unpatriotically, he explains, ''I see no harm
in telling young people to prepare for failure rather than success, since
failure is the main thing that is going to happen to them.''

When he is dismissed, ostensibly for sexual misconduct, Hartke finds employment
just across the lake at the former state prison, run by a Japanese corporation
that operates it much more efficiently and profitably than the state did.
''Color-coded'' prisons have become a growth industry, in part because most
productive domestic industry has disappeared. ''Poor and powerless people, no
matter how docile, were no longer of use to canny investors.'' The prison where
Hartke works, near the college town of Scipio, is populated entirely by black
inmates, the Supreme Court having decided that it was cruel and inhuman to
confine one race with another. America has been largely resegregated -black
insulated from white, rich from poor.

Hartke manages to teach some inmates how to read, though the immediate reported
benefits of literacy are mainly an increased pleasure in masturbation and wider
circulation for the anti-Semitic tract ''The Protocols of the Elders of Zion.''
''The lesson I myself learned over and over again when teaching at the college
and then the prison was the uselessness of information to most people, except as
entertainment.''

When gang members launch a military operation to break out a drug dealer, the
entire prison population escapes and crosses the frozen lake to the Tarkington
campus. For a variety of reasons, not least the racist supposition that blacks
could not possibly have planned the escape, Hartke is eventually arrested as the
leader of the uprising and incarcerated himself. Prison may not be such a bad
place to be in the year 2001. Most of the United States has been sold to
foreigners, and what is left is broken down and depleted. Black markets, race
war, martial law, tuberculosis and AIDS are all somewhere between endemic and
epidemic.

Like Eugene Debs Hartke, Mr. Vonnegut has always been a pessimist - ''a pillar
of salt,'' as he describes himself in his novel ''Slaughterhouse-Five.'' Like
Lot's wife, he looks back at the carnage. In this case, he also looks forward,
somewhat in the manner of another biblical personage, Jeremiah.

The bitter ironies in his books have always been tempered by a whimsical
stoicism, despair averted by glimpses of individual compassion and the mild
palliative of ''harmless untruths'' like the pleasantly ditsy religion of
Bokononism in ''Cat's Cradle.'' He is a satirist with a heart, a moralist with a
whoopee cushion, a cynic who wants to believe. His fiercest social criticism is
usually disguised in parable. In ''Cat's Cradle,'' for instance, a substance
called Ice Nine, which on release freezes all the water on the face of the
earth, stands in for nuclear weapons. In ''Slaughterhouse-Five,'' the
extraterrestrial Tralfamadorians provide a cosmic perspective on the
inexplicable suffering and horror of the firebombing of Dresden. In
''Jailbird,'' the terrestrial rape of the environment is echoed in the story of
the planet Vicuna, where scientists found a way to convert time into food and
energy, thereby running out of it.

As if racing against such a clock, Mr. Vonnegut is working much closer to the
ground in ''Hocus Pocus,'' which has more in common with Anthony Trollope's book
''The Way We Live Now'' than with Arthur C. Clarke's ''2001.'' It is the most
richly detailed and textured of Mr. Vonnegut's renderings of this particular
planet. Unlike many of his major characters, Hartke seems like a real person,
and Scipio seems like a real town. Some readers may miss the wilder leaps of
imagination and the whimsy, but what is gained is a muscular dignity of voice
that only rarely is tendentious. And, like outer space in ''The Sirens of
Titan,'' ''Hocus Pocus'' is not without ''empty heroics, low comedy, and
pointless death.''

If he eschews parables, Mr. Vonnegut still finds abundant metaphors for our
current situation. Hartke compares the land of the free and the home of the
brave to a vast plantation, the soil and labor of which has been exhausted. The
owners, whites of European descent, are selling it off, dispossessing the
laborers. The buyers, mainly Japanese, find themselves as an army of occupation
in a hostile, primitive land, bogged down in a terrible quagmire that may prove
as destructive to their nation as Vietnam was to ours. Prisons spring up like
the antibodies that attempt to form hard protective shells around the germs of
tuberculosis, which is enjoying a comeback.

But don't worry. There is sort of a bright side to all of this. The
science-fiction writer Kilgore Trout briefly appears - along with others in Mr.
Vonnegut's repertory company, represented by a story called ''Protocols of the
Elders of Tralfamador,'' in which he speculates that the whole point of human
history is to breed strains of germs powerful enough to travel through space and
spread DNA throughout the universe. Once we are through trashing and poisoning
the planet, any germ hardy enough to survive here could presumably make it
anywhere.

SAVE US FROM THE LOWER CLASSES

When I tried to tell the hostages a little about their captors, about their
childhoods and mental illnesses, and their not caring if they lived or died, and
what prison was like, and so on, Jason Wilder actually closed his eyes and
covered his ears. He was being theatrical rather than practical. He didn't cover
his ears so well that he couldn't hear me.

Others shook their heads and indicated in other ways that such information was
not only tiresome but offensive. It was as though we were in a thunderstorm, and
I had begun lecturing on the circulation of electrical charges in clouds, and
the formation of raindrops, and the paths chosen by lightning strokes, and what
thunder was, and on and on. All they wanted to know was when the storm would
stop, so they could go on about their business.

What Warden Matsumoto had said about people like them was accurate. They had
managed to convert their wealth, which had originally been in the form of
factories or stores or other demanding enterprises, into a form so liquid and
abstract, negotiable representations of money on paper, that there were few
reminders coming from anywhere that they might be responsible for anyone outside
their own circle of friends and relatives.

They didn't rage against the convicts. They were mad at the Government for not
making sure that escapes from the prison were impossible. The more they ran on
like that, the clearer it became that it was their Government, not mine or the
convicts' or the Townies'. Its first duty, moreover, was to protect them from
the lower classes, not only in this country but everywhere. Were people on Easy
Street ever any different? From ''Hocus Pocus.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Kurt Vonnegut. (Jill Krementz)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              286 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 9, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

The Insider's Insider

BYLINE: By JOSEPH S. NYE Jr.; Joseph S. Nye Jr. is the author of ''Bound to
Lead: The Changing Nature of American Power'' and the director of the Center for
International Affairs at Harvard University.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 22, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1517 words


Mr. Nitze was a member of the foreign policy establishment that ultimately
fragmented over Vietnam. Educated at Hotchkiss and Harvard, he married into
wealth and made more money in Wall Street. A year of graduate work, again at
Harvard, reinforced his conviction that ideas were important only insofar as
they led to action. In Government his mentor was Harry Truman's Secretary of
State, Dean Acheson.

Mr. Nitze believed in courteousness, attention to detail and discretion in
public. Indeed, when he published his memoirs last year, reviewers complained
about their dry and uninformative nature.

One could argue that there have been five generations of foreign policy elites
over the last half-century: the post-World War II founders, John F. Kennedy's
best and brightest, the Nixon-Ford Republicans, Jimmy Carter's young Democrats
and the Reagan Republicans. Mr. Nitze worked with four of the five, the
exception being the Carter generation. He resigned from the State Department in
1989 when the Bush Administration (which includes many alumni of the Ford
Administration) failed to offer him a significant position.

A longtime Democrat, Mr. Nitze has been bipartisan throughout his career. But
the high price he paid for this calls into question some of the arguments for
bipartisanship. He suffered suspicion from both the left and the right. It is
ironic that he was vilified by the right, since he was the author of National
Security Council Document 68, which some historians see as the 1950 equivalent
of a declaration of cold war. But Mr. Nitze's close association with Acheson,
tagged by right-wingers as the ''Red Dean'' in the bitter battles of the
McCarthy era, led Republican senators to veto his appointment to important
Defense Department posts in 1953 and again in 1974. The irony is doubly bitter
in the latter case, for Mr. Nitze in Defense would have slowed Henry Kissinger's
efforts to achieve a second strategic arms limitation treaty. (His relations
with the Nixon-Ford Republicans were marked by tension throughout his service
during that era, in part because of his distrust of Mr. Kissinger.) As for the
left, Mr. Nitze was originally slated for Deputy Secretary of Defense in
Kennedy's New Frontier, but had to settle for the lesser position of Assistant
Secretary, in part because of the enemies he had made. (Lyndon Johnson finally
elevated him to the higher job in 1967.) And although he supported Jimmy Carter
in the 1976 election, Mr. Nitze's hard-line monologues antagonized the
President, and he was not offered a position in the Administration.

Mr. Nitze was the model of a Government insider and, according to Mr. Callahan,
it was only the inside that interested him. This had both benefits and costs. On
the positive side, it meant that Mr. Nitze developed impressive bureaucratic
skills and knew how to get things accomplished. On the negative side, his
self-image as an insider led him to mute his critical judgment. For example, he
believed that the escalation of the Vietnam War was foolish. He expressed his
views privately, but did not press them until late in the game. Instead, as Mr.
Callahan describes it, Mr. Nitze's public position (he was then Secretary of the
Navy) was that of a cheerleader.

Mr. Nitze was more prudent when he was in the Government than when he was out.
On the outside, says Mr. Callahan, he was often obsessive in his criticism of
the softness of Government policy toward the Soviet Union - whether as the
author of the Gaither Report, which criticized the Eisenhower Administration,
through his comments about President Gerald Ford's arms control proposals or as
a member of the Committee on the Present Danger that criticized President
Carter's approach to SALT II. Mr. Callahan suggests that Mr. Nitze's lapse from
his gentleman's code in 1977 - when he publicly questioned the patriotism of his
former friend Paul Warnke, the chief arms control negotiator in the Carter
Administration - might be a case where Mr. Nitze's bitterness at his exclusion
from power and his self-image as savior of the nation became intertwined in his
own mind.

Two ideas were central to Mr. Nitze's thought throughout the cold war period.
One was a systematic pessimism that led to worst-case assumptions about Soviet
intentions. In 1950, he dismissed the more moderate analyses by specialists such
as George Kennan and his former Harvard clubmate Charles Bohlen. In 1976 he
contributed to a Government-sponsored report by a team of outside experts that
revised C.I.A. estimates in a more pessimistic direction.

Another consistent idea was his belief in the importance of nuclear weapons and
of marginal differences in the nuclear balance. Almost alone among the veterans
of the 1962 Cuban missile crisis, he attributed America's success to nuclear
superiority rather than to conventional force advantages or to President
Kennedy's surreptitious offer to Nikita Khrushchev to remove American missiles
from Turkey. And in 1980, the Committee on the Present Danger (and President
Reagan) predicted a difficult decade for the United States because of the Soviet
advantage in intercontinental missiles. That Soviet advantage was not removed,
despite Mr. Nitze's best efforts at the bargaining table, yet it was the Soviet
Union that suffered political defeats in the 1980's.

David Callahan, now the managing editor of The American Prospect magazine, began
this biography as a student at Hampshire College and spent two years finishing
the book after graduation. Though one may quibble about details of
interpretation, Mr. Callahan has tried to be fair to his subject. The 53
interviews listed in an appendix are well distributed among Mr. Nitze's admirers
and critics, and include two with Mr. Nitze himself. Mr. Callahan is a little
less successful in his goal of writing a history of the cold war, in part
because so few documents are available for the later periods of Mr. Nitze's
career and in part because of the limitations that are inherent in a focus on an
individual. But he has chosen a fascinating individual, and he has produced an
immensely readable account of a critical figure in the history of American
foreign policy over the past 40 years.

HE KEPT HIS DISTANCE

David Callahan traces his political awakening to 10th grade in
Hastings-on-Hudson, N.Y. He fell in with a group of nascent conservative
intellectuals in the senior class, who gave no quarter to the 15-year-old
liberal. ''I couldn't stand being insufficiently informed to take them on,'' Mr.
Callahan recalled. Ten years later, the child of those bull sessions is
''Dangerous Capabilities,'' a political biography of Paul Nitze and his 40-year
role in shaping United States nuclear policy.

In more than four years of research, Mr. Callahan interviewed Mr. Nitze only
twice. ''I've maintained my distance from Nitze, and that has improved the
book,'' he said by telephone from his office in Princeton, N.J. Despite Mr.
Callahan's liberal views, he confessed, ''It's very easy to be sympathetic to
Paul Nitze. He is a marvelous man who is intellectually much more thorough and
thoughtful than many of the people who have served in Government with him. I was
being co-opted by Nitze's way of seeing the world, and I think subsequent drafts
remedied that problem.''

When they did meet, Mr. Callahan chose to question Mr. Nitze about biographical
details rather than confront him on the political philosophy that so influenced
foreign policy. ''He's kind of an intimidating guy, and I'm kind of a young
upstart,'' the 25-year-old Mr. Callahan explained. ''One's appetite for sitting
in an office with somebody who's 60 years older than you and asking hostile
questions - nobody can have much desire to do that.

''So maybe I let him off the hook in my personal contacts with him. But I think
that all his former friends and colleagues provided me with all the ammunition I
needed to make my attack anyway.''

Were the paranoia, proxy wars and massive spending of the nuclear peace
necessary? Mr. Callahan never put that multitrillion-dollar question to his
subject. Alluding to Mr. Nitze's volumes of policy analysis, memorandums,
speeches, memoirs and Congressional testimony, Mr. Callahan said asking that
question of Mr. Nitze is almost superfluous. ''I know what his answer is,'' he
said. ''His answer is 'Yes, it was worth it.' ''

JOSEPH A. CINCOTTI

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Paul Nitze during a 1985 press conference at NATO headquarters
in Brussels. (Associated Press) (pg. 22); Davod Callahan (Harper Collins) (pg.
23)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              287 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 9, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

If You're Thinking of Living in: Valhalla

BYLINE: By JERRY CHESLOW

SECTION: Section 10; Page 5, Column 1; Real Estate Desk

LENGTH: 1413 words


For Valhalla residents, the large amount of land allocated for public purposes
is bittersweet.

''We are protected from the massive development in the rest of the county,
because there just isn't any land left,'' said Wilfred V. Hurley, a lifelong
resident and retired fire chief of Valhalla. ''So we'll always have open, green
space.''

''Between the county-owned property and the cemetery, 40 percent of the hamlet
is tax exempt,'' said Kirk A. Baker, also a lifelong resident and a broker with
Weichert Realtors of nearby White Plains. ''It's good to have the medical center
here. But people who go to county facilities use our roads, our police and we
pay for them.''

Valhalla is a virtual highway hub. Both the Taconic and the Sprain Brook
Parkways pass through, making it convenient to commute to Manhattan. The Cross
Westchester Expressway, a major east-west road, connects Valhalla with New
Jersey and other parts of Westchester County.

According to Mr. Baker, the hamlet's accessibility has pushed housing prices out
of the reach of most first-time buyers. Two-bedroom houses on 50- by 100-foot
lots sell for a minimum of $220,000 in the Shelly Park area. The most expensive
area is the Stonegate section, where four-bedroom split levels and colonials go
for up to $600,000.

Valhalla has only one small apartment house, on Entrance Way. There are also
apartments over many stores in the hamlet's half-mile-long center and a local
ordinance lets homeowners convert part of their houses into efficiency
apartments.

Town Supervisor Robert F. Meehan explained that such conversions are according
to a strict set of guidelines and must include separate entrances, adequate
ventilation and fire safety precautions. About 5 percent of Valhalla's roughly
1,500 homes have such apartments.

According to Mr. Baker, units rent from about$600 for an efficiency to more than
$1,000 for some two-bedrooms.

The hamlet has two town-house condominium developments. Two-bedroom town houses
in the 20-unit Kensico Townhouses on Leroy Avenue or in the 40-unit Pleasant
Ridge on Bradhurst Avenue sell for about $235,000. Three-bedroom units in
Pleasant Ridge go for about $270,000.

Pamela Knight, a medical student at the New York College of Medicine in
Valhalla, bought a three-bedroom one-family home on Legion Drive last August.
Miss Knight says that she found the hamlet ''pretty, friendly, quaint and
without a lot of traffic'' and that she particularly likes the easy access to
New York City.

Valhalla experienced its first major growth in 1913, when New York City started
building the Kensico Dam to contain the waters of the Bronx River in what was to
become the Kensico Reservoir. At the time, the hamlet was named Kensico, after
the Siwanoy Indian chief Okensico, who signed the deed for the sale of White
Plains to Dutch and English settlers in 1683.

Stone cutters were brought in from Italy to build the 1,843-foot-long,
300-foot-high dam, using granite quarried from neighboring North Castle. Many of
their descendants still live in Valhalla.

Several dozen houses on reservoir land were moved to the hamlet's center, a
small shopping district clustered around the railroad station, which is on
Columbus Avenue. Although the center has beauty parlors, a dry cleaner, several
small grocery stores, a drugstore and a variety store, most residents do their
serious shopping in the Rose Hill Shopping Center, which straddles the
Valhalla-Thornwood border or at the Town Center shopping center in Thornwood.

Valhalla's first railroad station now serves as the Valhalla Station restaurant,
which has a Mexican and American menu. A new station has been built about 150
yards away. Other moderately priced restaurants in Valhalla include Overlook,
with an Italian menu, and the Morgan Inn and Craven's of Valhalla, which have
American menus.

The hamlet still maintains its small- town flavor, with annual events such as
the American Legion Memorial Day Parade from the Methodist Church on Columbus
Avenue and Westlake Drive to the monuments for World War II and Vietnam war dead
on Broadway in the center of the Hamlet.

On Christmas, the volunteer fire companies send fire trucks around the hamlet
and to the Westchester County Medical Center with one firefighter dressed as
Santa.

Besides the large green belt abutting the Kensico Reservoir, Valhalla has
several small parks. They include the three- acre Lakeside Park on Westlake
Drive, which has a baseball diamond and a soccer field, the five-acre Stonegate
Park on Eastview Drive, which has a baseball diamond, a basketball court and
playground equipment, and the three-acre Bradhurst Park, which has a baseball
diamond and playground equipment. There is also Patrick Henry Field, one of the
oldest Little League fields in the United States, according to Mr. Baker.

Valhalla's children attend the three schools in the Valhalla Union Free School
District, which has a total of 900 students from Valhalla, other parts of Mount
Pleasant, Greenburgh and Northcastle. The district has two elementary schools,
the Virginia Road elementary School in Greenburgh and the Columbus Avenue School
in Valhalla. Students in grades 7 through 12 attend the Valhalla Junior-Senior
High School on Columbus Avenue in Mount Pleasant.

According to the Superintendent of Schools, Dr. Michael Knowlton, students go
from kindergarten through grade 8 without being assigned to grades as such in
mathematics, reading, writing and social studies. Instead, they are allowed to
advance at their own pace through 18 levels.

''We don't think a student should be advanced or held back solely on the basis
of age or grade level,'' explained Dr. Knowlton.

Computers are introduced in kindergarten and, by the time they are graduated
from high school, said Dr. Knowlton, all students in the district are computer
literate. Last year, the district received a $30,000 grant from the State
Legislature to upgrade its computer facilities.

Part of the money is going to help establish a telecommunications program,
through which Valhalla students will have computer contact with students at
other schools in the northern hemisphere.

More than 90 percent of Valhalla's high school graduates go on to college, Dr.
Knowlton said. The high school has advanced-placement courses in history,
mathematics, the sciences and languages. Starting this year, it will introduce a
college-credit course in accounting, given in cooperation with Westchester
Community College in neighboring Greenburgh.

Gazetteer

Population: 5,100 (1990 estimate).

Median household income: $70,000 (1990 estimate).

Median price of single-family house: $290,000.

Property taxes on median-priced house: $5,000.

Median price of two-bedroom town-house condominium: $235,000.

Median rent on two-bedroom apartment: $850.

Government: Town Supervisor (Robert Meehan, Republican) elected to two-year term
and four board members elected to four-year terms.

Public school expenditure per pupil: $13,110.

Distance from midtown Manhattan: 25 miles.

Rush-hour commutation to midtown: 40 minutes on Metro-North Harlem Line; one-way
$6.75, weekly $46, monthly $149.

The Wagner Connection: In 1904, the New York Central Railroad had a stop at
Kensico and another at Kensico Cemetery. To eliminate the confusion, the
postmaster's wife, an opera buff, proposed changing Kensico's name to Valhalla,
the home of the gods in Wagner's four-opera Ring des Nibelungen. The name was
changed that year.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Shopping area near Valhalla's railroad station. Kensico Dam
Plaza, site of free summer concerts. (Alan Zale for The New York Times); Map of
New York showing location of Valhalla.

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              288 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 10, 1990, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Cambodian Rivals Said to Accept U.N. Peace Plan

BYLINE: By STEVEN ERLANGER, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1597 words

DATELINE: JAKARTA, Indonesia, Sept. 9


Today also marked the first meeting of an official American representative, John
Monjo, Ambassador to Indonesia, with Hun Sen, the Prime Minister of the
Vietamese-installed Government in Cambodia. Washington announced last week that
it would begin direct talks with Phnom Penh, a dialogue that was begun last week
at the ambassadorial level in Vientiane, Laos.

Mr. Hun Sen, speaking after a 40-minute meeting with Mr. Monjo, said that he
accepted the United Nations plan as ''the framework for a comprehenive
solution.''

He said that the plan, which calls for thousands of administrators under United
Nations auspices leading to new elections in Cambodia, had to be elaborated upon
in negotiations, a fact also emphasized by Mr. Alatas and the French
co-chairman, Edwige Avice, a Deputy Foreign Minister, in their formal opening
remarks.

But Mr. Hun Sen said he was now optimistic that the talks here, which quickly
broke into meetings of the co-chairmen with the individual factions, would have
a successful outcome.

He said the meeting with Mr. Monjo was a very good and important one. ''It is a
first meeting but very valuable,'' he said. ''We have the same intention, the
same understanding with the Americans.'' Mr. Monjo said only he brought ''no
special messages - just exchanging views.''

The United Nations plan has already been accepted by the three-party opposition
coalition fighting Mr. Hun Sen's Vietnamese-installed Government. The coalition,
led by Prince Norodom Sihanouk, is made up of his followers, those of another
non-Communist, former Prime Minister Son Sann, and the Communist Khmer Rouge,
during whose rule, from 1975 to 1979, more than one million Cambodians died by
execution and famine. Vietnam invaded the country and installed a pro-Hanoi,
anti-Khmer Rouge Government in 1979.

Khieu Samphan, the Khmer Rouge representative and vice president of the
anti-Government coalition, said today that he was also optimistic. ''Peace is
closer than ever,'' he said. He had ''no reservations'' about the United Nations
plan. The plan would establish a national governing council, under United
Nations supervision, to administer the country. The United Nations would also
set up and monitor free elections, and sending a military force as peacekeepers.
The four factions must negotiate the details of the plan, and it is expected
that there will be disagreements.

Khieu Samphan's comments were echoed by Prince Norodom Ranariddh, Prince
Sihanouk's son and representative here.

Sihanouk's Status Unclear

But the status of Prince Sihanouk, who said in a statement Saturday that he was
too ill to come here and who was communicating with Jakarta by fax, remained
unclear, adding a note of uncertainty.

Senior Western and Asian diplomats said today that the Chinese Prime Minister,
Li Peng, had urged Prince Sihanouk to come here, but that the Prince refused at
the last minute, because he was offended by some remarks of Mr. Hun Sen.

The diplomats said that Prince Sihanouk and the Chinese Deputy Foreign Minister,
Qi Huaiyuan, then had a long and bitter discussion, which ended with the Prince
saying that he was packing his bags to go to his second home, in Pyongyang,
North Korea.

China has been the main sponsor of all the opposition factions and the sole
sponsor of the Khmer Rouge. Prince Sihanouk is provided a home in the old French
Legation building in Beijing.

A Break From Diplomacy

Prince Sihanouk remained today in Beijing. But in a hallway interview, Prince
Ranariddh said that his father had decided to take ''a five- or six-month
break'' from diplomacy because of his health, and would issue a statement to
that effect today in Beijing. No statement was issued, however, and some
diplomats suggested that if this meeting turns out to be a success, Prince
Sihanouk may yet arrive.

Although Prince Sihanouk has said in the past that he would not serve as
chairman of an interim national leadership, the Supreme National Council, he is
now said to want the position.

In a statement Saturday, Prince Sihanouk said the coalition would accept a
council made up of six members from the coalition and six from Phnom Penh, as
Mr. Hun Sen has demanded. The Khmer Rouge had been demanding that all four
factions have an equal number of seats, giving the coalition three-quarters of
the seats.

In his statement, the Prince said the council could elect a chairman as a 13th
member. But Mr. Hun Sen is said by diplomats to be insisting that Prince
Sihanouk, if he is to take part in the council, be one of the 12.

A Demand for Consensus

Diplomats said, however, that Mr. Hun Sen is willing to accept Prince Sihanouk's
demand that the council operate by consensus, rather than by majority voting.

Still, Prince Sihanouk has been reluctant to allow himself to be put on the same
footing with Mr. Hun Sen, only 39 years old, whom he has called ''a Vietnamese
valet.''

Mr. Alatas, appearing buoyant after a process in which he has been so intimately
involved, said that the bilateral meetings would continue Monday ''to start
talking about forming the Supreme National Council,'' a necessary first step for
peace.

After getting the factions' commitment to the United Nations framework, he said
the main priority of the meeting will be to ''finalize the process of the
formation'' of the Supreme National Council, including ''its nature,
composition, functions and related aspects.''

If that could be accomplished here, senior Asian diplomats said, the peace talks
might then return to Paris, where a formal international conference on Cambodia
broke up in disarray in August 1989.

The talks here are taking place under the aegis of that conference. ''If nothing
else goes wrong, which it probably will,'' one Asian diplomat said, the
conference could be reconvened in late October.

The United Nations plan envisages the Supreme National Council taking Cambodia's
seat in the United Nations in the upcoming General Assembly. It would then cede
to a special United Nations authority the right to ''supervise or control'' the
five key ministries of state - foreign affairs, interior, finance, defense and
information.

The United Nations authority would in this way insure the neutrality of the
Government in the year or so before new elections can be organized and held.

Diplomats say the five permanent members foresee the appointment of United
Nations officials at the top levels of the ministries, working through Cambodian
bureaucrats of both rival administrations. If the Council agrees on particular
decisions, the United Nations would go along. If not, the United Nations
officials would decide.

''But how does Hun Sen understand 'supervise or control'?'' an Asian diplomat
said. This was the thorny sort of issue still to be worked out, he said.

The United Nations would also be responsible for monitoring a cease-fire and the
cessation of external aid to the combatants, for disarming the rival armies and
repatriating the 300,000 or so Cambodians displaced after the Vietnamese
invasion.

Phnom Penh is reluctant to cede too much control to the United Nations, but it
may do so if it does not mean the dismantling of the administration that is now
in place. Cambodian officials say dismantling would allow the Khmer Rouge to
intensify the war, but some admit it would also undermine the Government's
chances in an election.

Mr. Hun Sen has worries, too, that the Khmer Rouge will take advantage of a
cease-fire and continue its war for power by political as well as military
means. The Khmer Rouge might not hand in all its arms to the United Nations, for
instance, or tell many of its fighters to go underground rather than group
themselves in cantonments for disarming, as the United Nations plan suggests.

The U.N. Plan For Cambodia

These are the major requirements of the United Nations peace plan under which
the Vietnamese-backed Cambodian Government would share power with three
guerrilla groups it has been fighting for 11 years.

U.N. administration of the Cambodian Government until elections are held.
  U.N. supervision of disarmament of rival factions.

U.N. supervision of elections.

Human rights guarantees.

International guarantees regarding the neutrality of a restructured Cambodia.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              289 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 10, 1990, Monday, Late Edition - Final

C.I.A. Plays Drug Role Off Screen, Too

SECTION: Section A; Page 22, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 415 words


Like Mr. Robbins, I have long attempted to explain that the Central Intelligence
Agency's motives in tolerating heroin smuggling on the aircraft of Air America,
of its predecessor, Civil Air Transport, and on a dozen other air proprietaries
(which Mr. Robbins does not mention), in at least three other areas of
operation, were not overt fund raising. United States taxpayers were billed for
those conflicts.

It was a matter of C.I.A. policy not to offend military and political allies by
protesting their lucrative opium trade or by obstructing their use of C.I.A.
aircraft, facilities and, often, the agency's ''laissez-passer,'' or unchecked
access, to military air bases. However, C.I.A. managers were well aware of the
indirect funding benefits for their allies and were certainly willfully
complicit in the trafficking.

Under present law in the United States war on drugs, the C.I.A.'s assets can be
confiscated (the policies continue), as Eastern Airlines aircraft have been in
recent years. Investigation by Senator John F. Kerry's subcommittee on
Terrorism, Narcotics and International Communications has exposed the
continuation of drug hauling on C.I.A.-funded aircraft in the Iran-contra
affair. The notes of Oliver L. North and Rob Owen (those that survived the
shredder) document their awarenesses of drug smuggling on contra aircraft in
their Central American program.

As for Hollywood's movie ''Air America,'' I have to note that when the crunch
came in my own post, when we were surrounded by menacing North Vietnamese
divisions, the heroic Air America pilots refused to come and get us. We sweated
out two harrowing days and escaped on a returning Vietnamese air force resupply
chopper.

JOHN STOCKWELL
Elgin, Tex., Aug. 29, 1990
  The writer is a former Central Intelligence Agency provincial officer in
charge in Vietnam and author of ''In Search of Enemies.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              290 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 11, 1990, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Ending Talks, All Cambodia Parties Commit Themselves to U.N. Peace Plan

BYLINE: By STEVEN ERLANGER, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1239 words

DATELINE: JAKARTA, Indonesia, Sept. 10


Mr. Alatas, who has been instrumental in over two years of difficult
negotiations, beamed as the heads of the four factions held hands for the
cameras at the end of a news conference tonight.

A 12-Member Council

The council, which will initially be made up of six representatives of the Phnom
Penh Government and two from each of the three opposition factions, is a step
toward peace and reconciliation in a country whose travails have become a
metaphor for brutality in the last half of this century.

Since the 1960's, Cambodia has been the site of Vietnamese and American
incursions, large-scale American bombing, civil war sponsored by superpowers,
the horrors of Khmer Rouge administration, a Vietnamese invasion, an 11-year
occupation and the resurgence of civil war that has brought the Khmer Rouge back
to within 60 miles of the capital.

At its first meeting, the council can decide whether to elect a 13th member as
chairman. Senior Asian and Western diplomats said that in heated talks today,
all parties agreed to ask Prince Norodom Sihanouk, Cambodia's former King, to
become chairman.

Prince Sihanouk declined to come here, citing illness and causing a major
argument between him and China, diplomats said. His son and representative here,
Prince Norodom Ranariddh, said early today that his father would refuse to take
part in the council and would take a six-month break.

Hoping to Change His Mind

But Sihanouk aides said tonight that they were sure the Prince could be
prevailed upon to change his mind and chair the council, which will in any event
work by consensus and not by majority voting.

Tonight's agreement came a day after the Indonesian Foreign Minister said all
four factions had agreed to the United Nations framework.

The plan, drafted over eight months by the five permanent members of the United
Nations Security Council and completed Aug. 28, is a framework for a
comprehensive peace that must be elaborated upon by the Cambodian parties.

But the five permanent members -China, the Soviet Union, the United States,
Britain and France - will continue their pressure on the Cambodians and
''essentially work to dictate a settlement,'' a senior Asian diplomat said.

The Soviet Union has been the main sponsor of Vietnam and the Phnom Penh
Government of Hun Sen. The United States has provided non-lethal military aid to
the two non-Communist factions, headed by Prince Sihanouk and a former Prime
Minister, Son Sann. And China, working to deny Vietnam control over Cambodia,
has been the main military sponsor of all three opposition factions and the sole
sponsor of the Khmer Rouge.

'Constellation Was Right'

But with the Soviet Union taking a new international role and badly needing
cash, the withdrawal of most Vietnamese forces a year ago and China eager for
international acceptance after its crackdown on the pro-democracy movement last
year, the ''constellation was right for cooperation,'' a senior Western diplomat
said.

The Supreme National Council is intended to be a largely symbolic body that will
represent Cambodia at the United Nations and cede much of its authority to the
United Nations.

Perhaps 5,000 United Nations peacekeeping troops and 1,200 officials will
administer the country, organize a cease-fire and new elections, disarm the
combatants and insure the withdrawal of all foreign forces and the cessation of
all foreign military aid.

The International Conference on Cambodia in Paris, suspended in August 1989,
could resume as early as October for the final negotiation and signing of a
peace settlement, Asian and Western diplomats said.

Careful Not to Antagonize

At their news conference tonight, the Cambodian leaders were upbeat and careful,
with Mr. Alatas's prodding, to avoid antagonizing each other unduly.

''This document is of great and very significant value,'' said Khieu Samphan,
representing the Khmer Rouge, under whose rule more than one million Cambodians
died of starvation, disease and execution from 1975 to late 1978, when Vietnam
invaded the country and forced them from power.

Hun Sen, the Prime Minister of the Phnom Penh Government that was installed by
Vietnam, said, ''This document is the best we have ever come upon.''

Prince Ranariddh, the son of Prince Sihanouk, who was overthrown in an
American-backed coup in 1970, called the document ''very, very historical'' and
called for good will ''to bring back to our people peace and independence.''

Son Sann, a former Prime Minister under Prince Sihanouk and leader of the other
non-Communist faction in the opposition, said the agreement ''is only a
beginning, and the road to travel remains long.''

More disputes lie ahead, in particular over what control United Nations
officials will have over administration and the details of the disarming of
forces.

But the factions did agree here to the basics: The Supreme National Council
would become, in the transitional period between the signing of a peace
settlement in Paris and new elections, the sole embodiment of Cambodia's
sovereignty, independence and unity.

To Occupy U.N. Seat

The council will occupy Cambodia's disputed seat in the United Nations beginning
with the coming session of the General Assembly and will represent the country
in all other international institutions until a new Government can be formed.

The six members of the council from the Phnom Penh side are: Mr. Hun Sen, Deputy
Prime Ministers Hor Nam Hong and Kong Sam Ol, Interior Minister Sin Song,
Defense Minister Tie Banh and Chem Snguon, Deputy Minister of Justice.

Mr. Khieu Samphan will represent the Khmer Rouge along with Son Sen, the chief
of staff of its army.

Mr. Son Sann will represent his Khmer People's National Liberation Front along
with his spokesman, Ieng Mouly.

Prince Ranariddh will represent his father's faction along with Chau Sen Coosal,
former Speaker of the National Assembly. ---- Son Sen's Inclusion Assailed In
New York, David R. Hawk, director of the Cambodia Documentation Commission, a
research group that works to document human rights violations in that country,
criticized the seating on the council of Mr. Son Sen, whom he described as being
a having directed the killing of tens of thousands of people in Cambodia.

In Washington, officials of Amnesty International USA identified Mr. Son Sen as
having been among the leaders of the Khmer Rouge who were responsible for the
large-scale killings in Cambodia between 1975 and 1978. Mr. Son Sen, according
to the Amnesty group, was directly responsible for a network of torture and
execution centers throughout Cambodia.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              291 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 11, 1990, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

In 10 State Primaries, Candidates Scurry Not to Look Like Politicians

BYLINE: By MICHAEL ORESKES, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 10, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1274 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 10



Primaries in 10 States

Ten states, in addition to Rhode Island, Minnesota and Arizona, will hold
primary elections on Tuesday: Connecticut, Maryland, New Hampshire, New York,
Utah, Vermont and Wisconsin. So does the District of Columbia, where Democrats
will pick their nominees to succeed Marion S. Barry Jr., a three-term Mayor
brought low by drug charges, as well as Representative Walter E. Fauntroy, a
19-year delegate to the House of Representatives, who is running for mayor.

In Minnesota, Mr. Perpich of the Democratic-Farmer-Labor Party, seemed headed
for defeat early this year, but he has gone up in the polls as his opponent,
Mike Hatch, the former commerce commissioner, called on negative political
tactics, attacking him in television commercials. This is evidence, Mr. Strother
said, that attacks, while still widespread, are backfiring more often than they
did in the past.

For his part, Mr. Perpich has not even tried to make promises to the voters, Mr.
Strother said, for fear they would not be believed. Instead he has gone on
television and read from out-of-state magazines that said Minnesota, where he
has been Governor for 10 years, was a good place to live and work.

In the closing days, Mr. Hatch has focused on his support for legal abortion,
which Mr. Perpich opposes. If Mr. Perpich survives the primary, he will be one
of five opponents of abortion around the country running as the Democratic
nominee for governor against a Republican who supports abortion rights, an
illustration of how complex the issue's political impact has become.

In Rhode Island, a businessman, Bruce Sundlun, has been making progress in his
campaign for the Democratic nomination for governor on the theme of ''I am not a
politician.'' But newspapers reported today that he had been raising money in a
very political way, with hints of favors to come after the election.

One opponent, Mayor Joseph Paolino of Providence, who was dropping in the polls
as he attacked Mr. Sundlun, an old political ally, went on television to say he
was eschewing any more negative campaigning.

''Together, we can take a stand against the old-style negative politics,'' Mr.
Paolino said tonight in a television advertisement produced by his media
consultants, Doak & Shrum, who have lost races in Texas, California, Florida and
Alabama this year after their candidates engaged in heavily negative campaigns.

The third Democrat running for governor in Rhode Island, Mayor Frank Flaherty of
Warwick, was the first to campaign against the tone of the campaign. ''It's
getting embarrassing,'' he said last week.

Attacks can still be effective, and are surely still commonplace, politicians
report. But they are more dangerous than they once were, if they make the
attacker look like an old-fashioned politician, which is just about the worst
attack than can be made on a candidate this year.

Governor Looks Vulnerable

The Democrats in Rhode Island are battling fiercely for the Democratic
nomination because it would give them the right to face Governor Edward D.
DiPrete, who has been badly wounded by ethics conflicts and the sagging New
England economy. Campaigning in 1988 for another two-year term, Mr. DiPrete
promised not to raise taxes but then was forced to raise the sales tax. Mr.
DiPrete, first elected in 1984 after Democrats wounded each other in a divisive
primary, is expected to win his primary against a former radio host, Steve
White. Even with the damage they have inflicted on each other, all three of the
Democrats are currently ahead of Mr. DiPrete in polls. But the Governor has said
he is sure he can come back.

The public distaste for politics is also illustrated in both the governor's race
in Connecticut and the House race in Vermont. Tuesday primaries in both states
are largely overshadowed by the fact that independent candidates, Lowell P.
Weicker Jr., the former Republican Senator, for governor in Connecticut, and
Bernie Sanders, a Socialist, for Congress in Vermont, will be on the ballot in
the fall and are given a serious chance of winning against party nominees chosen
Tuesday.

In Arizona, former Gov. Evan Mecham, who was impeached and convicted in 1988, is
attempting a comeback in Tuesday's Republican primary for governor, saying he is
the only candidate who can stand up to ''the powerbrokers'' and ''the Phoenix
40,'' a business group.

The front-runner for the Republican nomination, J. Fife Symington, a millionaire
developer, said he would support any of his four Republican opponents in the
general election except Mr. Mecham, who he said needed, ''a poke in the nose.''

The Republican nominee will face Terry Goddard, who resigned as mayor of
Pheonix, after saying he would not, to run for governor. Mr. Goddard's father,
Samuel P. Goddard, is chairman of the Arizona Democratic Party and was once
governor.

The incumbent, Rose Mofford, a Democrat who succeded Mr. Mecham, is retiring.

Trouble in Maryland

A number of House members have had close brushes with defeat in primaries this
year as the mood against politicians dilutes their advantages in fund-raising
and access to constituents.

Another is in trouble Tuesday in Maryland. Representative Roy Dyson, a Democrat
whose district includes Southern Maryland and the Eastern Shore, faces a strong
challenge from a state legislator, Barbara Kreamer.

Mr. Dyson has been in political trouble since an aide, Tom Pappas, committed
suicide under mysterious circumstances in 1988. Mr. Dyson's situation further
deteriorated when it was disclosed that he was a conscientious objector during
the Vietnam War - a position his opponents say they cannot square with his
pro-military stands on the Armed Services Committee and the substantial campaign
contributions he has received from military contractors.

In New Hampshire there is a spirited Democratic primary to face Gov. Judd Gregg
in the fall. Joe Grandmaison, a former state Democratic Party chairman, is the
front-runner in that race but faces two opponents Tuesday.

In Utah there are two Republican races for Congressional nominations, one for
the seat held by Representative Wayne Owens, a Democrat who is a two-term
incumbent.

In Vermont, Gov. Madeleine M. Kunin, a Democrat, is not seeking re-election.
Richard A. Snelling, a Republican who was Governor from 1977 to 1985, and Peter
Welch, a former State Senator, face only token opposition in the primaries.

In Wisconsin, Gov. Tommy G. Thompson, a Republican, is expected to win
renomination. and Congressional primaries have been quiet.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Graphic: Today's Primaries: Races to Watch

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              292 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 12, 1990, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Work With China, Without Illusions

SECTION: Section A; Page 30, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 498 words


The U.S. and other democracies should encourage these constructive moves now by
easing the diplomatic ostracism imposed on Beijing after the June 1989 bloodbath
in Tiananmen Square. President Bush was always right to insist that the world
had nothing to gain from isolating China. But he then undermined support for his
own arguments by downplaying Beijing's gross abuse of human rights.

There's good reason for hard-headed diplomatic realism; there's no excuse for
reviving soft-headed fantasies about the nature of Deng Xiaoping's China.
Beijing's leadership has left no doubt about its determination to uphold
Communist dictatorship by force, despite Communism's collapse elsewhere. Wise
American policy would keep both American interests and values in clear sight.

Mr. Bush isn't the first President to let his diplomatic stance toward China
color his reading of Chinese politics. For more than two decades after the
Communists won control of the mainland, the U.S. insisted that Mao Zedong's
regime was an extension of Soviet power, with the real China temporarily camped
in Taiwan. This self-deception kept the U.S. from grasping the reality of
Sino-Soviet rivalry, and contributed to disastrous misjudgments about the
strategic significance of Vietnam.

Richard Nixon, while he prevented others from acting on the Sino-Soviet schism,
made it a centerpiece of his own approach. Together with Henry Kissinger, he
stood the old China policy on its head, courting Beijing as a strategic ally
against Moscow.

The image of a heartless ''Red China'' yielded to something more worthy of
American friendship: a land of Ping-Pong players, pandas and the Great Wall.
That was all the more remarkable since the new U.S.-China amity began during the
final years of the radical, murderous Cultural Revolution.

Mr. Deng's rise to power brought welcome economic reforms, but American leaders
ignored continued political repression. To be sure, U.S. diplomats weren't the
only ones surprised by the brutality of last year's massacre. But more than a
year later the Bush Administration still won't reconcile its policies to Chinese
realities.

Nations can make common cause in foreign policy even when they do not share
common values. China's leaders understand that well enough. They wage fierce war
against ''bourgeois liberalization'' and Soviet-style reforms at home even while
they cooperate with Washington and Moscow. America's leaders would do well to
learn that pragmatic alignment does not require wholesale endorsement.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              293 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 12, 1990, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

IN THE NATION;
Not the Only Crisis

BYLINE: By Tom Wicker

SECTION: Section A; Page 31, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 760 words


Not at all. West Germany and the Soviet Union, for instance, now have agreed on
how to share the costs of Soviet troop withdrawals from East Germany; so German
reunification actually will take place on Oct. 3, barely three weeks from now.
In the long run, this might be the most important event of 1990, or the coming
decade; but it's taking place in a vacuum of public and perhaps official
discussion, owing to the Middle East frenzy created by a dedicated
Administration and a headline-happy press.

Only five weeks ago the major topics of American political discussion were the
nomination of David Souter to the Supreme Court, the $50 billion savings and
loan scandal that made Neil Bush a household name, an economy that even an
upbeat President called ''sluggish,'' his broken pledge to oppose new taxes, and
efforts to deal with the budget deficit.

None of these matters have disappeared or been managed. Though Senate hearings
on Mr. Souter are at hand, all have taken second place to the idea of the U.S.
standing tall in the desert, in opposition to aggression and in defense of oil.
It's not clear which comes first, and both are admittedly important; but so are
other problems that existed before Saddam Hussein loosed his tanks - problems
that will not be solved by more troops from Egypt or more Presidential
backslapping in Helsinki.

In keeping to his August vacation schedule, Mr. Bush sought to show that he was
not hostage to the Middle East crisis, as President Carter was thought to have
been when Iran was holding U.S. hostages. Staying in Maine thus made some sense
(though with oil supplies supposedly in danger the President at least could have
beached his gas-guzzling speedboat). In fact, Mr. Bush's single-minded attention
to the Iraqi problem, however successful his efforts, may have made him as much
a hostage to a single issue as Mr. Carter was.

In particular, that sluggish U.S. economy, and the dubious determination of
Democrats and Republicans alike to raise taxes anyway, demands Mr. Bush's
attention as much as does the Middle East. An economic collapse at home would
make a major military commitment abroad incongruous, if not impossible, even
with Saudi money as a backup. And what would distinguish one supposed superpower
from another if each tried to maintain a military front on top of an economy
sliding into ruin?

It has largely escaped notice, moreover, in Americans' persistent innocence of
even their own history, that Mr. Bush has reverted to the sort of imperial
Presidential conduct that the Vietnam War should have taught the nation to
question. It's true that he has kept Congress informed about his Middle East
policy; but the strategy, decisions and announced goals all have been his,
including one that could backfire - to expel Iraq from Kuwait and restore the
emirate.

Few now dispute that goal; but suppose Iraq suddenly withdraws from Kuwait,
contradicting Mr. Hussein but apparently bowing to overpowering opposition as
well as to Mr. Bush's demands. That would bring about the end of the blockade,
the embargo and the anti-Iraq coalition, force Mr. Bush to bring U.S. troops
home and leave Iraq unscathed as a military power - perhaps, having defied the
U.S. and the world without real loss, even enhanced as a dominant voice in the
Middle East.

Mr. Bush's imperial crisis management might not then seem so impressive; both
Congress and the public might ask some embarrassing questions, such as: Who was
the real winner? And who took the U.S. out on a limb that could be cut off
behind it?

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              294 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 12, 1990, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

GOVERNOR VICTOR IN MINNESOTA VOTE

BYLINE: By MICHAEL ORESKES, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 6, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 781 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 11


Although Mr. Perpich opposes abortion, supporters of abortion rights did not
mobilize the kind of national effort for Mr. Hatch that they have done in other
states where opponents of abortion faced supporters of abortion rights.

The winner of the Republican nomination was Jon Grunseth, a businessman, who in
the last days of the campaign bought thousands of dollars in television time to
attack his opponent, State Auditor Arne Carlson, who had been favored to win the
nomination. Mr. Grunseths, like Mr. Perpich, opposes abortion; Mr. Carlson
supports legal access to abortion.

Questions About Integrity

Mr. Dyson survived a strong challenge in Maryland's First District from state
Delegate Barbara Kreamer. He narrowly won re-election in 1988 after controversy
over his financial support from military contractors ensnared in the Pentagon
procurement scandal, and Ms. Kreamer attacked his integrity again in this
campaign, She made an issue of the disclosure in the final days of the campaign
that Mr. Dyson, a member of the House Armed Services Committee and a strong
supporter of the military, had been a conscientious objector during the Vietnam
War.

But she was hamstrung in getting her message across in the sprawling district
that stretches across the television markets of Baltimore, Washington and
Salisbury in southeast Maryland and the Eastern Shore.

Ms. Kreamer's staff said she bought television time in Salisbury, on the Eastern
Shore, and, in the final days, in Baltimore. But she could not afford spots on
Washington television stations, which cover about 25 percent of the district.

With 70 percent of the precincts reporting at 11 P.M., Mr. Dyson won his party's
nomination with 56 percent of the votes to Ms. Kreamer's 30 percent. The
remaining votes were split by two minor candidates.

Wayne Gilchrest, who barely lost to Mr. Dyson two years ago, won an eight-way
Republican primary for another opportunity to challenge Mr. Dyson.

Replay in Rhode Island

In Rhode Island, Bruce Sundlun, a millionaire businessman, won the Democratic
nomination for governor. Gov. Edward D. DiPrete, a Republican who raised taxes
after promising not to, is viewed as very vulnerable in his race for a fourth
two-year term.

Mr. Sundlun defeated the Mayor of Providence, Joseph R. Paolino Jr., and the
Mayor of Warwick, Francis Flaherty, in the Democratic primary today.

In Vermont, former Gov. Richard A, Snelling won the Republican nomination to
seek his old job. He will face the winner of the Democratic primary, Peter
Welch, former president pro tem of the State Senate. Gov. Madeleine M. Kunin, a
Democrat, decided not to run again.

Representative Peter Smith won the Republican nomination to for re-election to
Vermont's lone House seat for the second time. His main challenge will be from
the independent candidacy of former Mayor Bernard Sanders of Burlington, a
Socialist, who had no opposition in today's voting. Two Democrats sought their
party's nomination but politicians said neither of them would be as strong a
candidate as the well-known Mr. Sanders.

In another comeback effort, Evan Mecham, impeached as governor of Arizona in
1988, ran against four other Republicans, lead by Fife Symington, a Pheonix
developer. The Republican nominee will face Terry Goodard, who resigned as Mayor
of Phoenix to seek the governorship, once held by his father. He won the
Democratic nomination over token opposition.

Three Republican Governors - Judd Gregg of New Hampshire, Edward D. DiPrete of
Rhode Island and Tommy G. Thompson of Wisconsin - had token primary opposition.

But the weakened political position of Mr. DiPrete, who promised not to raise
taxes but did so when Rhode Island's economy deteriorated, drew three Democrats
into a fierce battle for their party's nomination to challenge the Republican
incumbent.

Mr. Gregg easily defeated the operator of a nudist camp, Robert Bonser.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              295 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 12, 1990, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

John Berga, 61, Dies; Colonel and Engineer

SECTION: Section D; Page 25, Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 201 words


He died of a heart attack, a spokeswoman for the family said.

Mr. Berga was the Washington representative of the Electric Power Research
Institute, a nonprofit research organization in Palo Alto, Calif. He was
previously executive director of the energy engineering board at the National
Research Council of the National Academy of Sciences.

A 1951 graduate of the United States Naval Academy, Mr. Berga was commissioned
in the Air Force and served tours of duty in South Korea and South Vietnam. He
earned a degree in nuclear engineering and served on the faculty of the United
States Air Force Academy and as a nuclear project engineer. He retired from
active duty in 1974.

He is survived by his wife, Patricia; four children from a previous marriage,
Ross of Chantilly, Va., Sarah of Pittsburgh, Sally of Denver, and Rebecca L. Fry
of Lorton, Va.; two stepchildren, Timothy Lewis of Chantilly, and Pamela Coombs
of Fredericksburg, Va.; a brother, Reid, of Hemet, Calif.; a sister, Betty Hiatt
of Amboy, Ill.; and 11 grandchildren.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              296 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 13, 1990, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

U.S. Wants to Aid 2 Cambodia Factions

BYLINE: By CLIFFORD KRAUSS, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 659 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 12


Testifying before the House subcommittee on Asian and Pacific Affairs, Under
Secretary of State Robert M. Kimmitt noted ''a dramatic upswing in the prospects
for a peaceful settlement'' between the guerrilla coalition and the Cambodian
Government.

''We are moving to a political process where non-Communist strengths will come
into play, where the non-Communist parties can provide the Cambodian people an
alternative to the Communists in a free and fair election campaign,'' Mr.
Kimmitt said. ''In this context, cutting off aid to the non-Communists would
undercut their position, and our credibility, just as the diplomatic process
appears to be moving toward a conclusion.''

A History of Brutality

Mr. Kimmitt pledged that stopping the Khmer Rouge from retaking power was a
major policy goal.

Human rights groups charge that more than a million people died under Khmer
Rouge brutality. The Khmer Rouge were ousted late in 1978 by a Vietnamese
invasion force that installed the current leadership. In response to the
Vietnamese invasion, China, the United States, Thailand and Singapore have aided
the guerrilla groups fighting to overthrow Prime Minister Hun Sen.

After the Administration dropped its support for the rebel coalition at the
United Nations in July, it opened talks with Hanoi, and the Hun Sen Government
to promote a negotiated settlement.

The policy modifications, along with the recent diplomatic gains, appear to have
weakened Congressional resolve against aiding the guerrillas. Representative Jim
Leach, Republican of Iowa, a member of the House Asia subcommittee and formerly
a critic of the Administration's Cambodia policy, told Mr. Kimmitt that aid to
the non-Communist rebels now ''makes a lot more sense'' because it is more
clearly designed to block the Khmer Rouge from taking power.

Mr. Kimmitt went a step further in his Congressional testimony today to distance
the Administration from the Khmer Rouge by calling on the non-Communist rebels
to break with their radical partners.

No Need for Khmer Rouge Tie

''I don't foresee any circumstance in which they would see to their political
benefit to have any form of association with the Khmer Rouge'' in the period
leading up to elections, Mr. Kimmitt said. ''I question whether they need any
coalition with the Communists.''

Representative Stephen J. Solarz, Democrat of Brooklyn, chairman of the
subcommittee and a strong proponent of Administration policy, said he hoped that
the United States would cut off the non-Communist guerrillas if they continued
their alliance with the Khmer Rouge into the election period.

Mr. Kimmitt noted that while China had been helpful in persuading the Khmer
Rouge to compromise, the guerrillas retained a considerable degree of
independence. While he said he hoped other Western countries would contribute to
the United Nations effort toward fair elections and disarming the combatants, he
could not specify any commitments.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              297 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 13, 1990, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

CONFRONTATION IN THE GULF: WASHINGTON TALK;
Congress and the Crisis: To Intervene or Not?

BYLINE: By NATHANIEL C. NASH, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 10, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 726 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 12


''It not only will give a sense of shared responsibility, but it will give a
sense of unity in this country on a major decision,'' said Representative Dante
B. Fascell, a Florida Democrat who is chairman of the House Armed Services
Committee.

Those who argue for invoking the resolution also argue that the issue is
preserving the power of the institution of Congress and not ceding through
inaction authority to the executive branch. So far, they say, Congress has
repeatedly failed to effectively enforce the resolution to make Presidents more
accountable when they take the country into foreign conflicts. If the resolution
is not going to be used, why keep up the charade that it matters, they ask.
Senator George J. Mitchell of Maine, the majority leader, has held two meetings
with some of his colleagues this week, worrying this point.

''If they do anything, it will be to preserve the integrity of the Congress,''
said Tom Korologos, a longtime Republican lobbyist. ''They are seriously
concerned about not eroding the power of this institution.''

The drafters of the Constitution specifically gave Congress, as representative
of the broad public, authority to declare war, reasoning that the President, as
Commander in Chief, would be more inclined to engage the country in armed
conflict.

Only five times in the country's history has Congress declared war -the War of
1812, the Mexican War (1846), the Spanish-American War (1898) and World War I
(1917) and World War II (1941). Even prolonged conflicts like the Korean War and
Vietnam were waged with no formal Congressional declaration.

The War Powers Resolution, specifically passed in 1973 as an attempt to halt the
bombing of Cambodia and Laos, has been used successfully only once, to endorse
the presence of peacekeeping troops in Lebanon during its civil war, authorizing
an 18-month extension of their stay. Within weeks a car bomb blew up the
American Embassy, killing 231 marines.

While the strikes against Grenada by President Reagan and Panama by President
Bush were so short that the 90-day trigger became a moot issue, many argue that
the Persian Gulf involvement - which Administration officials have said will
almost certainly last for months - seems almost ideal for asserting the
authority of the law.

But President Bush, who said during his campaign that he wanted to repeal the
War Powers Resolution, has maneuvered carefully to avoid triggering it. While he
notified Congress when United States troops were sent to Saudi Arabia, he did
not use language specifically saying that hostilities were imminent. That would
have set the 90-day clock ticking.

For Congress the issue now seems to have become one of whether the wimp mantle
has been passed from George Bush to Capitol Hill.

Members agree that concern over ceding authority to the White House is slow in
evolving, and some are up in arms.

''The Congress should move to reassert its authority because right now we are
just being told what is happening and not really brought into the
delibarations,'' said Sentor Brock Adams, Democrat of Washington. ''For too long
we have been in a politically defensive position. There is a stirring that they
should be doing something, but so far it's just a stirring. They are not about
to come out and challenge Bush on this one.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              298 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 13, 1990, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

CONFRONTATION IN THE GULF;
The Rugged Land Helps Shape G.I.'s

BYLINE: By JAMES LeMOYNE, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 11, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 828 words

DATELINE: IN SAUDI ARABIA, Sept. 12


Almost all soldiers interviewed said they thought they were here for a year at
least, whether war was waged or not.

Long Duty Foreseen

''No Christmas trees this year,'' said Col. Walt Mather, commander of the First
Brigade of the 24th Infantry Division, which includes the Fourth Battalion.
''We're going to be here a long time,'' he declared, hopping into a jeep that
raised clouds of dust as it cut across the almost featureless sand.

Several soldiers here said they suspected they were the opening wave of what
could well become the first semipermanent American military force in the Middle
East, deployed to guard the vulnerable oilfields of the Persian Gulf countries.

Their commanders, preparing for such duty, say they are determined to live,
battle ready, in the desert to be toughened enough to wage war or survive an
attack by Iraqi troops.

One lesson American officers here seem to have carried away from their defeat in
Vietnam is that troops cannot be expected to fight well if they are asked to
live split lives, constantly divided between cushy rear areas and terrifying
combat.

'It's Tough Out Here'

''We are going to stay out here and live out here,'' Colonel Mather said,
looking out at the silent desert.

The sweating soldiers he commands say they are now adjusting to that harsh
prospect and they admit that after two weeks it isn't easy.

They are almost all young men in their 20's and 30's. Many are recently married
with the first small son or daughter waiting back home with their wives. So
total is their isolation that they repeatedly ask for news of the outside world
and reassurance they have not somehow been put aside.

''It's tough out here,'' said Lieut. Kirk C. Dorr, the 23-year-old commander of
an M-1 tank. ''We're all hoping the American people don't forget about us.''

The armored unit here could not live in more primitive conditions. Clusters of
tanks and armored personnel vehicles are scattered over miles of empty waste.

A rest area is nothing more than a tepee of camouflage netting spread over a
vehicle, punctured by a stubble of radio antennas. The infrequent bath is a
splash of sun-scorched water dribbled out of a five-gallon can. There is sand in
everything.

For company there are lizard tracks, a few wandering camels, rocks, the sun by
day, the wind at evening and the stars by night.

There is virtually no contact with Saudis, and the troops here openly wonder at
the thoughts of the residents of this conservative Arab land. So sensitive are
Saudi sensibilities that the American units here have not yet carried out any
practice firing with live ammunition, despite repeated requests to do so. Such
firing is still being negotiated with the Government, officers say.

Few Have Seen Combat

Dressed in their dust-saturated desert fatigues, these young soldiers seem well
trained and well motivated. But almost none have seen combat. Colonel Mather was
in Vietnam but his men have not yet killed or watched friends killed in battle,
and they are visibly trying to gird themselves to withstand those withering
experiences.

''There are some things you just can't train for,'' said Capt. Tim Bella, a
commander in the support battalion that keeps the tanks here running and
battle-ready. ''We're telling the mechanics that they've got to be ready to go
to work on a turret in which a man may have been wounded.''

Braced in the cramped cockpit of his M-1 battle tank, Sgt. William Darnell
seemed all too aware of what might lie ahead as he trained a swinging
105-millimeter cannon over a duff sea of rippling dunes.

''Once we got here into the desert we knew it was for real,'' the 25-year-old
sergeant said. ''Out here now it's 100 percent all the time.''

In the Heat of the Day

The heat is such that the Fourth Battalion rests from 10 in the morning until 4
in the afternoon. By 9 in the morning the sand is already so hot that it burns
through the thick rubber sole of a boot. The American armored units, equipped
and ready for night fighting, do much of their maneuvering after dusk.

Besides combat, the prospect that seems to concern American commanders most is a
drawn-out engagement with no clearly defined goal or time limit.

''If we knew how long it was going to take it would be a lot easier,'' Capt.
Terry Ward of the Fourth Battalion said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: In the Saudi desert, American soldiers are beginning to settle
in for what they feel will be a long tour of duty. Sheridan tanks of the 82d
Airborne Division took part yesterday in maneuvers. (Associated Press)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              299 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 13, 1990, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1990 ELECTIONS;
Primary Results Across U.S. Reflect Wide Outcry Against Politics as Usual

BYLINE: By MICHAEL ORESKES, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 10, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1012 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 12


A public outcry against business-as-usual politics welled up among voters in
primary voting around the country on Tuesday, illustrating a mood of anxiety
about growth, the economy, the quality of life and the quality of politics.

In the suburbs just north of here voters dumped the chief executive of
Maryland's largest county, a jurisdiction more populous than either Baltimore or
Washington.

Voters in the Democratic primary in Montgomery County, a booming suburb typical
of the places where much of American politics is now shaped, moved to replace
the County Executive with a candidate who had railed against special interest
groups and said that he wanted to impose a tax on development. The vote
reflected the public mood as voters in 10 states and the District of Columbia
voted in primary balloting with less than two months to go before the general
election.

'A Mood of Change'

In the Rhode Island governor's race, Democrats turned their backs on two veteran
politicians, the Mayors of Providence and Warwick, and instead nominated as
their candidate a businessman, Bruce Sundlun, who insisted that he was not a
politician at all, his two previous races against the Republican Governor,
Edward D. DiPrete, notwithstanding.

''There is definitely a mood of change in this country,'' said Mark Gearan,
executive director of the Democratic Governors Conference. ''Candidates who were
able to capitalize on that were successful.''

Nonetheless, it remained difficult to oust incumbents. A Maryland
Representative, Roy Dyson, was renominated by Democratic voters, perhaps because
his opponent could not afford enough television time to reach voters.

An important element of the voter mood of frustration this year, particularly in
suburban jurisdictions, is an anger at crowding, traffic congestion, noise and
dirt.

''It is one of those unexpressed, inchoate grievances among the electorate
here,'' Bill Bradley, who publishes a newsletter on California Politics, said in
Sacramento. ''Growth is a huge issue here. Both candidates for governor are
trying to incorporate what they describe as their support of growth management
into their campaigns.''

Issue of Growth

The issue of growth has become a way in which many voters express the belief
that government is on the side of powerful interests, instead of ordinary
people, politicians said.

''The people of this county can control their own interests,'' Neal Potter said
after capturing the nomination for Montgomery County Executuve against the
incumbent, Sidney Kramer. Mr. Potter, a 75-year-old Council member, ran on a
platform to curb growth.

The defeat of Mr. Kramer, who has served four years as the County Executive, was
the most dramatic illustration. Steady growth in recent years has pushed
Montgomery County's population to 750,000 people, making it the largest
jurisdiction in Maryland.

In a county that tends to vote Democratic, Mr. Potter has become the the
favorite in November to defeat the Republican nominee, Albert Ceccone.

Crowding in California

Candidates in other areas are trying to show their concern about growth and the
quality of voters' lives. Dianne Feinstein, the Democratic candidate for
governor of California, has called for a growth management commission, while her
Republican opponent, Senator Pete Wilson, has been citing his experience in
managing growth as Mayor of San Diego.

In June, Californians approved a gasoline tax increase on the promise that the
money would be used to alleviate freeway crowding.

Concern about growth and suspicion toward government came through clearly in the
voting across the country on Tuesday as the primary season neared an end. Other
themes were less certain.

Supporters of legal abortion won a victory in Maryland, but lost in Minnesota.
In Maryland, four state legislators who had been part of a filbuster against
legislation to protect legal abortion, were defeated in primary voting. But in
Minnesota, often thought of as an early part of the anti-abortion movement,
supporters of legal abortion were defeated in both the Democratic and Republican
gubernatorial primaries by opponents of abortion.

The incumbent Governor, Rudy Perpich, a Democrat, will now face a conservative
businessman, Jon Grunseth. Mr. Perpich said he was glad the Republicans had
nominated a conservative because now he could occupy the middle ground.

But Mr. Grunseth, making it clear he planned a sharp attack on what some
Minnesotans contend has been Mr. Perpich's odd behavior in office, replied,
''I'd rather be a little conservative than a little goofy.''

Mr. Grunseth won the Republican nomination by launching a wave of negative
campaign commercials against his principal opponent, Arne Carlson, in the final
weeks of the campaign. Mr. Grunseth's attack was described as the largest buy of
television time for a political campaign in the state's history.

While public restiveness overturned one incumbent in Maryland, it was not enough
to defeat another. Representative Dyson survived a challenge from State Delegate
Barbara Kreamer and two other candidates. Mr. Dyson, a hawk on military issues,
was embarrassed by the disclosure that he had been a conscientious objector in
the Vietnam War.

Politicians said Ms. Kreamer had been unable to buy enough television time to
reach all of the district, which sprawls through three television markets from
Baltimore to Washington.

Mr. Dyson's victory set up a rematch with Wayne Gilchrest, a Republican who
nearly defeated Mr. Dyson, a member of the House Armed Services Committee, in
1988 after the disclosure that some of his campaign contributions came from
military contractors linked to the Pentagon procurement scandal.

In Arizona, voters rejected a return bid by Evan Mecham, who was impeached and
ousted as Governor in 1988. He was defeated for the Republican nomination for
governor by J. Fife Symington, a Phoenix developer. Mr. Symington will face the
Democratic nominee, Terry Goddard, whose father, a former Governor, is now the
state Democratic chairman.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              300 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 13, 1990, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1990 ELECTIONS;
Primary Results: Setting the Stage for November

SECTION: Section B; Page 10, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1290 words


Primaries held Sept. 11. Percentages are not final.

Arizona

J. Fife Symington (R) 44%
Evan Mecham (R) 24%
Fred Koory (R) 16%
Sam Steiger (R) 13%
Bob Barnes (R) 2%

Terry Goddard (D) 84%
Dave Moss (D) 16%

Former Gov. Evan Mecham, who was impeached in 1988, had his hopes for a
political comeback dashed by the Phoenix real-estate developer and millionaire
J. Fife Symington.

Terry Goddard, the son of a former Arizona governor, easily won the Democratic
nomination, after resigning his position as Mayor of Phoenix to run.

Connecticut

Bruce A. Morrison (D) 65%
William J. Cibes (D) 35%

Bruce A. Morrison, a four-term United States Representative, resoundingly won
the Democratic nomination for Governor. His toughest opposition now may not be
the Republican nominee, Rep. John G. Rowland, who did not face a primary fight,
but former Senator Lowell Weicker. Mr. Weicker, a Republican, is running as an
independent.  Mr. Morrison's opponent in the primary, William J. Cibes, a
little-known and poorly financed member of the General Assembly, had attempted
to make the election a referendum on introducing a state income tax on wages and
salaries. Mr. Morrison would avoid one unless the voters approved it in a
referendum.

DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA

MAYOR

Sharon Pratt Dixon (D) 35%
John Ray (D) 26%
Charlene Drew Jarvis (D) 22%
David A. Clark (D) 11%
Walter Fauntroy (D) 7%

Sharon Pratt Dixon, the only Democratic mayoral candidate who aggressively
criticized the behavior and administration of Mayor Marion Barry, defeated four
opponents in a city where 90 percent of the voters are registered Democrats and
the Democratic nomination is ususally tantamount to winning the election. , Ms.
Dixon faces stronger than usual opposition from the Republicans, who nominated a
law-and-order candidate, the city's former police chief, Maurice T. Turner Jr.,
who was unchallenged in the primary.

Jesse Jackson won his first election ever, becoming the Democratic nominee for
the District's ''shadow senator,'' a postion created by the city to lobby
Congress for statehood. Eleanor Holmes Norton was narrowly elected the
Democratic nominee for the city's nonvoting delegate to Congress, overcoming
recent disclosures that she had not paid city taxes for several years.

MARYLAND

GOVERNOR

William Donald Schaefer (D) 77%
Frederick M. Griisser Jr. (D) 23%
William S. Shepard (R) 52%
Ross Z. Pierpont (R) 48%

William S. Shepard, a retired foreign service officer, overcame the criticsm of
his ''one-household'' ticket - he put his wife on the ticket as the nominee for
lieutenant governor - and won the Republican nomination for governor. He faces
an uphill battle in November against Democratic Governor William Donald
Schaefer, who coasted to renomination.

Faced with a struggle for his political life, Rep. Roy P. Dyson held on to the
Democratic nomination, despite attacks on his integrity for taking hawkish
positions on defense spending in Congress after havind declared himself a
Conscientious Objector during the Vietnam War. Wayne T. Gilchrest, who narrowly
lost to Mr. Dyson two years ago, defeated seven other candidates for the
Republican nomination.

MINNESOTA
GOVERNOR

Rudy Perpich (D) 56%
Mike Hatch (D) 42%
Kent Herschbach (D) 2%

Jon Grunseth (R) 49%
Arne Carlson (R) 32%
Doug Kelley (R) 17% Gov. Gov. Rudy Perpich, believed to be vulnerable because of
his anti-abortion positions and eccentric habits that he said many voters find
''goofy,'' defeated a supporter of abortion rights, Mike Hatch, a former state
commerce commissioner.

SENATE

Paul Wellstone (D) 60%
Jim Nichols (D) 35%

Rudy Boschwitz (R) 87%
John Zeleniak (R) 13%

Minnesotan Republicans also selected an opponent of abortion rights, Jon
Grunseth, a businessman, over state auditor Arne Carlson, who supports a woman's
right to abortion.

The incumbent Senator, Rudy Boschwitz, a Republican, easily won renomination and
will face Paul Wellstone, a political science professor.

NEW HAMPSHIRE

GOVERNOR

Judd Gregg (R) 82%
Robert A. Bonser (R) 18%

J. Joseph Grandmaison (D) 47%
Robert F. Preston (D) 44%
Paul Blacketor (D) 9%

An operator of a nudist camp, Robert A. Bonser, provided little opposition for
the incumbent Governor, Judd Gregg, a Republican who easily won his
renomination. In November, Mr. Gregg will be running against the former state
Democratic Party chairman, J. Joseph Grandmaison.

SENATE

Robert C. Smith (R) 65%
Tom Christo (R) 29%
Ted de Winter (R) 3%
Ewing Smith (R) 3%

John A. Durkin (D) 41%
James W. Donchess (D) 32%
John Rauh (D) 27%

Former Senator John A. Durkin, a Democrat, and Rep. Robert C. Smith, a
Republican, will be fighting for the Senate position vacated by two-term
conservative Republican Gordon Humphrey. Although Republicans generally have the
advantage in New Hampshire, Mr. Durkin is a well known figure in the state. Mr.
Humphrey chose not to run for re-election this year, instead seeking and winning
Republican nomination for a seat in the State Senate.

NEW YORK

COMPTROLLER

Carol Bellamy (D) 71%
Andrew J. Spano (D) 29%

In a campaign that focused more on attacking the Republican incumbent than echa
other, Carol Bellamy, the former New York City Council president, handily
defeated the Westchester County clerk Andrew J. Spano.

She now turns her attention to the incumbent, Edward V. Regan, the only
Republican holding statewide office who is up for re-election in November.
Already Ms. Bellamy has attacked Mr. Regan for being a tame watchdog over the
state's finances. In turn, Mr. Regan has questioned how independent Ms. Bellamy
will be of the Democratic governor.

Both the incumbent Governor, Mario M. Cuomo, a Democrat, and the Republican
gubernatorial candidate, Pierre A. Rinfret, had already received their parties'
nominations before Tuesday's election.

RHODE ISLAND

Edward D. Diprete (R) 70%
Steve White (R) 30%

Bruce Sundlun (D) 41%
Joseph Paolino (D) 33%
Frank Flaherty (D) 27%

Gov. Edward D. Diprete, a Republican who is seeking a fourth two-year term,
faced only token opposition in the primary. But he is seen as vulnerable by
Democrats after he broke his promise not to raise taxes. The troubled New
England economy is also expected to make it a difficult campaign for him.
Millionaire businessman Bruce Sundlun, who has been defeated twice before in
gubernatorial contests with Mr. Diprete, gained the Democratic nomination after
beating Mayor of Providence Joseph Paolino and Mayor of Warwick Francis
Flaherty.

VERMONT

GOVERNOR

Peter Welch (D) 90%
William Gwin (D) 10%

Richard Snelling (R) 88%
Richard Gottlileb (R) 12%

With Governor Madeleine M. Kunin stepping down after two-terms in the office,
both parties selected well-known candidates who faced only minor challenges in
their successful bids for their party's nominations. In November, voters will
choose between former Governor Richard Snelling, a Republican, and Peter Welch,
a Democrat and former president of the state senate.

WISCONSIN

GOVERNOR

Tommy G. Thompson (R) 93%
Ben Masel (R) 5%
Edmund Hou-Sey (R) 2%

Gov. Tommy Thompson, after easily defeating his opponents in the Republican
primary, will face Assembly Speaker Thomas Loftus, who ran unopposed for the
Democratic nomination. Mr. Loftus, who is trailing Mr. Thompson in the polls and
in campaign contributions, is expected to make state property taxes, which have
increased over the last four years, a major campaign issue.

Source of election data: Associated Press

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              301 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 14, 1990, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Outlook at Book Fair: Global and Historical

BYLINE: By J. Anthony Lukas; J. Anthony Lukas is the author of ''Common Ground:
A Turbulent Decade in the Lives of Three American Families,'' which won the
Pulitzer Prize for nonfiction in 1985.

SECTION: Section C; Page 1, Column 3; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1736 words


Like ducks and geese winging across the Long Island marshes, writers and editors
are flocking back to their winter roosts. But the sure signal that the book
industry has resumed after the summer doldrums will come this Sunday when
marketing managers and publicity agents get down to the serious job of selling.

That takes place at the 12th annual New York Is Book Country street fair, an
event at which publishers traditionally display their wares for the coming
season. This year's hoopla is dedicated to the proposition that ''Books Know No
Boundaries.''

That is scarcely titillating news. But its emphasis on the global marketplace is
appropriate in a year when many Americans have felt like slightly irrelevant
spectators at the great dramas of their time. When a dissident playwright
becomes the first freely elected president of Czechoslovakia in half a century;
when the former president of Nicaragua, the bane of two American
Administrations, ensconces himself in a Wall Streeter's town house to receive a
parade of editors eager to bring out his memoirs; when a transforming Soviet
leadership authorizes the publication of Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn's ''Gulag
Archipelago,'' New York's tight publishing world does well to forswear
parochialism.

But national frontiers are not the only boundaries that hedge us in; we are
constrained by time as well as by space. As the British novelist L. P. Hartley
put it: ''The past is a foreign country. They do things differently there.''

So I am pleased to report that while a host of our ablest reporters is
harvesting the astonishing news from Central and Eastern Europe, another pack of
journalists has quietly been breaching the frontiers of the past.

Consider this partial list: David Halberstam is writing on America in the 50's;
Taylor Branch on the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. and the civil rights
movement; Tom Powers on German efforts to build a nuclear bomb during World War
II; Robert K. Massie on British-German naval competition early in this century;
Jean Strouse on J. P. Morgan and his era; David McCullough on the world of Harry
S. Truman; Robert A. Caro on Lyndon B. Johnson; Geoffrey Ward on the Civil War;
Richard Reeves on the truncated Administration of John F. Kennedy; Gay Talese on
Italian immigration to this country, illuminated by his family's own experience.

Mr. Talese is scarcely alone in addressing history in a personal vein. Suddenly
it seems memoir is one of our most vital genres. A path brilliantly blazed by
Frank Conroy and Geoffrey Wolff has been followed of late by Geoffrey's brother,
Tobias Wolff, Lance Morrow, John Gregory Dunne, Joyce Johnson, Russell Baker,
Carl Bernstein, Jonathan Yardley, John Edgar Wideman, Annie Dillard and others.

For some reason, my generation of reporters - having earned our spurs in the
multiple alarums and excursions of the 60's and 70's - have turned its eyes
backward, trying to find out how we all got here.

In part, this is probably a function of our age - most of us are in our 50's now
- a time when many people feel impelled to measure their experience against
those who have come before.

Then, as my friend Nicholas Lemann has pointed out, there is a notion among many
journalists - probably exaggerated - that the story on the street is simply not
as vivid as it was in the chromatic decades past. The civil rights movement,
Vietnam, Watergate, long hot summers in Detroit and Watts, the pyrotechnics of
Woodstock and Haight-Ashbury, the trials of the Chicago Seven and Daniel
Ellsberg - these were dramatic yarns that seized journalists by the throat in a
way that the savings-and-loan crisis and acid rain do not. (Though, as
demonstrated in Mr. Lemann's own forthcoming book on migration from the
Mississippi Delta to Chicago housing projects, there is still plenty of
incendiary tinder to be found in the contemporary lives of ordinary Americans.)
Finally, reporters are like tailbacks: they run to daylight. Quick to seize
opportunities, they seize opportunities others fail to exploit. Tom Wolfe argued
that the New Journalists of the 60's appropriated the techniques of fiction
precisely because many academically trained and academically based novelists had
forsworn narrative. Similarly, it could be argued that a new generation of
academic historians has abdicated the vital narratives of Allan Nevins and Henry
Steele Commager for quantitative analyses of census tracts in Worcester, Mass.

Certainly there are many fine professional historians out there who write
old-fashioned narrative with style and brio: Alan Brinkley, James McPherson,
Patricia Limerick, Eric Foner, Stephen W. Sears are a few names that come to
mind. But much contemporary historiography is uncomfortable with dramatic tales
of conflict and sweeping movements for social change, particularly if they focus
on the exploits of ''great men.''

Yet the thirst for narrative - indeed, for the exploits of heroes - is as old as
Thucydides and Homer. If historians fail to satisfy it, journalists surely will
try.

My own bewitchment by history goes back 15 years to the spring of 1975 when I
went to Boston to research a magazine article on that city's busing struggle set
against the background of the Bicentennial celebration of the battles of Concord
and Lexington.

What struck me then was how all the participants in the desegregation fight
invoked the past to justify their present actions. White proponents of
desegregation called up the liberties for which Americans had spilled their
blood 200 years before; blacks invoked Crispus Attucks and other blacks who had
died fighting for American independence and, by extension, their own freedom;
opponents of busing pictured Federal District Judge Arthur Garrity, who had
ordered the busing, as an unelected tyrant, the judicial equivalent of George
III.

As I pondered O'Brien's line to Winston in George Orwell's ''Nineteen
Eighty-Four'' - ''Who controls the past controls the future; who controls the
present controls the past'' - I began to hunger for history, not as a mere
record of past events, but as a way of perceiving the present and guiding the
future.

In the book that I later wrote about Boston - ''Common Ground: A Turbulent
Decade in the Lives of Three American Families'' - I found myself insistently
tugged back to the earliest roots of that city's struggle. I pursued the story
of each family back as far as I could, to 18th-century County Louth for the
Irish McGoffs, to Burke County, Ga., in the 1830's for the black Twymons, to
Revolutionary Maine for the Yankee Divers.

My preoccupation with the past led to a good-natured tug-of-war with my
strong-willed editor at Alfred A. Knopf Inc., Robert Gottlieb. ''Do we always
have to carry everything back to the 18th century?'' he would groan.

No, I said. I'd try to pare some of it. But one of my principal themes was the
burden of history. I didn't believe in fate, certainly not in predestination.
But I did believe that the weight of history, the accumulated experience of
generations of Irish, blacks and Yankees, nudged the families into conflict with
one another.

''Oh come on!'' Mr. Gottlieb would exclaim. ''My family came off a 19th-century
Russian shtetl. What does that have to do with who I am in mid-Manhattan at the
end of the 20th century?''

Opting for a strategic retreat, I conceded that Alfred A. Knopf's distinguished
editor in chief, a guiding light of the New York City Ballet, might have severed
his last ties with the shtetl. But for the McGoffs, living in an intensely Irish
community by Charlestown's docks, or the Twymons, the products of a union
between an illiterate Georgia sharecropper and an assimilationist Nova Scotian
farmer, the past was more salient. Mr. Gottlieb and I agreed to disagree on that
point. But when I chose my next subject I felt the time had come to tackle a
work of outright history for the first time.

The subject I chose was one of those events that once electrified a nation, but
has now passed into almost total obscurity: the assassination of the Governor of
Idaho, Frank Steunenberg, in 1905. This led to the trial of ''Big Bill'' Haywood
for orchestrating the assassination. With Clarence Darrow as defense attorney
and Senator William Borah as prosecutor, the trial opened in Boise in the summer
of 1907 and was recorded for posterity by half a hundred reporters from all over
the country who believed they were covering ''the trial of the century.''
Central to the story is the role of James McParland, the legendary Pinkerton
detective, who decades before had infiltrated the Molly Maguires in the
Pennsylvania coal fields. His testimony was responsible for sending virtually
the entire leadership of the violent ''Mollies'' to the gallows. Now, 30 years
later, McParland at age 67 was pitted against one of the most feared and hated
labor leaders in the nation, the man who had just formed the ''Wobblies.''

It is a great drama, which asks big questions about the American experience. I
believe that 1905 to 1907 in the Rocky Mountain states was the time and place
when this nation came closest to class war. Assassination and bombings were
common. Labor and capital glowered at each other across a widening chasm of
hatred and suspicion. Federal troops and state militias, private detective
armies and vigilante bands were routinely thrown into the struggle. Many of the
working class were girding for such a fight. Surely the upper classes
desperately feared it, and mobilized to halt the revolution they believed was
imminent.

We know now that neither revolution nor class war took place. But the question
that bedevils me is, Why not? My friend David McCullough, one of the finest of
all narrative historians, believes that the secret of writing such history is
allowing the reader to overcome what he knows now was the outcome and to
entertain the notion, if only briefly, that ''it might have turned out
differently.'' That requires the author to soak himself in the assumptions of
the period he is writing about, until he, too, momentarily forgets how it turned
out.

So while others have been in Bucharest and Leningrad, or tracking Saddam
Hussein's legions across the Kuwaiti sands, I have spent the summer in 1905.

If I came first as a skittish tourist, now I have taken up temporary citizenship
there, determined to find out how they did things in that strange land we call
the past.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              302 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 14, 1990, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Samuel S. Stratton, 73, Former Congressman, Dies

BYLINE: By JOHN T. McQUISTON

SECTION: Section D; Page 16, Column 4; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 552 words


Samuel S. Stratton, a former Congressman who represented the Albany and
Schenectady area for 30 years and was a longtime member of the House Armed
Services Committee, died yesterday at Shady Grove Hospital in Gaithersburg, Md.
He was 73 years old and had lived for the last year in the Manor Care nursing
home in Potomac, Md.

Mr. Stratton, who suffered a stroke a year ago, died of a heart attack shortly
after arriving at the hospital, said Robert Mott, his son-in-law.

A Democrat whose hawkish views often put him at odds with his party, Mr.
Stratton devoted his Congressional career to strengthening the nation's defense
system. He strongly supported the American war effort in Vietnam and proposed
increased spending for new weapons systems like the B-1 bomber, the MX missile
and the neutron bomb.

First Elected in 1958

He was the third-most senior Democrat on the Armed Services Committee when he
announced in 1988 that his failing health prevented him from running for a 16th
term.

He was first elected to the House in 1958, becoming the only Democrat in 42
years to be sent to Congress from what was then the 32d Congressional District
in the Albany-Schenectady-Troy area.

Despite several redistrictings in a predominantly Republican area, he was
returned to Congress with ease every two years and became dean of the New York
delegation in January 1979. At his retirement, Mr. Stratton represented the 23d
District.

He began his political career as a city councilman in Schenectady, and was
elected mayor by 282 votes in 1955. He fulfilled a campaign promise to clean up
the city by leading a police raid on a gambling den in the shadow of City Hall.

Mr. Stratton supplemented his meager mayoral income as an announcer and
newscaster for several local radio and television stations. He also appeared on
early television as the character ''Sagebrush Sam,'' who dressed as a cowboy and
played a harmonica.

Shift in Political Focus

In 1962, he tried to shift his focus to statewide politics by seeking the
gubernatorial nomination. But party leaders gave the nod to Robert M.
Morgenthau, then the United States Attorney for the Southern District of New
York and now the Manhattan District Attorney.

In 1964, Mr. Stratton sought to become a Democratic candidate for the United
States Senate. But his effort failed when Robert F. Kennedy entered the fray and
defeated him on the first ballot at the Democratic State Convention.

''When Bobby Kennedy decided he was a New Yorker, that was the end of my
campaign,'' Mr. Stratton said years later.

Mr. Stratton was born in Yonkers and attended school in Rochester and
Schenectady. He graduated from the University of Rochester and held master's
degrees in philosophy from Haverford College and Harvard University.

He was commissioned as an ensign in the Naval Reserve in 1942 and served in the
South Pacific during World War II as a naval combat intelligence officer on the
staff of Gen. Douglas MacArthur. He was twice awarded the Bronze Star and
retired from the Naval Reserve at the rank of captain.

He is survived by his wife, Joan; three daughters, Lisa Gonzalez of San Mateo,
Calif., Debra Stratton Mott of Springfield, Va., and Kim Petrie of Aspen, Colo.,
and two sons, Kevin, of Vienna, Va., and Brian, of Clifton Park, N.Y.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Samuel S. Stratton (Associated Press)

TYPE: Obituary

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              303 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 15, 1990, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

In Combating Crime, Veterans Find a Home

BYLINE: By DAVID GONZALEZ

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1, Column 2; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1290 words


In October 1967, when a United States Army patrol was pinned down by enemy fire
at Loc Ninh, Pfc. Otis Caldwell volunteered to repel the attack, allowing the
wounded to be evacuated and winning a Bronze Star in the process. Now he relies
on some of the same instincts honed in distant jungles to try to reclaim the
streets and subways that many New Yorkers think have become a war zone.

Each weeknight Mr. Caldwell, 43 years old, leads a platoon of ex-servicemen
through the dimly lighted parks and rattling trains in and around Long Island
City, Queens. While their forays may trigger memories of recon missions, the
locales are vivid reminders of their onetime homes of last resort, because these
men are also veterans of homelessness.

They are the Veterans Civilian Observation Patrol, a neighborhood group
operating under the auspices of the 108th Precinct, and they are fighting to
make streets safe amid a surge of conspicuous violent crimes in New York City
that has left innocent people senselessly killed and the city outraged.

The patrol members' efforts have earned them plaudits from the police and
citizens, and one honor more prized than any medal - a place to call home. This
weekend Mr. Caldwell and 22 other patrol members, or VCOPS, as they call
themselves, will leave their cots at a shelter for homeless veterans and move
into apartments in the Prospect Heights section of Brooklyn.

For these men, many of whom have waged protracted battles with drugs, the work
has been a therapy that has let them tap newfound sources of strength and pride.
''Once you get back your self-esteem, you're on the road to recovery,'' said Mr.
Caldwell, himself a recovering alcoholic.

The patrols leave each weeknight at 10 o'clock from the 108th Precinct station
house in Long Island City and head east into the neighborhoods. One recent night
pedestrians did quick double-takes as two dozen men wearing their trademark
green T-shirts began their patrol through Sunnyside, Queens. In pairs they
strode down both sides of the street, stretching from corner to corner. ''We
walk with lots of space so people won't think we're a gang,'' said Bruce Weems,
a Navy veteran whose broad, bulging biceps carried tatoos of a cobra and his
initials.

Two point men led the way and cast darting glances into shadowy doorways, ready
to alert others to any potential problem. Every few minutes they pivoted with
arms raised to signal all clear, then waited until the entire squad responded in
kind. Should any patrol member stand still with his arms at his side, it signals
he has spotted something or someone suspicious.

Reassuring Sight

The sight of these men steadily advancing up the streets would appear to be
enough to deter anyone with criminal intentions. As the patrol members slowly
fanned out toward the perimeter of a local park recently, five youths emerged
from the darkness and quickly crossed the street while glancing warily over
their shoulders. Inside the park, the few remaining people appeared relieved to
see the patrol.

''Sometimes a lot of things go down around here and it's nice to have these
people watch out,'' said a 23-year-old woman who identified herself only as
Kelly. ''They're here more than the cops are, and if something goes down they're
here before the cops.''

The men routinely ride the No. 7 line to Sunnyside and walk through neighborhood
streets back to Long Island City, although sometimes they will take the train
back to the Hunters Point station and walk through the grimy, maze-like exits
that lead to a desolate stretch of warehouses, factories and weed-covered lots.

Mr. Caldwell, who has been a patrol member since February and commander since
May, left the Army in 1969 with two Bronze Stars, the Purple Heart and chronic
pain from a bullet that ripped through his side and exited through his left leg.
The citation for the Bronze Star he won at Loc Ninh described how, armed with
only M-16's, he and others braved rocket and machine-gun fire to keep the enemy
back.

Years of Alcohol

Eight years ago he abandoned his job as a maintenance man at a college to pass
his days in an alcoholic haze that landed him first in a detoxification center
and later at a homeless shelter. Sober for nine months now, he said that he held
no bitterness toward others for his predicament and that all he is owed is a
chance to make a fresh start. His patrol work, he said, is a way to do that.

''Compared to Vietnam, the subways are a picnic,'' he said. ''The difference is
at least in Vietnam we had backup.''

Mr. Caldwell and the other VCOPS said they are a disciplined group that has
rarely needed to use their fists. Their job is simply to observe suspicious
activity and report it to the police. This summer they stopped two muggings and
four times followed suspects to their hiding places, where the police made the
arrests.

''These are guys who are willing to come out and put a little out for people who
probably haven't put out themselves,'' said Sgt. John McCluskey, a narcotics
officer at the 108th Precinct.

In 1988, residents of Long Island City were not willing to tolerate the Borden
Avenue Veterans Residence, a city-financed shelter run by the Salvation Army.
They complained that homeless men were drinking and urinating in the nearby
vest-pocket parks and side streets. Officer Fran Kinkowski, the precinct's
community affairs officer, decided to solve two problems by incorporating some
of these veterans into the precinct's community patrol program. Since the
original 13 recruits cleared the area of troublemakers and eased community
opposition, 90 men have been patrol members.

More recently, the group spun off the Veterans Service Corps, a not-for-profit
organization that seeks to provide housing, training and drug rehabilitation for
the patrol members. Russell Hicks, formerly a social worker at the Borden Avenue
shelter, started the service corps in response to what he thought was a paucity
of services for homeless veterans.

Mr. Hicks persuaded a landlord in Brooklyn to allow the Veterans Service Corps
to rent a refurbished building of 16 cozy studio and duplex apartments, complete
with varnished wood floors, smooth white walls and spacious tile bathrooms.
Rents will range from $595 for a studio to $695 for a two-person duplex. The men
who have jobs will pay the rent from their wages; those who are unemployed, from
public assistance. Mr. Hicks expects the rent to be partly offset by funds from
a contract he is negotiating with the local office of the Department of Veterans
Affairs.

Giddy as Short-Timers

In the days before the move into their new apartments, the patrol members had
the nervous, giddy enthusiasm of short-timers, the military slang for men about
to be discharged. On visits to the neighborhood - a section of Prospect Heights
where robbery and drug-related crimes are above the city average, the police say
- Mr. Caldwell and his men have already been welcomed by some residents.

While the area is fraught with many of the temptations and obstacles that caused
their downfall, the veterans said they weren't going to dwell on the possibility
of repeating mistakes.

''The VCOPS made me ready to step back into society and showed me that by
following the rules I can make it,'' said Warren Kelley, 35, who has been a
patrol member since June.

Before leaving his old command, Mr. Caldwell passed the mantle of leadership to
Billy Reeves, a boyish-looking veteran who will continue to live at the shelter
and recruit new VCOPS while the others begin a new patrol in Brooklyn. ''I'm
sorry I can't carry all of you guys now,'' Mr. Caldwell said as he paced the
room. ''But it'll happen to you the same as it happened to me.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Sgt. Bruce Weems of the Veterans Civilian Observation Patrol
checking a subway platform in Queens. Members of the Veterans Civilian
Observation Patrol being briefed by officers at the 108th Precinct in Queens on
what route they will take. The patrol is a neighborhood watch group consisting
of ex-servicemen, many of whom have been homeless. (pg26); A member on patrol in
a subway train traveling through Sunnyside. (Pg26)(Photographs by Michelle V.
Agins/The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              304 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 15, 1990, Saturday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

CONFRONTATION IN THE GULF: Ripples From the Gulf/A Special Report;
Crisis in the Gulf Hits Home: 'Everything is Different'

BYLINE: By LISA BELKIN, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 2169 words

DATELINE: TWENTYNINE PALMS, Calif.


Business is all but nonexistent at the three tattoo parlors in this desert town,
which is home to the nation's largest Marine base. The dry-cleaner nearest the
base has laid off 15 workers and cut its hours in half.

A note on the window of Ernie's weight lifting room announces that it will be
closed on weekends and, ''In honor of our military, will remain closed until
they return.''

In varying degrees, the military buildup in the Persian Gulf 8,500 miles away is
affecting day-to-day life throughout the United States.

A Backdrop or Intrusion

In some places it is merely a backdrop - the yellow ribbons and American flags
that line the main shopping street in Houston, for instance, or the videotaped
messages from members of the armed services that are broadcast on television.

Elsewhere, the mobilization is more of an intrusion, interrupting established
routines in often unexpected ways. In Beaumont, Tex., Frances Foux has given up
her lunch hour to bring cases of sodas to soldiers at the local port who are
loading ships destined for the Persian Gulf. They remind her of her brother who
was killed in Vietnam.

In still other places the mobilization has brought an unexpected boom in
business for companies that make products useful for fighting a desert war. The
Gatorade plant in Newport, Tenn., for example, is adding extra shifts to meet
the growing orders from the military. So far, nearly 100,000 cases have been
shipped to the Gulf.

Some Feel the Strain

And then there are the people and places for whom life has been turned upside
down. People like Tracy Ross in places like Twentynine Palms.

At John's Hamburgers, which was nearly empty despite the noon hour, 5-month-old
Derek Ross squealed with delight as Mrs. Ross, 23, dangled a set of Marine dog
tags for her son's amusement. Derek's father, Danny, left for the Persian Gulf
in mid-August, and Mrs. Ross said she was feeling the strain of life without her
husband.

''Everything is different now,'' she said. ''Everything is harder.''

This Southern California town, 70 miles east of San Bernardino in the Mojave
Desert, exists almost solely because of the Marine base. About 12,000 people
live on the base and 13,000 others live around it. Although the Marine Corps
refuses to say how many troops from which divisions have left this base and
others around the the country, Karen Van Hout, a spokeswoman for the Chamber of
Commerce, said it is fairly easy to figure out who is no longer in Twentynine
Palms. The Seventh Marine Expeditionary Brigade, which has 4,000 men, was the
first to leave, she said. It was followed by the First Force Service Support
Group and the Third Light Armored Infantry Battallion.

''We don't know exactly how many have left,'' said Linda Jones, whose husband,
Maurice, shipped out early in September. He left just two weeks after their
hastily arranged wedding, which had originally been scheduled for next
Valentine's Day. ''The better question is, 'Who's still here?' There are no men
older than 18 and younger than 40.''

Mrs. Jones, who works as a visiting nurse, said the women have formed support
groups. They ''help a little,'' she said, ''but they don't bring him home.''

The Better to Keep Busy

Some of the group meetings are structured and official, with information on
emotional counseling and advice on balancing checkbooks. More often the
gatherings are for pot-luck suppers or picnics with the children, the better to
keep busy.

Suddenly, life in Twentynine Palms centers on the mail. Mrs. Jones said a trying
day became a happy one recently when the Marine Corps relaxed rules that
restricted the size of packages that could be sent to the troops in the Gulf.
Now she is looking for the perfect tape recorder to send to her husband so she
can replace her written letters with her voice and be able to hear him in
return.

Mrs. Ross said she had written to her husband daily since he left, but is not
certain how many letters have reached him. She has only received a handful from
him so far, she said, and one was addressed to Derek.

''It said all the things a daddy wants to tell his son in case he doesn't come
back,'' she said, jangling the dog tags faster and giving the baby a watery
smile. ''I read it to him.''

An Unsettling Emptiness

There is the same unsettling emptiness at other military towns across the
country, too. Nearly one-third of the 40,000 people in Hinesville, Ga., near
Fort Stewart, has been sent to the Persian Gulf. In Killeen, Tex., near Fort
Hood, pistol sales boomed, then dropped as soldiers bought weapons for their
families before they departed.

At the courthouse in Bell County, where Fort Hood is situated, 325 marriage
licenses were sold in the first two weeks of August; normally, the rate is 20 to
30 a week. Now it is back to normal.

In San Diego, local pizza restaurants are frantically advertising for drivers
because pizza delivery was a popular side job for many marines from Camp
Pendleton. Now most of them are gone.

In nearby Oceanside, Calif., Oscar Culp said he feels that the flow of the days
is out of sync. Mr. Culp, who was a marine for 25 years, serving in World War
II, Korea and Vietnam, now owns the CMC Furniture store in Oceanside.

Pay days at Camp Pendleton are on the 15th and 30th of the month, he said, and
he could tell it was pay day without looking at his calendar. He would watch the
buses filled to standing room with soldiers who came to town to have a a
haircut, go shopping or retrieve items left in pawn shops between paychecks. In
recent weeks, he said, the buses from the base are virtually empty.

At Guardsmen's Homes

Some Uncertainty But No Regrets

In smaller pockets around the country, far from military bases, equally dramatic
disruptions of life are taking place.

In Detroit, Roger Wojtylko has lost the ability to plan his business. A staff
sergeant in the Michigan National Guard, Mr. Wojtylko was called to active duty
for two weeks. He was then released, but knows he might be called again at any
time.

Mr. Wojtylko builds and remodels houses, and he has had to return deposits to 15
customers since the call-up began because he has no way of knowing whether he
can complete a job. Since his National Guard pay is as sporadic as his call-up
schedule, he and his two daughters, 6 and 15 years old, are living on his wife's
salary as a bus driver.

Farther north, in Vienna Corners, Mich., Victor Briley is facing the same
uncertainty. Mr. Briley, a first lieutenant in the Michigan National Guard, was
called to active duty in mid-August. As a result he has postponed plans to
double the size of his auto repair shop. While he is gone, his wife tackles the
ledger books after she completes her regular job as a waitress, and one of his
three employees runs the day-to-day business.

Neither Mr. Wojtylko nor Mr. Briley say they have any regrets about their
decision to join the Guard, despite the disruption it is now causing them. They
did not enlist for the money or on a whim, they said, but to serve their country
and to challenge themselves.

''I'm a very patriotic person,'' Mr. Wojtylko said. ''I was in Vietnam. I don't
want to leave home unless I have to, but if I have to, I have a commitment to
supporting my Government.''

Mr. Briley agreed. ''I don't mind being called up,'' he said. ''It's a
challenge. This is an opportunity for my unit to prove what it can accomplish.''


At the Workplace

Business Is Sweet And Bittersweet

For every place that has become unsettled since the partial mobilization,
however, there is another that has been made more stable. The activity in the
Persian Gulf is giddy news in some parts of the country, like the oil states of
Texas and Oklahoma. With oil selling for more than $30 a barrel, there is
optimism in those states on a level not seen in several years.

Engineered Support Systems in St. Louis has been laying off employees in the
past year because of cuts in Government contracts for the water purification
units that the company manufactures. In recent weeks the company has rehired 25
employees and might need to recall as many as 200 more.

At the Artesia bottled water company in San Antonio, bottling machines are
working 20 percent longer each week now that Artesia has received a contract to
supply water to parched troops in Saudi Arabia.

Beau Price is quenching thirst another way in thanks for his more modest
increase in business. His T-shirt company has sold 2,000 shirts with a picture
of an Iraqi soldier riding a camel and being attacked by American troops. The
slogan: ''I'd fly 10,000 miles to smoke a camel.''

Many of the shirts were sold to soldiers working at the port, and in
appreciation he is using some of the profits to buy cases of soft drinks for the
troops in Saudi Arabia.

When business improves, so do hundreds of lives. Randy Hudson, for instance, is
a 30-year-old welder in San Antonio who has a wife, two children and a mortgage.
He had worked at Fairchild Aircraft for five years before he was laid off in
January when the company filed for bankruptcy.

'Big Reunion' at Fairchild

The chapter 11 proceedings were almost complete when the mobilization began and
Fairchild received a $3.86 million contract from the Air Force to manufacture
special vests that are hooked up to air-conditioning units.

Now Mr. Hudson is one of 60 employees that the company has called back to work.
It plans to hire 30 more.

Returning to Fairchild after nine months of sporadic jobs welding race cars and
worrying that he would lose his house was ''like a big reunion,'' he said,
adding, ''We're happy to be working up a sweat so the guys over there don't have
to.''

Often, however, this jubilation has a bittersweet side. At Survival
Technologies, also in St. Louis, Alice Jennings and Catherine Kinnard are among
the 180 workers who produce 95 percent of the nerve gas antidote in the West.

Since the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait, the company has rushed the delivery of an
85,000-piece order and has received a second order for $6 million. The company
would not give specifics on the size of the order, but 40 people have been added
to the staff so far and 25 more are needed.

But Mrs. Jennings and Mrs. Kinnard are not happy that business is going so well.
Both have sons in the military, and as they fill the antidote canisters and ship
them out both mothers realize that their sons might need the pen-sized
applicators someday.

''Every day when we leave we feel like we've accomplished something,'' Mrs.
Kinnard said. ''I think I'd feel the same if I didn't have a son.''

Mrs. Jennings said: ''I hope he never has to use what we make. I hope they leave
it on a shelf and it gathers dust.''

'The Lucky Ones'

Other Things On Their Minds

At the businesses that are struggling, at the ones that are reborn and in the
households that are praying for relatives and friends in the armed forces, it
may seem impossible that there are people who have not been affected at all by
the Gulf crisis.

But for some people - Mrs. Ross, waiting for her husband to return to the Marine
base at Twentynine Palms, calls them ''the lucky ones'' - there are jobs to
worry about, bills to pay, and concerns like crime that seem more personal and
more urgent.

Two New York City police officers near Times Square looked slightly baffled
recently when they were asked if the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait had altered their
daily lives.

''We work in Times Square,'' said Officer Jeff NcNamee. ''That's what's on our
minds.''

His partner, Officer Joe Guinn, said: ''It hasn't affected us. We got our job to
do at home. The soldiers got their job to do over there.''

Fifty blocks uptown, at Broadway and 93d Street, sales at the Cunningham
Newstand have not increased because of Saddam Hussein. But they did rise
noticably last week when Time magazine ran a cover story about New York's social
and economic problems, said Marc Salih, the newsstand manager.

Social Issues Take Precedence

''People here are concerned with social issues, not the Middle East,'' he said.
''My worry is to keep the business going. You can't worry about things on the
outside.''

Sherri Baker, a 25-year-old Boston housewife, echoed this sentiment. ''I don't
read about that stuff,'' she said as she flipped through the pages of The Boston
Herald and waited for her husband to return from an errand.

When asked what she reads instead, Mrs. Baker took the pink hairbrush she was
holding and pointed to an article about local prison releases. ''I read stories
about convicted killers being released,'' she said, ''because I want to know
where they are.''

Across the street, 15-year-old Carlos Caballo, a student at Boston High School,
was standing outside the school board building. ''I didn't know anything was
going on,'' he said when asked about the Persian Gulf. ''I don't read the
news.''

What does occupy his thoughts? ''Jobs, girls, clothes,'' he replied. ''Stuff
like that.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: September 19, 1990, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

CORRECTION:

A front-page article on Saturday about the Persian Gulf confrontation's impact
on America misstated the reasons for layoffs at Engineered Support Systems of
St. Louis. It laid off workers earlier in the year because of delays receiving
Government money and the prospect of reduced military spending.

GRAPHIC: Photos: Alice Jennings in an antiseptic room at Survival Technologies
in St. Louis, where nerve gas antidote for the military is produced. ''I hope he
never has to use what we make,'' said Mrs. Jennings, who has a son in the
military. ''I hope they leave it on a shelf and it gathers dust.'' (Bill Stover
for The New York Times); ''Everything is different now,'' said Tracy Ross, whose
husband left for the Persian Gulf last month. ''Everything is harder.'' She was
with her 5-month-old son, Derek, at a restaurant in Twentynine Palms, Calif.
(Bart Bartholomew for The New York Times); Beau Price of Beaumont, Tex., donated
cases of soda for soldiers in Saudi Arabia. He bought it with some of the profit
he made from selling souvenir shirts, many to soldiers working at the port. (F.
Carter Smi

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              305 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 15, 1990, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Samuel S. Stratton, 73; Lawmaker Represented Albany in Congress

BYLINE: By JOHN T. McQUISTON

SECTION: Section 1; Page 29, Column 4; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 552 words


Samuel S. Stratton, a former Congressman who represented the Albany and
Schenectady area for 30 years and was a longtime member of the House Armed
Services Committee, died on Thursday at Shady Grove Hospital in Gaithersburg,
Md. He was 73 years old and had lived for the last year in the Manor Care
nursing home in Potomac, Md.

Mr. Stratton, who suffered a stroke a year ago, died of a heart attack shortly
after arriving at the hospital, said Robert Mott, his son-in-law.

A Democrat whose hawkish views often put him at odds with his party, Mr.
Stratton devoted his Congressional career to strengthening the nation's defense
system. He strongly supported the American war effort in Vietnam and proposed
increased spending for new weapons systems like the B-1 bomber, the MX missile
and the neutron bomb.

First Elected in 1958

He was the third-most senior Democrat on the Armed Services Committee when he
announced in 1988 that his failing health prevented him from running for a 16th
term.

He was first elected to the House in 1958, becoming the only Democrat in 42
years to be sent to Congress from what was then the 32d Congressional District
in the Albany-Schenectady-Troy area.

Despite several redistrictings in a predominantly Republican area, he was
returned to Congress with ease every two years and became dean of the New York
delegation in January 1979. At his retirement, Mr. Stratton represented the 23d
District.

He began his political career as a city councilman in Schenectady, and was
elected mayor by 282 votes in 1955. He fulfilled a campaign promise to clean up
the city by leading a police raid on a gambling den in the shadow of City Hall.

Mr. Stratton supplemented his meager mayoral income as an announcer and
newscaster for several local radio and television stations. He also appeared on
early television as the character ''Sagebrush Sam,'' who dressed as a cowboy and
played a harmonica.

Shift in Political Focus

In 1962, he tried to shift his focus to statewide politics by seeking the
gubernatorial nomination. But party leaders gave the nod to Robert M.
Morgenthau, then the United States Attorney for the Southern District of New
York and now the Manhattan District Attorney.

In 1964, Mr. Stratton sought to become a Democratic candidate for the United
States Senate. But his effort failed when Robert F. Kennedy entered the fray and
defeated him on the first ballot at the Democratic State Convention.

''When Bobby Kennedy decided he was a New Yorker, that was the end of my
campaign,'' Mr. Stratton said years later.

Mr. Stratton was born in Yonkers and attended school in Rochester and
Schenectady. He graduated from the University of Rochester and held master's
degrees in philosophy from Haverford College and Harvard University.

He was commissioned as an ensign in the Naval Reserve in 1942 and served in the
South Pacific during World War II as a naval combat intelligence officer on the
staff of Gen. Douglas MacArthur. He was twice awarded the Bronze Star and
retired from the Naval Reserve at the rank of captain.

He is survived by his wife, Joan; three daughters, Lisa Gonzalez of San Mateo,
Calif., Debra Stratton Mott of Springfield, Va., and Kim Petrie of Aspen, Colo.,
and two sons, Kevin, of Vienna, Va., and Brian, of Clifton Park, N.Y.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Samuel S. Stratton (Associated Press, 1988)

TYPE: OBITUARY

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              306 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 16, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

VIETNAM AND THE GULF CRISIS

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 1, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 22 words


Members of the House and Senate whose lives were touched by the Vietnam War see
lessons for the Persian Gulf crisis. Page 18.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: SUMMARY

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              307 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 16, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Once Considered a Sure Thing, California's Environmental Package Falters

BYLINE: By ROBERT REINHOLD, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 30, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1500 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES, Sept. 15


When first proposed, a sweeping California ballot measure that promised a ''bold
and comprehensive'' plan to protect the environment seemed a sure winner that
could deliver a powerful national message about the public's determination to
fight pollution.

But seven weeks before the election, the initiative appears to be in trouble.
And environmentalists fear it may prove that voters' willingness to convert
noble, abstract notions about the environment into concrete actions may be
limited by the potential cost.

''A recession is coming,'' one backer said. ''People get scared when they hear
it's going to cost billions of dollars. Until recently I would have said it
would pass handily. Now, it just might lose.''

The Nov. 6 vote may offer the first public test of the domestic political
consequences of the turmoil in the Middle East, which has sharpened public
awareness of the trade-offs between energy production and environmental
protection, a balancing act that is nowhere more pointed than in
automobile-dependent California.

While the initiative still leads in the polls, it has been battered in recent
days by reports - vigorously disputed by its backers - that it would cost
billions of dollars to local governments and the state and that it would depress
agriculture and other industries. The legislative analyst for the City of Los
Angeles, for example, estimated that the city's Department of Water and Power
would have to spend more than $6 billion just to reduce carbon dioxide
emissions.

Opponents Focus on Tom Hayden

An advertising campaign financed by chemical and allied agricultural interests
has portrayed the initiative as an effort that tries to do too much and promotes
the political ambitions of Assemblyman Tom Hayden, the chairman of the steering
committee leading the effort to pass it. While Mr. Hayden, of Santa Monica, has
long since moved into the Democratic liberal mainstream, the commercials attempt
to exploit the public's lingering perception of him from his youthful days as an
opponent of the Vietnam War. Those opposing the initiative call it the Hayden
Initiative.

The environmental leadership, which calls the measure Big Green, is worried.
''We're on the line,'' said Robert K. Hattoy, regional representative of the
Sierra Club here. ''If Big Green loses, it will look like the movement cannot
translate the rhetoric of Earth Day into the reality of Election Day.''

Mr. Hayden says this will not happen. ''A tremendous amount of money is flowing
from the chemical companies to create a fictional campaign, but we will win in
the end,'' he said. But doubts are growing. The campaign is using the same
Hollywood hoopla environmentalists used successfully four years ago to pass an
initiative to label foods and products containing toxins. On Thursday night,
celebrities, including Bette Midler, Robin Williams, Cher, Olivia Newton-John
and Meryl Streep, sang, danced and preached for clean air and water, nearly
filling the 6,166-seat outdoor Greek Theater in Hollywood and raising about
$600,000.

'Other Side Is Much Smarter'

''They're blindly going through campaigns of the past,'' said one disaffected
backer, who spoke on the condition that he not be identified. ''The other side
is much smarter. There is a feeling Big Green goes too far and voters do not
want to pay a lot of money. There is no groundswell of support.'' A California
Poll, an independent, nonpartisan statewide survey taken by the Field Institute
Aug. 17-27, found voters favoring the measure by 58-26, but the margin was 49
percent to 35 percent among those who were familiar with it. The poll, with a
margin of error of plus or minus five percentage points, also found that 16
percent were undecided. A recent Los Angeles Times poll found support had
slipped to 44 percent in favor and 42 percent against; the poll's margin of
error was three percentage points.

Political experts say this is ominous because the opposition has not begun its
main television advertising assault. The measure is popular in the Los Angeles
and San Francisco areas, but not in the politically pivotal San Joaquin Valley,
the huge agricultural region, because of fears that curbs on pesticides could
injure the economy.

Could Influence Governor's Race

For that reason, the measure could play a key role in the governor's race
between Dianne Feinstein, the Democrat, and Senator Pete Wilson, the Republican.
Ms. Feinstein has endorsed it, hurting her in agricultural areas; Mr. Wilson has
not. Jim Costa of Fresno, chairman of the Democratic caucus in the state
Assembly, said: ''I told her that if it's a close race and she loses, the reason
will be that she did poorly in the San Joaquin Valley because she supported Big
Green.''

On the ballot as Proposition 128 and formally known as the Environmental
Protection Act of 1990, the measure runs 39 pages and nearly 16,000 words. It
would substantially rewrite California environmental law, imposing standards far
more stringent than Federal law, including these:

* All pesticides and herbicides known to cause cancer and reproductive harm
would be phased out and the sale of imported produce containing residues of
those substances would be banned unless they presented ''no significant risk''
to health.

* Emission of ''any gases which may contribute, directly or indirectly, to
global warming,'' including carbon dioxide, would be reduced by 40 percent by
the year 2010.

* Manufacture of chlorofluorocarbons would be phased out to protect the ozone
layer.

* A $300 million bond fund would be created to buy ancient redwood forests,
limit clear cutting of timber and require developers to plant trees.

* All oil and gas drilling in state-controlled coastal waters would be
prohibited and a $500 million oil-spill response fund created.

* $40 million a year would be provided for ''applied research'' on alternatives
to pesticides in agriculture and other topics.

It would also create an elected state Environmental Advocate, with authority to
enforce environmental laws, independent of the governor and attorney general.
Reportedly, Mr. Hayden wants this job, but he has not acknowledged that.
Proponents say the new post is necessary because the Legislature, Governor and
Federal Government have been unwilling to take adequate measures to protect the
environment. The measure was originally mounted to bolster the gubernatorial
campaign of Attorney General John K. Van de Kamp, who opposed Ms. Feinstein in
the Democratic primary. It cobbles together several disparate approaches to
environmental protection that backers said the Legislature and Governor were
unwilling to pass.

'A Multipurpose Creature'

Critics call the initiative a poorly drawn law. John P. Dwyer, a professor of
law at the University of California at Berkeley, likened it to ''a frenzied
scientist's recombinant DNA experiment'' that had spliced unrelated changes into
a ''multipurpose creature.''

Debate focuses mainly on the cost and Mr. Hayden's role.

Frederick Cannon, senior economist at the Bank of America in San Francisco, told
a symposium at Berkeley's Graduate School of Public Policy about 10 days ago
that while the measure would not cause a recession, its impact would be
''substantial'' with ''major dislocations'' for certain industries, particularly
farming. He added that the costliest provisions would be the ''greenhouse'' gas
reductions.

The nonpartisan Legislative Analyst's Office in Sacramento estimates direct
costs to state and local governments at up to $2.6 billion over the next 20
years. An analysis commissioned by opponents of the initiative said it would
increase energy prices by $10 billion to $15 billion a year, raise electric
rates by at least 20 percent by the year 2000, and cause the loss of 500,000 to
2 million jobs in manufacturing and construction. The opponents have refused to
release the details of how these conclusions were reached.

Backers angrily dismissed such figures as scare tactics and are preparing their
own economic analysis. ''These are simple-minded economic assessments based on
the notion that we are capped out on energy savings,'' said Ralph C. Cavanagh of
the Natural Resources Defense Council. ''There are large opportunities to save
more by saving rather than producing energy.'' He argued that renewable energy
sources including geothermal, solar and wind power would get a substantial boost
from the initiative.

The measure faces further political difficulties because the ballot will contain
three other measures related to the environment. One of them, called Careful and
mounted by the California Farm Bureau Federation and the Western Growers
Association, would set less restrictive rules on pesticides. The two others
offer competing plans on logging by environmentalists and timber companies.

''There's a lot of confusion. All four sound good. People don't know how to vote
to be good environmentalists,'' said Mr. Hattoy of the Sierra Club.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: ''A tremendous amount of money is flowing from the chemical
companies to create a fictional campaign, but we will win in the end,'' said
Assemblyman Tom Hayden. (Associated Press)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              308 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 16, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

CONFRONTATION IN THE GULF;
Views on the Gulf: Lawmakers Versed in Vietnam

BYLINE: By R. W. APPLE Jr., Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 18, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1376 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 15


Their lives were touched by the long, hard, painful war in Vietnam.

One won the Congressional Medal of Honor, another watched his father-in-law's
political career be destroyed, one spent years in a prisoner-of-war camp,
several helped organize opposition to the war. They sit in the Senate or the
House of Representatives now, and many think that they learned things in those
days that offer lessons in the current crisis in the Middle East.

Their views, elicited in a series of interviews this week, range from
Representative John Murtha's conclusion that the United States must act quickly
and with overwhelming force if force is to be used at all, to Representative
John J. Rhodes 3d's conviction that the White House staff should keep out of
military decisions, to Senator Charles S. Robb's belief that television could
make or break the United Nations effort to reverse Iraq's aggression.

None subscribes to the ''Bomb Baghdad Now'' school of thinking, and none faults
President Bush for having taken a stand against Saddam Hussein.

Caution in Drawing Parallels

According to the records of an organization called Vietnam Veterans in Congress,
100 current members of Congress - 24 Senators and 76 Representatives, all men -
served in the armed forces in the war, which lasted from 1964 to 1975. About 40
of those served only in the reserves or National Guard, and even among those who
saw active duty, many never found themselves in harm's way.

The present-day member of Congress who saw the Vietnam war from the most exalted
vantage point was Representative Les Aspin, Democrat of Wisconsin, who - with
Yale, Oxford and Massachusetts Institute of Technology degrees under his belt -
spent his days as a ranking aide to the Secretary of Defense, Robert S.
McNamara, traveling often from the Pentagon to Southeast Asia.

A major lesson, he said, was that ''you need to be careful in drawing
parallels.'' He continued, ''World War II lessons didn't apply in Vietnam,
although Westmoreland and others thought they did, and just because you couldn't
use air power to cut supply routes in Vietnam jungles doesn't mean you can't use
it to cut them when they cross the desert.''

''Here's another one,'' he said. ''Gradual escalation didn't work in Vietnam,
they say, because it didn't inflict enough pain. But inflicting pain isn't the
only goal. If you bombed Baghdad, Saddam would hurt badly, but it might also
destroy the international coalition the President has managed to build behind
his policy.''

Only Mr. Robb, a Virginia Democrat, was widely known to the public in his
Vietnam days. That was not because of any feats of derring-do, although he
served combat time as a Marine officer, but because he had married the
President's daughter, Lynda Bird Johnson, not long before he shipped out.

''We've been spared the more riveting images, the more graphic coverage, so
far,'' he said of the Persian Gulf crisis. ''But I don't think that changes how
important television can be, over the long haul, in maintaining public support
for U.S. policy, or destroying it in just a few weeks.''

''If people sense a deep frustration -if they read it in pictures of the troops'
faces out in the desert - or if they see deaths unrelated to clear goals or
evident progress, then we will be in trouble,'' he said. ''If Saddam is bright
enough to show us pictures of starving Iraqi kids, that could undermine backing
for the blockade and the embargo. Global television is very powerful.'' Mr.
Murtha, who served as a Marine in Vietnam and Korea, said that on his recent
visit to Saudi Arabia, troops repeatedly asked whether ''the folks back home''
supported them.

The Aura of Vietnam

''The aura of Vietnam hangs over these kids,'' the Pennsylvania Democrat said.
''Their parents were in it. They've seen all these movies. They worry, they
wonder.''

At a meeting with Mr. Bush, the lawmakers reported, he and several of his
colleagues exchanged guesses on how long the current high level of public
backing would last. The answers ranged from six months to two years.

Similar concerns and conclusions have led Senator John McCain, Republican of
Arizona, to conclude that air and naval power, not ''a land battle in which we
trade American bodies for Iraqi bodies,'' should be the President's instruments
of choice, if necessary, to drive Mr. Hussein out of Kuwait.

Mr. McCain, a former naval pilot who was shot down over North Vietnam and
imprisoned for five and a half years, continued, ''But I don't believe the
American people will support a war of attrition any longer, even if our vital
interests are clearly at stake.''

Importance of Powell

For that reason, he said, the country was fortunate to have Gen. Colin L.
Powell, a Vietnam combat veteran, as Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. The
senator called him ''a man who doesn't even have phrases like 'gradual
escalation,' 'body count' and 'flexible response' in his lexicon.''

But Mr. Rhodes, an Arizona Republican who was an intelligence adviser to
Vietnamese troops at Tuy Hoa and whose father also served in the House, said he
was worried that ''the people in the White House situation room will forget an
important lesson -that once they have set the goal, clearly and succinctly, they
ought to turn it over to the military commanders.''

Perhaps the most aggressive of the group, at least in his instincts, was
Representative Duncan Hunter, a Republican who represents a San Diego district
in the House and who took part in army helicopter assaults in Vietnam.

''It is important to go farther than President Bush has gone,'' he said. ''You
must have a plan for victory, which we never had in Vietnam, and in this case
that means defanging Saddam, destroy his military production capacity at a
minimum. Otherwise he'll survive to bring his nuclear-weapons plans to fruition,
then attack again.''

In contrast, Senator Bob Kerrey, Democrat of Nebraska, the Medal of Honor
winner, was the most cautious. He said he was worried about early comparisons of
President Hussein to Hitler that, he said, like treating Ho Chi Minh as the
incarnation of evil, were gross exaggerations that inhibited clear thought.

''Just about everything that happened to me in Vietnam has influenced my
perspective,'' said Senator Kerrey, who lost part of a leg in the war. ''Above
all: don't underestimate the enemy. Try to negotiate first, use every avenue.
People need to remember that it's a very serious step, war. People kill and
people get killed.''

'The World Is With Us'

Representative Pat Schroeder, Democrat of Colorado, started in politics as an
anti-war activist and is now a senior member of the House Armed Services
Committee. She said she ''drew a bright line between Vietnam and this.''

''Vietnam was already a hot war when we got there,'' she said. ''We never had
any choice but to fight. This is much more like the post-World War II period,
when we deployed our troops to Western Europe to try to avoid a conflict. In
Vietnam, it looked as if we were interfering in a civil war. Here it doesn't. In
Vietnam, we had no established goals. Here we do.''

''But the big reason I support this is that the world is with us this time,''
she continued. ''The cause is just, so others rallied around. Without that, it
just won't work.''

Like some of his colleagues, Senator John Kerry of Massachusetts, a gunboat
commander on the Mekong River, then the national spokesman for Vietnam Veterans
Against the War, said that ''the issue here is staying power.'' But his worries
focused on the troops, as well as the public, and he urged that they be rotated
by unit - not indivdually, as in Vietnam, ''where the policy bred a lot of
selfishness, and guys who were short worried about their own survival, not about
the success of the unit or the campaign or even the country.''

Soldiers were referred to as ''short'' when they were due to be sent from the
front lines soon.

Mr. Kerry said some arrangements would have to be made ''for a place where a guy
can have a beer,'' despite Saudi opposition to alcohol, and some way would have
to be found to counteract the depressing effect of prolonged duty in the Arabian
desert, which he described as ''a bleak, oppressive place.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Senator John Kerry of Massachussetts, a gunboat commander on
the Mekong River in the Vietnam War, said a way would have to be found to
counteract depressing effects of prolonged duty in the Saudi desert.

The boat he commanded, below at left, is shown on patrol in Vietnam (United
States Navy); Senator John McCain of Arizona, a former Navy pilot who was shot
down over North Vietnam, at work in Washington on Friday. A picture, above,
shows him at a North Vietnamese hospital before he was sent to a prison camp
where he was held for five and a half years. (Photographs by Jose R. Lopez/The
New York Times)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              309 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 16, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Threats and Party Backlash for El Salvador Chief

BYLINE: By LINDSEY GRUSON, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 10, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1580 words

DATELINE: SAN SALVADOR, Sept. 13


In the 15 months since his inauguration at the head of a rightist Government,
President Alfredo Cristiani has moved moved toward the center of the Salvadoran
political spectrum, provoking a backlash from the core of his party that
threatens his administration, Western diplomats and Salvadoran politicians say.

''This Government has moved toward the center and it hasn't carried the
hard-liners with it,'' said a Western diplomat who fears that Mr. Cristiani and
his circle of supporters may be on the verge of losing control of the Government
and the army. ''The hard-liners are rewriting the rules.''

Diplomats say the far right, led by Roberto d'Aubuisson, sees Mr. Cristiani as
the ungrateful heir of their political legacy and a captive of the American
Embassy and what they see as its policy of appeasement of the Communist rebels
of the Farabundo Marti National Liberation Front.

The diplomats say the right wing has reacted by using its dominance over the
party apparatus, the courts and the legislature to undercut the President on
several key military, diplomatic and administrative decisions.

Links to Death Squads

At stake, Bush Administration officials warn, is the long-term balance of
Salvadoran political power and the future of United States support of the
Salvadoran Government in its battle against the rebels, the longest and largest
American counterinsurgency commitment since the Vietnam War.

American officials say they fear that the growing assertiveness of the faction
led by Mr. d'Aubuisson, who has repeatedly been linked to rightist death squads
that have killed thousands of people, will fortify sentiment in the United
States Congress for reducing or ending the $85 million in military assistance it
has been sending to El Salvador each year.

Increasingly, Bush Administration officials have started to talk about
''Lebanizing'' the conflict here, by which they mean withdrawing support,
building up neighbors and waiting to see what happens. Western diplomats say
such talk is weakening the resolve of Salvadoran officers who support the rule
of law and respect for human rights.

In an interview late last month, President Cristiani admitted that ''it gets
kind of lonely'' in his post. But he played down signs of divisions within his
governing party, the Nationalist Republican Alliance, which is known as Arena.
He said he was trying to expand the party's base and described it as ''a big
playing field that stretches all the way from the center to the right.'' He also
counseled patience. Far-Right Demands Resisted ''Everybody wants El Salvador to
change overnight into an advanced democracy like those in Western Europe,'' he
said. ''But it's a process. It will eventually bear fruit.''

But aides noted that in the meantime, the houses of several key allies have been
machine-gunned in attacks by presumed rightists. Mr. Cristiani has changed his
bodyguard, but several aides said they have pressed the President to take
further steps to increase his security.

''The same people who are supposed to be protecting him are the ones who are
going to kill him,'' a Cristiani adviser said of the President.

While acknowledging his political difficulties, some diplomats note that he has
defied widespread expectations that he could be nothing more than a puppet for
Mr. d'Aubuisson. They note that Mr. Cristiani has resisted rightists' demands
that he roll back key provisions of the country's decade-old land-reform program
and pressed forward with peace talks and the investigation into the army
killings in November of six Jesuit priests who were among the leading domestic
critics of the Government.

'It's a Pretty Good Record'

Most of all, they say, he has removed some hard-line officers long presumed to
be beyond the reach of civilian authority and has promoted Col. Rene Emilio
Ponce, a foe of the extremists, from Army Chief of Staff to Defense Minister.

''It's a pretty good record,'' the United States Ambassador, William G. Walker,
said recently. ''One shouldn't overlook some of the things he's been able to
do.''

The delicacy of the confrontation between Mr. Cristiani and Mr. d'Aubuisson is
reflected in the hesitancy of even usually voluble diplomats and politicians to
discuss the political turmoil. Ambassador Walker declined requests to comment on
Arena politics. So did senior army commanders and Arena leaders, including Mr.
d'Aubuisson.

The confrontation is a direct result of United States policy in El Salvador.
Fearful that it would be impossible to persuade Congress to approve aid if El
Salvador was viewed as in the sway of right-wing extremists, the Reagan
Administration twice blocked Mr. d'Aubuisson's ascension to the presidency -
first in 1982 when Vernon A. Walters was dispatched to El Salvador to inform the
General Assembly, which was ready to vote Mr. d'Aubuisson into the presidency,
that such a situation would be unacceptable to the United States.

Support of Party's Backbone

In the national elections of 1984, after what many saw as an American-engineered
vote fraud that propelled the centrist Christian Democrats to victory, Arena
leaders became convinced that they were tilting at windmills unless they
moderated the party's image to make it acceptable to Washington. Mr. d'Aubuisson
was persuaded to step aside in favor of Mr. Cristiani, a soft-spoken,
Jesuit-educated businessman.

But Mr. d'Aubuisson, who founded Arena as a front for an anti-Communist
paramilitary group, never lost the fervent support of the party's backbone, tens
of thousands of conservative peasants, petty landowners and rural businessmen
who are virulently anti-Communist and favor the elimination of anyone they
perceive as leftist. According to estimates, 40,000 Salvadorans have been killed
by the rightists' death squads during the 10-year civil war.

Many of the hard-liners say they can win the civil war by cracking down on rebel
sympathizers and popular groups, which they see as guerrilla fronts. In their
view, El Salvador's biggest mistake was accepting American aid, which they say
has never been worth the ensuing constraints. Mr. d'Aubuisson once said the
country should have rejected all American assistance except napalm.

Mr. Cristiani, by contrast, is popular among the much-smaller circle of
American-educated financiers and industrialists who joined the party in the
mid-1980's. His supporters, while no friends of the rebels, oppose the brutal
measures adopted by the far-right core and support the Salvadoran Government's
close relationship with the United States.

Kidnapping Charges Dropped

Throughout the 1989 election campaign, the two leaders presented a solid front.
Mr. Cristiani, who ran on a clean government platform, made no move to gain
control of the Arena apparatus. He argued that there should be a
church-and-state-type separation between the Government and the party.

But it was not long after Arena's easy election victory in March 1989 that Mr.
d'Aubuisson began to challenge Mr. Cristiani's stated goals, first by persuading
a judge to dismiss all charges against eight d'Aubuisson supporters accused of
running a kidnapping ring.

Mr. Cristiani succeeded in preventing the suspects' escape and having the
charges reinstated. But the victory, like so many others, turned out to be
short-lived. The charges were dropped again four months ago.

''The kidnappers are going around the country bragging about d'Aubuisson's
control of the courts and there's nothing Cristiani can do,'' a Salvadoran
politician said.

'The Soul of the Party'

Diplomats said the split within Arena grew deeper two months ago, when Mr.
Cristiani broke a personal promise and brought corruption charges against
Maximiliano Leiva, a retired colonel who was then the director of immigration.
At a stormy meeting in the presidential palace, Mr. d'Aubuisson demanded that
Mr. Leiva be retained.

''If you do it, only God can save you,'' Mr. d'Aubuisson finally thundered,
according to one official. Others corroborated the account.

When Mr. Leiva was dismissed and charged, Sigifredo Ochoa Perez, a hard-line
Arena leader, denounced the arrest as a direct attack on Mr. d'Aubuisson.
Although officials said the evidence against Mr. Leiva was extensive, a judge
quickly dropped the charges.

''Roberto is the soul of the party,'' Mr. Ochoa said in a interview published in
a local newspaper, Diario Latino. He dismissed the President's faction as
''arrivistas'' who had unfairly benefitted from Mr. d'Aubuisson's pioneering
labors.

U.S. Anger Over Slayings

In July, two d'Aubuisson aides contacted the rebels and suggested that they
break off negotiations with the Government, a politican with close contact to
the guerrillas said. By that account, the guerrillas were told that the
d'Aubuisson faction had won a power struggle and that if the rebels wanted to
negotiate, Mr. d'Aubuisson was the only one worth talking to. The rebels
declined, according to the politician.

''The brake on d'Aubuisson is coming off,'' a Western diplomat said. ''As the
U.S. role decreases, there is less and less reason for d'Aubuisson to take a
smaller role.''

But American diplomats say their hands are tied by American anger over the
Jesuit case, and increasing evidence that the killings were ordered by senior
Army officers.

''If they're still killing priests after 10 years of American involvement, you
have to ask if the U.S. should still be here,'' a diplomat said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: President Alfredo Cristiani left, who has moved toward the
center of the Salvadoran political spectrum since his inauguration 15 months
ago, has been criticized by the far right, led by Roberto d'Aubuisson, which
sees him as the ungrateful heir of its political legacy. (Camera Press London;
Associated Press); At an Independence Day demonstration yesterday in San
Salvador, marchers carried a banner that read '' 'For Demilitarization for
Peace' National Debate for Peace.'' The protesters urged the Salvadoran
Government and guerrillas to reach an agreement in peace talks being held in
Costa Rica. (Agence France-Presse)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              310 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 16, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 2, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1006 words



INTERNATIONAL/3-19



France will send 4,000 soldiers and dozens of airplanes, tanks and helicopters
to Saudi Arabia, President Mitterrand said, responding to Baghdad's moves
against French and other foreign diplomats in Kuwait on Friday.          Page 1



The U.S.'s offensive capability against Iraq is being built up, according to
American officials, who say that the American forces have already achieved a
''credible'' defense of Saudi Arabia.          1



Germany pledges $1.87 billion           16



Leftist Palestinian leaders rally Arab support for Iraq           16



Gorbachev presses Israel to join conference on Mideast           6



U.S. retreats from seeking repeal of resolution on Zionism           17



Views on the crisis: lawmakers versed in Vietnam           18



Democrats straddle a line on policy statement           27



Oil companies fear a backlash over the large profits they are likely to report
for this fiscal quarter, and they are trying to find ways to hold down those
profits.          1



Archeological research in Iraq, where the remnants of the earliest human
civilizations lie, may be severely hampered by the crisis in the region,
archeologists say.          1



AIDS is spreading through Africa to an astonishing degree. Spread mainly through
heterosexual intercourse, it is striking men and women alike, the rich and the
poor, and city as well as country dwellers.          1



What makes the two sexes so vulnerable to epidemic           15



A crackdown on township violence in South Africa was announced by the police,
after Nelson Mandela said that the Government believed sinister outsiders were
manipulating the fighting between black factions.          3



Church urges Kenya to free report on slaying           3



Soviet central economic controls should be kept in place for another year,
according to Prime Minister Nikolai I. Ryzhkov, who vowed a spirited fight to
resist plans to move to a free-market economy.          9



The President of El Salvador, Alfredo Cristiani, has moved toward the center of
the Salvadoran political spectrum, provoking a backlash from his own rightist
party that threatens his administration.          10



Nicaragua using a new currency           11



Briton who reported Army smear wins back pay           12



Poor nations get unspecified pledge of more aid           4



Deadlock threatens future of nuclear treaty           5



NATIONAL/20-33



A California environmental measure to be voted on in November appears to be
faltering after much initial support, a sign that voters may be reluctant to pay
the costs of a clean environment.          30



PAC's base their contributions less on ideological or geographic factors than on
whether the recipient sits on a Congressional committee that can help them, a
new study has found.           26



News analysis: Budget talks show philosophical conflicts           32



U.S. company eluding assault rifle import ban           31



Dixon clings to outsider image in insiders' city           26



Reporter's Notebook: Was Souter anecdote off the cuff?           32



Foreign visitors are finding delays to be very common at U.S. airports because
of a shortage of Government immigration inspectors.          20



F.A.A. orders secrecy on new bomb detectors           23



The Mississippi Delta's census count was often incomplete as the Census Bureau
ran into the same problems it faced in the inner-city neighborhoods of New York
City or Detroit: poverty, illiteracy, and suspicion.          20



Bill would again end benefits to census workers           21



 Massachusetts Journal: A new library law           20



Arts foundation awards $35,000 to six authors           33



REGIONAL/34-45



New Yorkers are asking themselves and their neighbors many questions about the
state of their lives in the city, focusing on their fears and frustrations
stirred by several chilling crimes.          1



Dinkins asks East New York's help in fighting crime           41



Man arrested during towing confrontation is released           34



Ex-sergeant's release ordered in stun-gun case           35



Officer's last words recalled at murder trial           43



Post and unions in tentative pact           45



Harlem's numerous historic sites, often ignored by historic-preservationists in
the past, are now receiving much support, and battles are brewing over the fate
of several historically significant places.           42



Parents are protesting the presence of an 11-year-old boy infected with the AIDS
virus at the Brooklyn junior high school that their children attend. The boy
recently revealed that he is infected with the virus.          34



Salvation Army is told to pay minimum wage           42



Westchester helps single mothers get off public assistance           38



Senate leader vows not to exceed Governor's spending limit           39



Teacher strikes in two New Jersey districts end           44



Obituaries

46


Leonid Tarassuk, an expert on arms and armor

Arts/Reviews          66


Music: Ensemble celebrates 10 years

Campus Life          53-55



Fashion          60-61



Life Style          56



Pastimes          66-69



Weddings          62-65


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: SUMMARY

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              311 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 16, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

HOME ENTERTAINMENT/VIDEO: AND KEEP IN MIND

SECTION: Section 2; Page 42, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 820 words


Here are some notable releases of the last few months.

ALL DOGS GO TO HEAVEN - Don Bluth's film for very young viewers ''is so
overcomplicated that it becomes difficult to follow.'' (Janet Maslin) 1989.
MGM/UA. $24.98. 1 hour, 25 minutes. Closed captioned. G. BAD INFLUENCE - As a
charming drifter who takes over the life of a Los Angeles yuppie (James Spader),
Rob Lowe helps make this ''a refreshing exercise in glossy decadence.'' (Vincent
Canby) 1990. RCA/Columbia. $89.95. Laser disk, $34.95. 1:39. CC. R. BLUE STEEL -
Jamie Lee Curtis is so appealing as a rookie cop that Kathryn Bigelow's
good-looking thriller ''holds together even when it has no reason to.'' (Maslin)
1990. MGM/UA. $89.98. LD, $24.98. 2:03. CC. R. BORN ON THE FOURTH OF JULY - Ron
Kovic returns from Vietnam a bitter paraplegic. Oliver Stone's film has
''enormous visceral power'' and is ''stunning when it is most specific.''
(Canby) 1989. MCA/Universal. $91.95. LD, $39.98. 2:25. CC. R. DRIVING MISS DAISY
- On screen, starring Jessica Tandy and Morgan Freeman, Alfred Uhry's play opens
up with a ''singularly theatrical lightness of touch.'' (Canby) 1989. Warner.
$92.95. LD, $24.98. 1:39. CC. PG.

FAMILY BUSINESS - Sean Connery, Dustin Hoffman and Matthew Broderick make up a
three-generation crime family in a film that doesn't leave the stars much to
work with. (Canby) 1989. RCA/Columbia. $89.95. LD, $34.95. 1:53. CC. R.
FLASHBACK - Dennis Hopper and Kiefer Sutherland give fine performances in an
engaging comedy that ''ends upwoozy and sort of distraught.'' (Canby) 1990.
Paramount. No price listed. LD, $34.95. 1:48. CC. R. THE HANDMAID'S TALE -
Natasha Richardson gives a perceptive portrayal of a woman whose job is to bear
children. Volker Schlondorff's adaptation of Margaret Atwood's novel has a
''clear and insidious visual scheme.'' (Maslin) 1990. HBO. $89.99. LD, $39.95.
1:49. CC. R. HARD TO KILL - As a pony-tailed Los Angeles cop out for revenge,
Steven Seagal is the ''latest inheritor of the Charles Bronson-Chuck
Norris-Bruce Lee action-film mantle.'' (Maslin) 1990. Warner. $92.95. LD,
$24.98. 1:36. CC. R. INTERNAL AFFAIRS - Richard Gere and Andy Garcia star in a
dizzying police thriller by Mike Figgis, a ''master of steamy sex appeal and
brooding, nocturnal murk.'' (Maslin) 1990. Paramount. No price listed. LD,
$34.95. 1:55. CC. R. LORD OF THE FLIES - William Golding's classic story of
mayhem among castaway schoolboys makes a spectacle for the eye but ''there is
almost nothing to keep the mind from wandering.'' (Maslin) 1990. Nelson. $89.98.
LD, $34.98. 1:30. CC. R. THE MAN IN THE GRAY FLANNEL SUIT - Gregory Peck
possesses humble, stolid valor as a New York ad man with five mouths to feed.
1956. CBS/Fox. $39.98. 2:33. No rating. THE LITTLE MERMAID - The Hans Christian
Andersen story is a marvel of skillful animation. ''The best animated Disney
film in at least 30 years.'' (Maslin) 1989. Disney. $26.99. LD, $29.99. 1:23.
CC. G. MOUNTAINS OF THE MOON - Bob Rafelson's film about the African
explorations of Sir Richard Francis Burton and John Hanning Speke is big in
technical ways, but the casting leaves the principals ''looking somewhat smaller
than life.'' (Canby) 1990. Nelson. $89.98. LD, $34.98. 1:30. CC. R. MY LEFT FOOT
- Daniel Day-Lewis won an Oscar as Christy Brown, the disabled Irish painter and
writer. ''Intelligent and beautifully acted.'' (Canby) 1989. HBO. $89.99. LD,
$34.95. 1:43. CC. R.  NUNS ON THE RUN - Two London hoods join the Missionary
Brides of Christ in a genial farce with ''something of the licentiousness of 'A
Fish Called Wanda.' '' (Canby) 1990. CBS/Fox. $89.98. 1:30. PG-13.

ROGER AND ME - Michael Moore goes looking for Roger Smith, chairman of General
Motors. ''The corporate nose has never been tweaked to such serious and
delirious effect.'' (Canby) 1989. Warner. $89.95. LD, $24.98. 1:31. CC. R.
ROSALIE GOES SHOPPING - As a woman who can't help using bad credit cards and
rubber checks, Marianne Sagebrecht is the ''shrewd, beatific center'' of Percy
Adlon's film about mercahandise-mad America. (Maslin) 1989. Vidmark. $89.95.
1:34. CC. PG.

STEEL MAGNOLIAS - Truvy's beauty shop is dressed up with a big-name cast.
''Condescending, superficial.'' (Canby) 1989. RCA/Columbia. $91.95. LD, $34.95.
1:58. CC. PG. VALMONT - Milos Forman's film falls well short of its predecessor,
''Dangerous Liaisons''; it lacks the ''arch, brittle bitchiness.'' (Maslin)
1989. Orion. $89.98. LD, $44.95. 2:17. CC. R. THE WAR OF THE ROSES - Michael
Douglas and Kathleen Turner trade smashed china and broken bones. ''A dark,
funny divorce to the death.'' (Caryn James) 1989. CBS/Fox. $89.98. LD, $39.98.
1:56. CC. R. WHERE THE HEART IS - John Boorman's film about a New York
demolition king and his pampered kids has an ''undeniable grandeur even in the
midst of its broadest lapses of sense, taste and style.'' (Maslin) 1990.
Touchstone. $89.95. LD, $29.99. 1:47. CC. R.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              312 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 16, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

In Japan, the Private Sector Plays a Role in Foreign Aid

SECTION: Section 3; Page 11, Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 352 words


To the Editor:

While America's gunboat diplomacy builds swiftly in the Middle East, Victor H.
Palmieri appropriately points out the growing influence of Japan's foreign-aid
programs (''U.S. Takes Back Seat in Third World,'' Aug. 26). Indeed, in 1987,
Japan was the largest donor of official bilateral assistance to 29 countries,
among them China, India, Indonesia, Iraq, Syria, Nigeria, Kenya and Zambia. In
its rapid rise to become the world's largest donor, Japan has received
broad-based public support and assistance and encouragement from the powerful
private sector, including Keidanren, the Japan Federation of Economic
Organizations. This is in contrast to the aid fatigue and disillusionment that
grip many wealthy nations of the West.

The public-private cooperation in development aid and direct investment was
clearly evident at the beginning of the year when Prime Minister Toshiki Kaifu,
visiting Poland and Hungary, announced a $1 billion aid program for the two
countries. The announcement was seconded by the Suzuki and Daihatsu Motor
Company with plans for new automobile plants in the region. In Southeast Asia,
Thailand has been a principal recipient of Japanese official assistance for 20
years. In 1988, this came to $360 million, which was dwarfed the following year
by direct private investments from Japan of $3.5 billion. Such infusions have
made Thailand the world's fastest-growing economy in 1988 and 1989. ''Japan
Inc.'' is also moving strongly into Vietnam, while Washington maintains its
moribund policy.

Chile - another booming economy - received $123 million in Japanese investments
in 1988, considerably more than the total for the prior 10 years. The newly
elected President of Peru, Alberto Fujimori, is also seeking aid and investments
from his ancestral homeland. These developments are inexorably turning the yen
into an international coin of the realm; meanwhile, the United States remains
hamstrung by its massive budgetary deficits.
LESLIE S. HIRAOKA
Union, N.J., Aug. 30

The writer is a professor of management science at Kean College of New Jersey.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              313 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 16, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

The Nation;
In Politics, Will 1990 Be a New Beginning?

BYLINE: By MICHAEL ORESKES

SECTION: Section 4; Page 4, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1462 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


The gulf crisis has become a lens through which Americans are focusing their
ideas about a host of issues, foreign and domestic, military and economic,
political and cultural. As the campaigns blah, blah, It has created oportunites
for Republicans to revive themes and issues that had flagged, so to speak, but
it also is bringing to vivid life the economic nationalism that some Democrats
see as the last best hope for their party.

A nagging worry about foreign economic competition has been focused into an
anger that the United States is being taken advantage of in the gulf by its
trading partners and allies, particularly Japan. The abstract idea of an empire
overextended is now a picture of 100,000 sons and daughters standing on the
desert with a handful of allied Arab soldiers.

This has moved a new phrase, burden sharing, to the top of the debate about
foreign alliances and military spending. America has even accepted -indeed,
solicited - payment for its armies for the first time since the 18th century.

But the crystalizing of these anxieties coincides with a resurgence of a macho
patriotism - and just when the Republicans seemed to have run out the string on
their symbolic use of the flag. The refrain of a song now popular on radio in
Alabama ends thusly: ''we'll blow Baghdad off the map.''

In the very short run, the gulf intervention has clearly rescued President Bush
and his party from public discontent over the economy and other domestic ills.
But there may be long-run political benefits, too. The loss of the Soviet Union
as an adversary took a weapon from the Republican political arsenal. In 1988,
President Bush ran commercials saying he was the best man to look Mikhail S.
Gorbachev in the eye and not blink. That is gone as a campaign theme. The public
had only modest interest in last weekend's quickie summit meeting, according to
polling by the Times-Mirror Company. But Americans remain riveted by the gulf
crisis, the polls said. In 1992, will Mr. Bush's commercials say he is the best
man to look Saddam Hussein in the eye?

''The political stakes are already enormous,'' Kevin Phillips, the political
analyst, writes in the latest edition of his newsletter, The American Political
Report. Indeed, the political effects of the intervention are so far-reaching,
Mr. Phillips adds, that it could even produce a debate over whether politics was
Mr. Bush's motivation.

''It's unclear whether there will ever be a debate over motivation,'' he
continued. ''However, by way of citing a precedent that there could be, we'd
remind that Franklin D. Roosevelt's economic, diplomatic and political
motivations were under considerable suspicion in 1941-42, and if World War II
had gone badly for the U.S., conservative Republicans would have captured
Congress and investigated F.D.R. up one side and down the other.''

President Bush recognized the crucial moment when he went before Congress last
week to speak about the Gulf crisis and its relationship to other issues, most
notably the budget.

Americans overwhelmingly support Mr. Bush, but they remain uneasy about an
intervention in which American blood is traded for Kuwaiti oil. So Mr. Bush went
to great lengths to explain that the mission he had once said was to protect the
American way of life was in fact to protect ideals and principles of
international order.

Made to Order

Oil seemed an afterthought in the Tuesday night speech, mentioned in just one
paragraph. But Mr. Bush went on for pages on the theme that America and its
allies were at the birth of a new world order where tyranny and aggression were
held in check by international cooperation.

Out on the campaign trail the gulf crisis has frozen out other issues. Oil
companies have replaced savings and loans as the organizations a politician
least wants to be linked to. But the intervention itself is not really a subject
for debate, since close to 80 percent of the country supports it.

Just as Communism collapsed without sending more than a ripple through the
campaign dialogue of 1988 and 1989, ''the new world order'' seems to be taking
shape, too, without much dialogue between candidates and voters.

But there are glimmers of a debate about how Americans would define success in
the Persian Gulf. If Iraq is driven from Kuwait but the United States has to pay
most of the bill, will Americans view this as success or failure? If Mr. Bush's
new world order is achieved but the peace dividend is spent, will there be
tickertape parades?

Those who fail to know history are doomed to repeat it, so they say. But those
who do know history seem doomed to an endless search to fit current circumstance
to historical precedent.

Increasingly, this seems to apply to political analysts' efforts to understand
the political impact of the Persian Gulf intervention, which has helped turn
this midterm campaign season into a volatile and complicated one.

Will 1990 be like 1958? That was when President Eisenhower soared in the polls
after sending troops to Lebanon, only to watch as a recession pushed the economy
to the forefront by Election Day and Republicans took a drubbing. Or will 1990
be more like 1962? That was when Democrats seemed headed for trouble in midterm
elections, until the Cuban missile crisis sent President Kennedy's standing
soaring and boosted Democrats just before Election Day.

The effort to divine the balance between foreign and domestic concerns is surely
relevant in this year of voter discontents. But the past may be poor prologue.
It may turn out that this year is one that people look back on later and say, oh
yes, that began taking shape in 1990.

FALL LINEUPS rrThe end of primary season is in sight. Last week, 10 states and
the District of Columbia chose the finalists for their November elections,
leaving only three more to vote. Here are some of Tuesday's results.

District of Columbia

The Democratic voters of the capital, already assured that their Mayor would not
return, chose the only candidate for his job who spoke ill of him. The winner,
Sharon Pratt Dixon, rose from last place among the five Democrats with a
campaign that promised to rid the District of the organization that Marion Barry
built. Even Mayor Barry volunteered, in a television interview, ''certainly, my
case has been an example of what some people are very tired of.''

In November, Ms. Dixon, a lawyer, will run against Maurice T. Turner Jr., former
police chief and recent convert to the Republican Party. He ran unopposed. About
90 percent of District voters are Democrats.

Maryland

The popular Gov. William Donald Schaefer, a Democrat, was easily renominated,
and the hawkish Representative Roy P. Dyson, who had suffered the embarrassing
disclosure that he was a conscientious objector during the Vietnam war, managed
to hold on to the Democratic nomination. Otherwise, Maryland voters were not
especially forgiving. They turned out the Montgomery County Executive as well as
four state legislators who had opposed abortion rights.

Representative Dyson is expecting a tough campaign; the Republican candidate,
Wayne T. Gilchrest, nearly defeated him two years ago. Governor Schaefer will
face William S. Shepard, a retired foreign service officer who won the
Republican nomination in a close race.

Connecticut

United States Representative Bruce A. Morrison, a former legal-aid lawyer from
New Haven, was the Democrats' lopsided choice for governor, and the Republican
candidate for that job, Representative John G. Rowland, was unopposed. But each
has a tougher opponent in former United States Senator Lowell P. Weicker Jr.,
who is running as an independent in the three-way gubernatorial race.

Arizona

Evan Mecham, the former car dealer who was Governor for 15 months before his
impeachment and conviction in 1988, failed to make a comeback (though he got one
in four votes) on the Republican ticket. The winner was J. Fife Symington, a
developer. The Democratic nomination went to Terry Goddard, who resigned as
Mayor of Phoenix to run.

Minnesota

Gov. Rudy Perpich's reputation for eccentricity and his opposition to abortion
were the big issues, but he survived with 56 percent of the vote. The Governor,
a Democrat, was trailing in polls earlier this year and suffered heavy campaign
attacks from Mike Hatch, a former state Commerce Commissioner and a supporter of
abortion rights. (Mr. Perpich took to reading aloud on television from
out-of-state magazines that described Minnesota as a nice place to live.)
Republicans chose Jon Grunseth, a conservative businessman and an abortion
opponent.

In the Minnesota Senate race, the Republican incumbent, Rudy Boschwitz, will
face Paul Wellstone, a political science professor.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Sharon Pratt Dixon (center) after winning the Democratic
mayoral primary in Washington. (Jose R. Lopez/The New York Times); J. Fife
Symington with his wife, Ann, after winning the Republican gubernatorial primary
in Arizona last week. (Associated Press)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              314 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 16, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Vietnam Is Not the Enemy

SECTION: Section 4; Page 22, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 446 words


You thought it was 1990, and the enemy was Iraq. No. For some policy makers in
the Bush Administration it remains 1975, and the enemy remains Vietnam. There's
no other plausible explanation for the Administration's self-defeating decision
to extend the U.S. economic embargo against Vietnam for one more year under the
Trading With the Enemy Act of 1917.

The embargo prevents Americans from most trading with Vietnam or with Vietnamese
nationals abroad. American companies cannot organize tours to Vietnam, and
individual American travelers cannot use credit cards.

There are limited exceptions for humanitarian activities and gift packages to
individual Vietnamese. But U.S. phone companies can't provide service to
Vietnam, a cruel hardship for Vietnamese here who want to stay in touch with
family members.

The Vietnam War is over. The cold war is over. Washington and Hanoi have begun
cooperating productively in efforts to achieve a political settlement in
Cambodia. Progress is also being made on humanitarian issues, from the orderly
departure of Vietnamese refugees to the search for remains or traces of American
soldiers missing in action. Meanwhile, Vietnam is pursuing a serious program of
market-oriented economic reforms. Businessmen from anti-Communist bastions like
Taiwan and Singapore are moving aggressively to profit from Hanoi's liberal
foreign investment code. American business organizations are pressing for an
early end to the U.S. embargo, which punishes them at least as much as it
punishes Vietnam.

U.S. restrictions have helped keep Vietnam one of the world's poorest countries,
feeding the mass exodus of refugees toward Hong Kong and the countries of
Southeast Asia. The pressure is sure to grow in the coming months as Soviet aid
is scheduled to be cut back drastically. Some argue that the pressure could
spark a revolt against Communist rule. More likely, increased economic contacts
with the West would increase pressure for democratic political reform.

The Bush Administration made just that argument last spring when it extended
China's trade privileges in the face of Beijing's post-Tiananmen hard line. The
same logic applies even more clearly to Vietnam, which is moving toward reform.

Congress has no say over the Administration's action, which came by executive
order. But Representative Howard Berman of California, recognizing that
person-to-person contacts can advance democratic values far more efficiently
than embargoes, has introduced a bill that would ease U.S. travel restrictions
for countries where Americans face no special dangers. Renewal of the embargo
against Vietnam shows how badly such reform is needed.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: EDITORIAL

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              315 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 16, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Inside The Arsenals

BYLINE: By John H. Cushman Jr.; John H. Cushman Jr. is a correspondent in the
Washington bureau of The New York Times.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 52, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 3370 words


For weeks, an endless military caravan has disgorged metal and explosives onto
the sands of Saudi Arabia. No sooner did the American buildup begin than
Pentagon commanders started to draw up the so-called order of battle - an
ever-shifting account of the forces arrayed on each side. They calibrated the
speed, reach, accuracy and deadliness of weapons, and worked on a strategy to
take advantage of their strengths and Iraq's presumed weaknesses.

The mustering of such immense armies belies the notion that large-scale
mechanized warfare vanished with the cold war. Since the Vietnam War, American
technology has, in fact, produced an awesome arsenal: a laser-guided artillery
round that costs $30,000 a shot, planes virtually invisible to radar and mobile
computerized boxes that belch rockets. The most potent ones are untested in
combat, but they share one thing: almost incomprehensible destructive power. Yet
with all their impressive infrared optics, digital computers and laser range
finders, they are not invulnerable to desert heat or human error.

For its part, Iraq is deep in tanks, artillery, armored personnel carriers,
missiles and a muscular modern air force that backs up the country's million
fighting men.

Saddam Hussein spent oil earnings and borrowed heavily to buy weapons from
countries as diverse as the Soviet Union, China, France, Brazil, South Africa
and Austria. Some weapons even originated in the United States. Some were
delivered by way of Saudi Arabia, and many, paradoxically, were financed by
Kuwait.

Even though they blitzed defenseless Kuwait in a matter of hours, the Iraqi
forces are actually tailored for a prolonged war. The 10-year war against Iran
was a war of attrition: of artillery barrages and haphazard missile strikes
against distant civilian targets. The United States force now assembled in the
Middle East, in contrast, prefers rapid, fierce fighting. Protracted standoffs
are not part of the new American military thinking.

American strategy is based on supremacy in the air. Early in the buildup in the
Persian Gulf, the United States and its allies achieved numerical superiority:
hundreds of fighters and bombers flew into the region, and five aircraft
carriers - four American and one French - were deployed in surrounding waters.
In all, the allies had more than 700 warplanes available early this month.

But the Iraqi Air Force is formidable. According to Periscope, a data base of
the United States Naval Institute, Saddam Hussein's forces in the sky depend on
100 Mirage jets from France, 30 Hunter fighters of British origin and about 400
Soviet planes. Most of the Soviet craft are MIG's, many of them modern, highly
capable fighting machines. Iraq also has perhaps 120 Chinese J-6 and J-7 jets,
which are less impressive. The latest reported addition is a small number of
Soviet Fencer long-range bombers.

The Mirage, when armed with French Exocets and other air-to-ground weapons, is
well suited for attacks on ships and other large targets, like oil refineries.
In 1987 an Iraqi Mirage launched two Exocet missiles at the Stark, an American
frigate on patrol in the Persian Gulf to protect oil tankers. The Stark,
unprepared for the attack, was gutted, and 37 crew members died. The Iraqis
insisted the strike was an accident.

The overwhelming air power now facing Hussein's forces is built around Awacs -
the E-3 Airborne Warning and Control System. Using modified Boeing 707's, the
system's aircraft carry a saucerlike radar above the fuselage and communications
devices that link the whole field of battle into a single picture. The Awacs can
detect low-flying targets 230 miles away and can see higher-flying airplanes at
even greater distances.

Five American and five Saudi Awacs are in the region now. So are several
Hawkeyes, similar craft that take off from aircraft carriers.

According to Aviation Week and Space Technology, which quoted unnamed Israeli
analysts, French electronics could be loaded onto a Soviet transport plane, the
Il-76, to do the same job as an Awacs. But experts doubt the Iraqis have enough
of the planes, or a proficient enough air force, to make good use of the
technology.

The unarmed American and Saudi Awacs are defended by F-15 Eagles, which are
equipped with missiles as well as jammers and other protective devices. Perhaps
200 American and Saudi F-15's are based in Saudi Arabia; they are bolstered by
similar British and French aircraft. A few dozen Kuwaiti jets also escaped to
Saudi Arabia when Iraq attacked.

Americans also fly the F-16, which, like the latest models of the F-15, can be
equipped for nighttime raids on ground targets, and the AV-8B Harrier, a Marine
Corps jump jet that can take off vertically and hover like a helicopter.

The FA-18 Hornet, flown by the Marines from airstrips in Bahrain and by the Navy
from aircraft carriers, illustrates the flexibility the military has in arming
planes. The Hornets have nine external weapon stations, which can carry
air-to-air and ground-attack missiles as well as various bombs, including
laser-guided ones.

The Navy's F-14 Tomcats also fly from the aircraft carriers. Pairs of these
powerful planes, stationed on a carrier just outside the Strait of Hormuz,
circle near Kuwaiti waters day and night. Refueling in midair, they are the
first line of defense for allied warships.

In dogfights, the gutsy pilot swooping down on his adversary with machine guns
blazing is a relic of wars past. Nowadays the strength of an American fighter
jet is in its missiles, principally the Sparrow and the Sidewinder.

Like many air-to-air missiles, the Sidewinder is guided by infrared sensors that
home in on heat signals from a jet's engines. Unlike most missiles, which have
to be positioned behind an enemy jet to detect the heat signals, the latest
Sidewinders can attack from all angles, including head-on. Gone too are the days
when a pilot caught a glimpse, however fleeting, of his opponent. The
Sidewinder's range is more than 10 miles. The Sparrow, guided by radar instead
of infrared sensors, has a range of more than 30 miles and can also attack from
any angle.

The Americans' most potent missile for combat in the air, however, may be the
Phoenix, carried by Navy F-14's. Its range is up to 127 miles, and it flies at
five times the speed of sound. The F-14, reportedly able to track 24 targets at
once, can launch six of the missiles, which use their own radar to hit targets.

But the Phoenix has never been used in combat, and it was plagued by problems
during tests. At one time hundreds of them were stockpiled while the Navy looked
for a fuse to detonate the warhead at the right moment. That problem was
reportedly fixed in 1988.

Iraq has several Soviet-made air-to-air missiles, some guided by their own radar
but none with the Phoenix's range. Iraq also has the French-built R.530
air-to-air missile, which has a relatively short range.

Air Force F-111's, some based in Saudi Arabia, and the A-6, flying from land
bases and naval aircraft carriers, are the most effective planes for deep
strikes - against targets like runways, control towers, and fuel and arms
depots. They can drop anything from immense cratering bombs to cluster bombs
full of grenades or small mines.

Simultaneously, the F-4 Wild Weasel could destroy enemy air defense systems
outright, launching Shrike and Harm missiles, which are drawn to their targets
by the very signals ground radar emits as it searches for attacking planes. The
American forces also have powerful electronic jammers on many airplanes that can
confuse or blind enemy radar.

Lumbering B-52's have been stationed within striking distance of Iraq. So have
about 20 Stealth fighters, the Air Force's boxy, swallow-tailed machine made of
composite materials that elude radar. Like its larger cousin, the batlike
Stealth bomber, which is not yet ready for combat, the little fighter is
intended to catch enemy defenses off guard.

Saddam Hussein's forces are mightiest on the ground. He is estimated to have a
million men under arms and 5,500 tanks in his armored divisions.

Tanks are intimidating, but in modern armies they are married to infantry
(mostly riding in vehicles), artillery, helicopters and rockets - an alliance of
frighteningly destructive firepower.

The Iraqis are believed to have about 500 T-72's, the most potent Soviet tank,
and an indeterminate number of impressive British-built Chieftains. They may
have only 30, as the Naval Institute Data Base has reported, or they may have
captured hundreds of the tanks from Iran, according to Jane's Armor and
Artillery. But many Iraqi tanks - while still deadly - are nearing obsolescence.
For example, Iraq has 1,000 Soviet T-62 tanks, which, Jane's says, have a 50-50
chance of hitting targets from 1,500 meters, if the tanks stop moving before
they shoot. Iraq is also equipped with thousands of even less effective tanks,
from the Soviet Union and China.

The best American tank, the M1 Abrams, has unparalleled speed, armor, accuracy
and range, but it hasn't proved itself in combat. Weighing more than 50 tons and
propelled by a powerful gas-turbine engine, the tank is best suited for leading
an assault and has substantial advantages over any Iraqi armor. It can shoot on
the move and fire every few seconds. Aiming it is no more difficult than
operating a video game, and it can be as deadly at night as in daytime. The
newest M1 can shoot a 53-pound projectile two miles - a distinct improvement
over previous models. Because of their weight, the tanks had to be sent by ship,
so the first M1's didn't arrive in Saudi Arabia until the end of August.

The first American tank on the scene, flown in with the 82d Airborne Division,
was the relatively light Sheridan. With its gun-fired Shillelagh missile, the
Sheridan is an old tank that did not perform well in Vietnam.

The Marine Corps arrived later with M60 tanks, which, supported by guns,
helicopters, planes, antitank weapons and some 40,000 troops, quickly formed the
main blocking force south of the Saudi-Kuwait border.

The Saudis themselves have 300 French-built tanks as well as older American
machines that are capable but not overwhelmingly proficient.

The tanks' prowess has inspired the tank killers.

The most notable American antitank weapon, from the infantry's perspective, is
the TOW - short for tube-launched, optically tracked, wire-guided missile. The
missile is launched from a tube carried by a soldier or set up on a vehicle. The
weapon's main risk is that the soldier firing it can be threatened by the target
tank. The danger is reduced when the TOW is launched from its maximum range of
over two miles, out of the reach of most, but not all, tanks. Experts say the
TOW's optics have trouble penetrating the shimmering glare of the desert,
reducing its effective range.

Some newer tanks have thickened armor, and others have sheets of explosives on
the outside to deflect warheads. In response, the latest TOW has not only a more
powerful warhead but also a nose probe that detonates an initial burst to
trigger these tanks' defenses before the main round explodes.

Iraq has similar antitank weapons. Some are Soviet-made, but others, like the
HOT and the Milan, were made by Western European consortiums.

But the most powerful antitank weapons are fired from great distances, and here
the Americans have a decided advantage. Most of the Cobra and Apache helicopter
gunships are equipped with Hellfire missiles or TOW missiles similar to the ones
used by ground troops. The Hellfire, a laser-guided antitank weapon, and the
bigger Maverick antitank missile, guided by lasers or aimed by cameras in its
nose, can also be launched by A-10 aircraft, which support ground troops by
shooting up tanks. Despite the A-10's heavy armor, it is a daring pilot who
flies into the defenses surrounding enemy columns. Hellfires and Mavericks can
be launched from several miles away.

The laser-guided Copperhead is another formidable addition to the artillery. It
is shot from a gun but boosted like a missile and steered with fins. Within 10
miles, it can be guided to land smack on top of a tank. A spotter, possibly an
infantryman in his dugout but preferably one protected in an armored vehicle,
aims a laser beam at a target from a relatively safe distance, and a sensor on
the Copperhead's nose follows the reflection. The laser can also be aimed from a
helicopter or plane. Laser weapons are particularly suited to the barren desert.
But coordinating the Copperhead's fire is an art that requires considerable
practice, and with rounds costing $30,000 each, this has been hard to obtain.

Of all the Iraqi weapons, chemical agents and long-range ground-to-ground
missiles have caused the most concern. Both figured in the war with Iran. But
both have drawbacks in the standoff against the forces now fielded against them
in the Middle East.

Iraq's use of poison gas would risk massive retaliation, and the American forces
are protected by gas masks and protective garments. As for the long-range
missiles, mostly Soviet Scuds that can be altered to fly many hundreds of miles,
they are effective against cities and sprawling oil installations,but they are
not accurate enough to destroy particular military targets.

For exposed troops at the front lines, Iraq's ordinary big cannons, not its
missiles or chemicals, are the most terrifying weapons. Howitzers and other
field artillery can strike from many miles away, without warning and with
shattering force. Iraq has far more of the big guns than the assembled forces in
Saudi Arabia.

The United States has the big M198 artillery, whose range varies from 10 to 20
miles. It can not only shoot conventional high explosives, which can demolish
entrenched positions, but also scatter mines and other munitions useful against
lightly armored trucks and infantry.

Experts estimate that Iraq has 100 South African G-5 howitzers, considered the
best such guns in the world. They are similar to the M198 and accurate at almost
20 miles or more. Iraq also has hundreds of big Austrian-made howitzers, which
fire standard NATO ammunition. These guns, and thousands of smaller artillery,
massacred waves of Iranian troops in the 1980's.

On both sides, some of the heaviest guns are mobile: known as self-propelled
artillery because the howitzers don't have to be towed into position, the
immensely tracked vehicles resemble tanks with elongated guns.

Saddam Hussein has Saudi Arabia to thank in part for his strong arsenal of
mobile howitzers. In 1982, Iraq, which had just started its war on Iran, ordered
some $600 million worth of the weapons from France, according to Jane's Armor
and Artillery. The Saudis already had a number of the guns, and, fearful of
Iranian fundamentalists, handed them over to Iraq while it waited for its order
to be filled.

To counter the Iraqi howitzers, the United States Army has its own powerful
mobile weapon: the Multiple Launch Rocket System, which is carried around on the
chassis of a Bradley troop carrier. The gun holds two boxes, each holding six
rockets. The 12 rounds can be fired singly, or in one rippling salvo that lands
on a broad swath of territory.

The rocket system's warheads are not sophisticated enough to hit individual
tanks with precision, but they can destroy enemy artillery batteries, decimate
unprotected troops and wipe out concentrations of lightly armored vehicles. A
one-minute salvo can strew nearly 8,000 bomblets, each with the power of a hand
grenade, across a 60-acre area. The rocket's range is said to be 20 miles,
somewhat farther than that of most artillery. It has never been tested in
combat.

Iraq also has rocket launchers, perhaps 200 of them. Many are the Brazilian
Astros, also found in the Saudi arsenal, which can fire a warhead more than 30
miles, even farther than the American rocket system.

Once fired, Iraq's big guns are vulnerable to high-tech response. The Firefinder
radar, which performed well during the American presence in Lebanon in 1983,
tracks the trajectory of incoming artillery rounds and instantly pinpoints the
guns' location. Computers can then direct precise return fire, even before the
enemy's first round hits the ground.

The Americans have various options to protect them from sky attack. Soldiers on
the ground have the shoulder-fired Stinger and the mobile Chaparral and Hawk
missiles. In the war in Afghanistan, the American supported rebels used the
Stinger to deadly effect against Soviet jets and helicopters, driving aircraft
high into the sky. Mounted on vehicles, the Chaparral can also fend off
helicopters. The Hawk is for high-flying jets.

More sophisticated still is the Patriot antiaircraft missile. The missile, never
used in combat, is fired from a truck and has a range of well over 60 miles.
United States Army officers claim it can outmaneuver any airplane as it homes in
for the kill at three times the speed of sound.

The Patriot is even believed able to shoot down ballistic missiles like the
Iraqi Scud and al-Husayn, which so intimidated the Iranians.

Though they lack such advanced apparatus, the Iraqis are also equipped to resist
attack from the air. According to the International Institute for Strategic
Studies in London, they have 60 Roland missile launchers, built by German and
French companies. With a range of 10 miles, they are designed to fend off
low-flying aircraft or helicopters like the Apache and Cobra gunships. The
Rolands are mobile and travel with the troops, tanks and artillery. Hussein's
forces can also deploy various Soviet antiaircraft weapons, including several
types of missiles and two air-defense guns, which airmen respect for the barrage
of bullets that spew from multiple barrels.

During the Iran-Iraq war in the 1980's, when it escorted oil tankers through the
Persian Gulf, the United States Navy operated virtually independently of the
Army and Air Force. Now it finds itself in a supporting role.

The main purpose of the current naval buildup is to add to air forces. With four
well-defended aircraft carriers in the region, the Navy has added at least 150
armed jets, including the important F-14's.

Most of the naval armada is intended to support and protect the aircraft
carriers or to enforce the United Nations economic sanctions against Iraq. The
first American shots fired in the confrontation came from the U.S.S. Reid, which
fired a warning volley across the bow of an Iraqi tanker last month in an
attempt to enforce the embargo. Frigates and guided-missile destroyers, the
''small boys'' of the Navy fleet, are designed to protect friendly ships against
surprise attacks. The speedy, maneuverable ships carry helicopters and are armed
with guns and missiles, meant mainly to defend the fleet against air attack.
About a dozen American frigates and destroyers are in the Red Sea, the Persian
Gulf or nearby waters at any one time.

If Navy ships came under attack, they could employ the Aegis guided-missile
cruiser, a kind of seaborne Awacs. The Aegis has a mammoth four-faced antenna,
and long-range missiles and guns to shoot down enemy missiles and planes.

Three Aegis cruisers (along with less capable American cruisers) are in the
Middle East with various aircraft carriers. Two Aegis ships, the Antietam and
the Philippine Sea, also have offensive ability, carrying dozens of Tomahawk
cruise missiles. The cruisers can sail north in the gulf, bringing the missiles
in range of many targets on Iraqi soil. The conventionally armed Tomahawk packs
a very powerful warhead. It has demonstrated in tests that it can land precisely
on target after a flight of more than 400 miles, and its maximum range is even
greater.

The Navy multiplied its firepower in the gulf on Aug. 24, when it moved the
battleship Wisconsin through the Strait of Hormuz. Brought out of mothballs and
modernized, the vessel still carries its thick armor plating from World War II
and is considered invulnerable to conventional missiles and guns. Its 16-inch
guns can lob shells able to pummel targets more than 20 miles away. And its
cruise missiles could reach across the length and breadth of Iraq.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Launchers for the Patriot antiaircraft missile, left, in Saudi
Arabia. The Patriot flies at three times the speed of sound. (Dennis Brack/Time
Magazine); The Navy's F-14 Tomcat, right, loaded with six Phoenix air-to-air
missiles. The Phoenix can attack targets more than 125 miles away. (George
Hall/Chech Six); The Multiple Launch Rocket System, above, can fire its rockets
one by one or in a single burst that strews bombs over a 60-acre area. (Hans
Halberstadt/Arms Communications); The Roland antiaircraft missile, left, combats
low-flying jets or helicopter gunships like the U.S. Apache and Cobra.
(Euromissil); The Western European-made Milan, right, an antitank weapon, fires
a wire-guided rocket from the ground or a vehicle. (Defence Magazine);
French-made Mirage jets, right,

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              316 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 16, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

BEST SELLERS: September 16, 1990

SECTION: Section 7; Page 36, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1328 words




$

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Fiction

 1          1   FOUR PAST MIDNIGHT, by Stephen King. (Viking, $22.95.) Four
                novellas about horror and terror in the late-night hours.

 2      1   4   MEMORIES OF MIDNIGHT, by Sidney Sheldon. (Morrow, $21.95.) The
                destiny of an American woman is haunted by a vengeful Greek
                tycoon.

 3      2  14   THE BURDEN OF PROOF, by Scott Turow. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux,
                $22.95.) An attorney tries to unravel the mystery of his wife's
                death while defending his wheeler-dealer brother-in-law.

 4      3   6   THE WOMEN IN HIS LIFE, by Barbara Taylor Bradford. (Random
                House, $21.95.) The rise of a billionaire tycoon, from Nazi
                Berlin to London and New York, and his relationships with five
                women.

 5      4  13   MESSAGE FROM NAM, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $21.95.) A
                woman journalist's coming of age in the 1960's and 70's.

 6      5  19   THE STAND, by Stephen King. (Doubleday, $24.95.) Doomsday
                brings horrors to America; the uncut version of a novel first
                published in 1978.

 7      6  30   OH, THE PLACES YOU'LL GO! by Dr. Seuss. (Random House, $12.95.)
                The problems of finding your way through life; in verse and
                pictures.

 8      7  22   SEPTEMBER, by Rosamunde Pilcher. (Dunne/St. Martin's, $22.95.)
                Guests from many parts of the world at a get-together in a
                small Scottish town.

 9 *        1   SPY SINKER, by Len Deighton. (Bessie/HarperCollins, $21.95.)
                The adventures of a woman torn between love for her family and
                her duties as a spy for British intelligence in East Germany.

10          1   PRIME DIRECTIVE, by Judith and Garfield Reeves-Stevens.
                (Pocket, $18.95.) The former crew members of ''Star Trek'' 's
                Enterprise on a mission to discover why their careers were
                ruined.

11      9   6   GET SHORTY, by Elmore Leonard. (Delacorte, $18.95.) A Miami
                crook goes to Hollywood, where he finds that his life is the
                stuff of which motion pictures are made.

12      8  11   COYOTE WAITS, by Tony Hillerman. (HarperCollins, $19.95.) The
                murder of a Navajo tribal policeman involves an ancient
                artifact.

13     10   4   SEVENTH HEAVEN, by Alice Hoffman. (Putnam, $19.95.) A divorced
                woman with children creates waves in a stuffy suburban town in
                the 1950's.

14          1   A BED BY THE WINDOW, by M. Scott Peck. (Bantam, $18.95.) A
                detective probes the murder of a young paralytic in a
                Midwestern nursing home.

15          1   THE ROWAN, by Anne McCaffrey. (Ace/Putnam, $19.95.) The coming
                of age of a young woman in a universe governed by telepathy.

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Nonfiction

 1      6   2   DARKNESS VISIBLE, by William Styron. (Random House, $15.95.)
                The novelist's memoir of a period of severe depression.

 2          1   BOOTLEGGER'S BOY, by Barry Switzer with Bud Shrake. (Morrow,
                $19.95.) The autobiography of the former football coach at the
                University of Oklahoma.

 3      9   4   TOM LANDRY, by Tom Landry with Gregg Lewis.
                (Zondervan/HarperCollins, $18.95.) The autobiography of the
                former coach of the Dallas Cowboys.

 4      2   7   YOU JUST DON'T UNDERSTAND, by Deborah Tannen. (Morrow, $18.95.)
                The different languages men and women speak.

 5      5   6   EVERY SPY A PRINCE, by Dan Raviv and Yossi Melman.
                (Jaffe/Houghton Mifflin, $24.95.) A history of the Israeli
                intelligence community.

 6      4  23   MEN AT WORK, by George F. Will. (Macmillan, $19.95.) The
                political pundit and baseball buff describes the craft of the
                game.

 7      3   7   THE POLITICS OF RICH AND POOR, by Kevin Phillips. (Random
                House, $19.95.) How the rich got richer during the 1980's and
                what may lie ahead for American society.

 8 *    8  34   BARBARIANS AT THE GATE, by Bryan Burrough and John Helyar.
                (HarperCollins, $22.95.) The 1988 battle for control of RJR
                Nabisco.

 9      7  16   DAVE BARRY TURNS 40, by Dave Barry. (Crown, $16.95.) Thoughts
                about the crises of middle age from the syndicated humorist.

10 *    1   3   TRUMP: Surviving at the Top, by Donald J. Trump with Charles
                Leerhsen. (Random House, $21.95.) The New York entrepreneur
                reflects on his recent experiences.

11     13  34   MEGATRENDS 2000, by John Naisbitt and Patricia Aburdene.
                (Morrow, $21.95.) Prognostications for the next decade.

12     12   5   INSIDE JOB, by Stephen Pizzo, Mary Fricker and Paul Muolo.
                (McGraw-Hill, $19.95.) How America's savings and loans were
                looted of billions of dollars.

13     10   7   A NATURAL HISTORY OF THE SENSES, by Diane Ackerman. (Random
                House, $19.95.) How our ability to taste, touch, smell, hear
                and see affects our lives.

14     11  15   DON'T SHOOT, IT'S ONLY ME, by Bob Hope with Melville Shavelson.
                (Putnam, $19.95.) The comedian reminisces about his career.

15     15   2   HIT MEN, by Fredric Dannen. (Times Books/Random House, $19.95.)
                The evolution of the modern pop-music record industry.

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous

 1      1   9   HOMECOMING, by John Bradshaw. (Bantam, $18.95.) How to find the
                child you once were that lives within you and use it to deal
                with today's problems.

 2      2  83   WEALTH WITHOUT RISK, by Charles J. Givens. (Simon & Schuster,
                $19.95.) A Florida entrepreneur's financial advice.

 3      3  191  WEBSTER'S NINTH NEW COLLEGIATE DICTIONARY. (Merriam-Webster,
                $16.95.) A standard reference work, revised and updated.

 4      5  30   WEBSTER'S NEW WORLD DICTIONARY. (Prentice Hall/Simon &
                Schuster, $17.95.) The Third College Edition of a standard
                work, revised in 1988.

 5      4  40   THE GREAT WALDO SEARCH, by Martin Handford. (Little, Brown,
                $10.95.) An illustrated book of games.


These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,000
bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 28,000 other
retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets. The figures are
statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United
States.

*An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect
the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of
the book above.

AND BEAR IN MIND
 (Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)

HOCUS POCUS, by Kurt Vonnegut. (Putnam, $21.95.) Mr. Vonnegut's most topical,
realistic novel to date presents the first-person narrative of Eugene Debs
Hartke, a Vietnam veteran who loses a teaching job for being too pessimistic and
finds another at a state prison run for profit by a Japanese corporation.

EAST IS EAST, by T. Coraghessan Boyle. (Viking, $19.95.) An absorbing tragedy,
full of laughter to the end, about a young Japanese seaman, half American, who
jumps ship and winds up leading a life of unintentional crime in the United
States.

BODY, by Harry Crews. (Poseidon, $18.95.) Muscle, nerve, fervor and suspense are
amply displayed (so is skin) as Mr. Crews's hungry heroine campaigns to win a
major bodybuilding contest.

DANGEROUS CAPABILITIES: Paul Nitze and the Cold War, by David Callahan. (Edward
Burlingame/HarperCollins, $24.95.) An industriously researched life of Mr. Nitze
as the ultimate insider's insider, a systematic international pessimist who
served under six Presidents, starting with Franklin D. Roosevelt.

OTHER WOMEN'S CHILDREN, by Perri Klass. (Random House, $19.95.) Dr. Amelia
Stern, the protagonist of Dr. Klass's fine novel, struggles profoundly and
plausibly to balance her duties as a pediatrician and as a wife and mother.

BORIS PASTERNAK: A Literary Biography. Volume One: 1890-1928, by Christopher
Barnes. (Cambridge University, $69.50.) A painstakingly researched, elegantly
produced book that renders the full texture of Pasternak's insecure, displaced
existence.

AFRICAN CANVAS: The Art of West African Women, by Margaret Courtney-Clarke.
(Rizzoli, $60.) A stunning photographic study that celebrates the timeless but
vulnerable arts of everyday.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: LIST

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              317 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 16, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Easing Interest for Called Up Reservists

BYLINE: By IVER PETERSON

SECTION: Section 10; Page 5, Column 2; Real Estate Desk

LENGTH: 788 words


Armed Forces reservists who are called to trade their split level in suburbia
for a tent in Saudi Arabia can take some comfort, at least, from a World War II
law that reduces their mortgage interest rate to 6 percent and protects them and
their families from mortgage foreclosure while they are on active duty.

The Soldier's and Sailor's Civil Relief Act of 1940 also puts the 6 percent cap
on car payments, credit card balances and other installment debt, and allows the
servicemen to break rental leases without penalty.

On Wednesday, the House Veterans Affairs Committee heard Pentagon officials
testify that the act should be expanded, particularly a section barring
evictions of active-duty soldiers from rental apartments.

President Bush has authorized the call up of 47,000 reservists in the Gulf
crisis. About 19,000 have answered the call so far.

Thrift industry officials believe that the financial impact from even a call-up
of the full complement of reservists authorized would be greatest on the Federal
National Mortgage Association, known as Fannie Mae, and the Federal Home Loan
Mortgage Corporation, known as Freddie Mac.

The two big federally chartered, investor-owned mortgage syndicators, which buy
bank mortgages and convert them to investment instruments, have made commitments
to absorb the lost interest income on their mortgages.

Kenneth A. Mills, vice president for public relations for Chase Manhattan Bank,
said his company had already cut interest rate payments for about 100 servicemen
involved in the commitment to the Persian Gulf crisis.

''We feel that we want to cooperate with these people in any way we can,'' Mr.
Mills said. ''They are having their lives disrupted, and the least we can do is
to make sure we do what the law requires.''

James Grohl, a spokesman for the United States League for Savings Institutions,
estimated that the largest impact of the law would be on issuers of credit
cards, where interest rates routinely top 18 percent.

''My guess would be that not all of the reservists have mortgages,'' he said,
''but they probably do have credit cards.''

Second-mortgage home improvement loans, another high-interest form of credit,
would also come under the law, he said, as do all other installment debts.

In all cases, the 6 percent rate applies only while the soldier is on active
duty, and the reqular rate resumes once the soldier puts on civilian clothes
again. The lost interest income is lost to the bank forever, so while the
secondary mortgage market will absorb most of the loss, banks holding the
lowered mortgages in their own portfolios must absorb the lost interest income
themselves.

There are about 12.5 million outstanding home mortgages in the country, with an
average balance of $56,300.

The Relief Act passed during the first months of mobilization following the
attack on Pearl Harbor, prevents a creditor from attempting to foreclose or to
repossess a serviceperson's property while he or she is away on duty, unless the
creditor can show a court that ability to pay is not materially affected by the
call-up.

But even that approach may be difficult for an impatient mortgage lender.
According to an analysis of the act prepared by the Pentagon, a person on active
duty has an almost automatic right to a postponement of such a court action.

Indeed, Fannie Mae conceded that it would accept payments at a less than 6
percent rate, or even no payments at all, if the serviceman could not make them.
But the missed payments below the 6 percent level would have to be made up
later.

''Lenders should encourage the reservists to pay as much as possible, however,''
a Fannie Mae p0licy statement warned, ''because the mortgage should be brought
to a current status when the active duty ends.''

The last time the 1940 act took force was during a Vietnam-era reservists'
call-up in the late 60's, Mr. Grohl said. Mortgage rates were under 6 percent at
the time and credit card use was limited, so the impact on lenders was minimal.

Although most of the attention of the law's impact is likely to be on its affect
on savings and loan mortgage lenders, the act's broadest protections go to
renters, including renters of business space and agricultural land.

A serviceman called to active duty may break a lease with one month's notice and
the payment of a final month's rent, according to the Pentagon. If the lease is
on a yearly basis, the landlord must refund any overpayment. Security deposits
are also refundable when the month is up.

The act currently prohibits landlords from evicting reservists from apartments
costing less than $150 a month because of non-payment of rent, a figure the
Pentagon wants Congress to raise to $750.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              318 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 16, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Initiative Amendment: Dissenting Views

SECTION: Section 12NJ; Page 22, Column 3; New Jersey Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 161 words


The initiative and referendum article prompts these thoughts.

The New Jersey annual state budget would have been defeated by a landslide in a
public referendum.

Many major non-emergency Federal matters, which are bankrupting our nation,
would never have been approved by referendum. For example: the annual Federal
deficit budgets, salary increases of members of Congress, much foreign aid, the
Vietnam and Korean wars, Federal government intervention in education, housing,
welfare and many other programs not related to governing, and which, until 1934,
were the responsibilities of the states, as our wise Founding Fathers intended.

Why should people have to support and pay for Federal and state non-emergency
matters they would not approve, especially now that we have the fast machine
voting setup across the nation?

Public referendums, without petitions, are the wave of the future, and can't
come too soon.

HAROLD LINDERMANN
  Eatontown

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              319 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 17, 1990, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Emmys for Falk, Wettig And 'Murphy Brown'

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section C; Page 16, Column 5; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 748 words

DATELINE: PASADENA, Calif., Sept. 16


Patricia Wettig, who plays the cancer-stricken young mother on ABC's
''Thirtysomething'' won the award for best actress in a drama series in the 42d
Annual Emmy Awards tonight. Peter Falk won the Emmy for outstanding dramatic
actor as ''Columbo.''

NBC's ''L.A. Law'' won as best dramatic series, CBS's ''Murphy Brown'' won the
Emmy as best comedy series and ''Drug Wars: The Camarena Story'' won for
outstanding mini-series.

''I would really like to thank all the women with cancer who have shared their
stories with me so wholeheartedly,'' Miss Wettig said. ''I shared their insights
and their fears. I truly salute their courage.''

Mr. Falk, 63 years old, who has played the rumpled homicide detective since
1971, told the Pasadena Civic Auditorium audience that it was his birthday.
''You know, to get one of these things at any age is nice, but when you hit 41.
. . .'' he said.

Marg Helgenberger, who plays a woman of the world on ABC's ''China Beach'' won
the Emmy for best supporting actress in a dramatic series, and Jimmy Smits, who
plays the Hispanic lawyer Victor Sifuentes on ''L.A. Law'' won as supporting
actor.

Thanks to Veterans and Network

''I want to thank all of the Vietnam vets who have so graciously shared their
experience with us,'' said Miss Hegenberger, who plays K. C. on the Vietnam
drama. She also thanked ABC ''for picking us up for another season.''

The award for best dramatic direction was shared by Thomas Carter, for ''Equal
Justice'' and Scott Winant for ''Thirtysomething.''

Tracey Ullman was honored with a pair of Emmy awards for her work as star and a
writer of ''The Tracey Ullman Show'' in the nationally televised awards show.

''Oh, blimey, this brings it all full circle,'' the comedian said, accepting the
award for outstanding performance in a variety or music series. She ended the
low-rated Fox Broadcasting Company show earlier this year.

''I miss the show a whole lot,'' she said. ''Maybe I shouldn't have been so
cavalier. Maybe I should have taken that 10 minutes in the middle of 'The
Simpsons.'''

That was a reference to the hit Fox cartoon series that began as brief
commercial ''bumpers'' on her program.

Award to 'In Living Color'

She spoke to the black-tie audience moments after she and her show's writers
shared the category's writing Emmy with the comedian Billy Crystal and his HBO
special ''Midnight Train to Moscow.''

''In Living Color,'' the irreverent Fox sketch comedy show won the best
music-variety Emmy.

''Above all, I'd like to thank my family,'' said Keenan Ivory Wayans, the show's
star and executive. He thanked his cast, his production crew, Fox, then said,
his voice tight: ''My mother and father are here tonight. This is for you, Ma.''

''Cheers'' finally brought an Emmy to Ted Danson, nominated eight times for best
actor in a comedy series for his role as womanizing bartender Sam Malone.

''I guess this means you'll be saying 'You were robbed' to some other boy,''
Danson kidded the audience.

It was the eighth consecutive year, every year the show has been on the air,
that Danson was nominated. His other Emmy nomination was in 1984 for the
television movie ''Something About Amelia.''

Miss Bergen, who won for the title role on CBS's ''Murphy Brown,'' thanked her
fellow cast members ''for helping me with my marks every week.''

Hume Cronyn, who starred in Home Box Office's ''Age Old Friends,'' took the
prize for best actor in a mini-series or special. Barbara Hershey, who played
the lead in CBS's ''A Killing in a Small Town,'' won the Emmy for best actress
in a mini-series or special.

Playwright Terrence McNally was voted the Emmy for writing in a mini-series or
special for ''Andre's Mother,'' a drama about AIDS. In his acceptance speech,
McNally asked that society embrace and take care of people with the disease.

Joseph Sargent was named best director in a mini-series or special for his work
on CBS's ''Caroline?'' Vincent Gardenia won for supporting actor in a
mini-series or special, given for Home Box Office's ''Age Old Friends.''

Eva Marie Saint took the trophy for supporting actress in a mini-series or
special, co-starring in NBC's ''People Like Us.''

Recognition for Henson

A special recognition was given to puppeteer Jim Henson, who died earlier this
year. To the strains of Kermit the Frog's song ''The Rainbow Connection,'' show
host Candice Bergen, herself the daughter of puppeteer Edgar Bergen, movingly
recounted Henson's career.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              320 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 17, 1990, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Critic's Notebook;
The Iraq Conflict on American TV

BYLINE: By WALTER GOODMAN

SECTION: Section C; Page 18, Column 3; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 945 words


For the television audience, the confrontation with Iraq has become a war of the
innocents. The screen is dominated not by warriors but by wives, not men but
boys, not armor but infants. Such images are hardly bugle calls to battle; they
remind us night after night of the costs of conflict, as counted in the pains of
ordinary people.

That may not seem to be in character for the medium. Viewers have become
accustomed to having their emotions worked on by jolting pictures and
high-pitched language. Perhaps that would be the case with reports from the
Middle East, too, if cameras were permitted to record what the Iraqis have done
to Kuwait. Instead, television keeps reminding us of who must bear the costs of
any war. Whatever the effect of President Bush's brief message on the Iraqis who
watched it yesterday, it is not likely to prove much competition for the
messages that Americans have been receiving for several weeks.

President Saddam Hussein, at whose pleasure Western correspondents are in
Baghdad, permitted them and their cameras into a hospital room for newborn
babies. These are the targets of the embargo on trade, say the Iraqis; their
milk and medicines are at risk. Is there in fact a shortage of milk or medicine?
The question seems trivial beside the pictures, with their message that any
threat to those sickly infants, from any side and for any reason, is
unconscionable. Will many Americans be untouched by that principle?

Perhaps some spirits have been heated by the accounts, from women recently
permitted to leave Kuwait, of pillage and looting by the Iraqi invaders; the men
remain behind, still held, as Dan Rather never fails to describe them, as human
shields. But indignation at the captors is tempered by the awareness that an
attack on Iraq may insure their deaths.

President Bush said last week that the existence of American hostages could not
be allowed to deter American action against the aggressor. What else could he
say within the hearing of President Hussein? But whether, or how, they are
mentioned, the fact remains that the hostages have been the central element of
television's coverage.

President Hussein's efforts to present himself on the tube as their avuncular
host were no doubt clumsy, yet the pictures gave the captives flesh and blood,
and with the passing of time the fate of those who remain in Iraq and Kuwait has
come to rest less with Baghdad than with Washington. Any harm done to them by
the Iraqis will, of course, change the calculation, but for now Iraq has made
its move and the hostages survive. Will they survive an American move? Such is
the question behind President Bush's statement and in many of his listeners'
minds. The same question presents itself when we watch the young Americans in
uniform sending out greetings, via the tube, to the folks back home. How young
they look, these warriors. There is no surer way to subdue bellicose impulses
than to picture the people at the front not as regiments or batallions but as
individuals, indeed as kids; as demonstrated so powerfully in Vietnam, that
comes naturally to television. Unless the Iraqis do something further to put
them in jeopardy, their fate, too, is now seen to rest with Washington.

The fate of the hundreds of thousands of Asians and others, driven from jobs and
homes in Kuwait and stranded in the desert, seems already determined. Those who
survive will return to impoverishment at home. The scenes on television of so
many people living in makeshift misery are painfully like all those other
pictures of third world disasters, the droughts and floods and plagues to which
the wretched of the earth are prone.

But this time their punisher is no force of nature. Are they victims of the
Iraqi invasion or the American response? And does it matter? On the screen, they
are victims of hostility itself, a reminder that nothing is easier to produce
than refugees and a portent of worse to come should war break out in the Middle
East. With Iraq installed in Kuwait, which side has more incentive to resume
such a war? The lesson apparently known to Saddam Hussein, though no master of
the medium, is to strike before the cameras arrive. He also evidently knows when
to keep them away. Since Western correspondents are more welcome in the
hospitals of Baghdad than in the encampments of Kuwait, the main pictures of
military might on nightly television come from the United Nations side. The
attention that has been given to the number of Americans now enduring the sands
of Arabia, the strength of the tanks, the versatility of the planes, the
dominance of the ships presents the United States as a Goliath, difficult though
it is conceive of President Hussein as a David. The file footage of Iraqis on
parade can't compete.

In the weeks of coverage, the roles of aggressor and defender have in these ways
been perversely reversed by the camera. For now, Americans can find pride in
their country's display of might, but should hostilities break out for whatever
immediate cause or pretext, unless cameras are barred from the battlefield the
casualties will be transmitted to living rooms with predictably unsettling
effects. The Pentagon, remembering Vietnam, must consider that without some act
or accident of provocation from Iraq, the stage is set for Washington to bear
the onus of action.

So far, the nation stands behind the White House, and the evening news cannot be
charged with treating President Hussein affectionately. But given its inherent
fascination with faces rather than causes, with personal loss rather than
national gain, television is taking on the role of a deterrent to an expanded
war.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              321 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 18, 1990, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

CONFRONTATION IN THE GULF;
AIR FORCE CHIEF IS DISMISSED FOR REMARKS ON GULF PLAN; CHENEY CITES BAD JUDGMENT

BYLINE: By ERIC SCHMITT, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1288 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 17


Defense Secretary Dick Cheney abruptly dismissed the Air Force's top-ranking
officer today for publicly discussing Pentagon contingency plans for waging a
war against Iraq, including specific targets for American air strikes.

Mr. Cheney, acting after consulting with President Bush, said Gen. Michael J.
Dugan, the Air Force Chief of Staff, had endangered national security, demeaned
other branches of the military, and showed ''poor judgment at a very sensitive
time'' in statements made to reporters who accompanied during a five-day visit
to Saudi Arabia.

Latest Move in a Series

General Dugan was the first uniformed chief of one of the military services
relieved under extraordinary circumstances since 1949, and the first top general
dismissed since President Harry S. Truman ousted Gen. Douglas A. MacArthur in
1951. Today's action was the latest in a series of moves that Mr. Cheney has
made to assert his control over the military services.

General Dugan, in articles published on Sunday by The Washington Post and The
Los Angeles Times, said the Joint Chiefs of Staff had concluded that the only
effective military option for driving Iraqi forces out of Kuwait was heavy
bombing of Baghdad to ''decapitate'' the senior Iraqi leadership, making
President Saddam Hussein of Iraq, his family and senior commanders primary
targets.

Aiming at Baghdad

''The cutting edge would be in downtown Baghdad,'' General Dugan was quoted by
The Post as saying. ''If I want to hurt you, it would be at home, not out in the
woods someplace.''

Mr. Cheney told reporters at a hastily called briefing today that as Air Force
Chief of Staff, General Dugan was ''not even in the chain of command.'' on the
Persian Gulf operation.

''To speculate about what may or may not be included in a plan that might or
might not be implemented is inappropriate,'' he said.

Mr. Cheney added that it was ''inappropriate for U.S. officials to talk about
targeting specific foreign individuals,'' and that General Dugan's statements
were ''potentially a violation of the standing Presidential executive order''
prohibiting the assassination of foreign leaders.

Military experts have questioned the efficacy of attempting a pinpoint-bombing
raid to kill a national leader. But the use of the tactic as a way of trying to
get around the Presidential prohibition against assassinations may have a recent
precedent. After the American air raids on Libya in 1986, some Reagan
Administration officials said the attacks were an effort to kill Col. Muammar
el-Qaddafi, the Libyan leader. He survived.

Remarks by Mr. Cheney and his aides about the dismissal of General Dugan, a
four-star officer who became Air Force Chief of Staff only in July, raised the
question of whether many of his comments were true.

Operations Are Not Discussed

General Dugan, for example, told reporters that the Air Force has about 420
combat planes and 250 support planes operating from about 30 bases in the
Persian Gulf area. Mr. Cheney neither confirmed nor denied that statement and
others the general made, citing longstanding Pentagon policy to not discuss
sensitive military operations in progress.

But by suggesting a security breach, the Defense Secretary may have lent
credence to the general's account. ''It's contrary to sound practice to reveal
classified information about the size and disposition of U.S. forces,'' Mr.
Cheney said at a hastily called news conference at the Pentagon.

The damaging remarks were made to reporters General Dugan had invited to
accompany him on his plane during a tour in Saudi Arabia last week.

According to the articles, military officials had drawn up a list of immediate
military targets including air defense installations, airfields and aircraft,
ballistic missile launchers and communications centers.

''That's a nice list of targets, and I might be able to accept those, but that's
not enough,'' General Dugan was quoted by the Los Angeles Times as saying. ''I
want to know what is unique about Iraq. What is unique about Iraqi culture that
they put very high value on? What is it that psychologically would make an
impact on the population and the regime in Iraq?''

How 'to Hurt Saddam'

The Washington Post quoted officials on General Dugan's plane as saying that
Israeli officials had advised that the ''best way to hurt Saddam'' was to target
his family, personal guards and even his mistress.

''If and when we choose violence, he ought to be at the focus of our efforts,''
General Dugan was quoted as having said in The Post.

Mr. Cheney also took issue with General Dugan's comments that seemed to demean
the contribution of other services. ''Statements in the article to the effect
that the Army and the Marines would provide for diversionary activities while
basically the Air Force carried the ball were inappropriate,'' he said. ''What I
expect out of our military commanders is they are all part of the team.''

Before making his decision, Mr. Cheney said, he consulted with President Bush
and other Pentagon officials, whom aides said included Gen. Colin L. Powell, the
chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. Mr. Cheney said, however, that the
President left the final decision with him.

Mr. Cheney said he summoned General Dugan to his office at the Pentagon this
morning, where he told him that he was dismissed. Mr. Cheney said he would
recommend to President Bush that General Dugan's successor be Gen. Merrill A.
McPeak, a four-star general who is commander of the Pacific Air Forces. The Vice
Chief of Staff, Gen. John Michael Loh, was named Acting Chief of Staff.

Had Sought to Improve Things

General Dugan's misstep may have been born out of good intentions. Since he took
over as Chief of Staff two months ago, the general had sought to repair the Air
Force's image, badly frayed by the service's withholding of embarrassing
information about the performance of the F-117 in the December invasion of
Panama.

The general sought to make top Air Force officials more accessible. Shortly
after he took over, reporters received a pocket-sized, laminated card listing
the office telephone numbers of top Air Force officials.

General Dugan, a 53-year old West Point graduate who flew 300 combat missions in
Vietnam, had been commander of all North Atlantic Treaty Organization air forces
before he was named Chief of Staff.

A native of Albany, General Dugan also served several stints at the Pentagon,
most recently as a deputy Air Force chief of staff for programs and resources,
and later for plans and operations.

At the news conference, Mr. Cheney praised General Dugan's 32-year military
record, but said that ''it's incumbent upon senior officials to be discreet and
tactful in their public statements, and I found those qualities lacking'' in
General Dugan's comments.

Pentagon officials said there was a distinct difference between General Dugan's
comments and the statements other senior military commanders have made in urging
an all-out air attack if the American-led international force in Saudi Arabia
were attacked.

Previous Such Incidents

General Dugan, the officials said, stepped well beyond what Mr. Cheney and other
top military and civilian officials felt was appropriate.

In 1949, President Truman relieved the Chief of Naval Operations, Adm. Louis E.
Denfeld. Mr. Truman acted on the recommendation of the Secretary of the Navy,
who said the admiral had lost control of his command.

Two years later, Truman relieved General MacArthur, commander of United Nations
forces in the Korean War, because the general publicly expounded his own ideas
about winning the war, including using nuclear weapons against Chinese Communist
forces.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Defense Secretary Dick Cheney, left, announcing the dismissal
of the Air Force Chief of Staff, Gen. Michael J. Dugan, shown last month.
(Photographs by Paul Hosefros/The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              322 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 18, 1990, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

CONFRONTATION IN THE GULF;
Cheney Has Staked Out Authority at Pentagon

BYLINE: By MICHAEL R. GORDON, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1170 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 17


From the day he walked into the Pentagon a year and half ago, Secretary of
Defense Dick Cheney has let everyone know just who is in charge.

His dismissal today of Gen. Michael J. Dugan, the top-ranking officer in the Air
Force, was the most forceful but not the first move Mr. Cheney has made to
assert his control of the military services and to restrict the public comments
of senior officers.

Mr. Cheney's effort to rein in the military stems from a variety of factors,
including his desire to have the Pentagon speak with one voice coordinated by
the civilian leadership and his effort to decisively eliminate any notion that
his authority can be challenged because of his limited experience in military
matters.

And in this particular case, Mr. Cheney was also concerned that General Dugan's
freewheeling discussion in interviews over the weekend about bombing President
Saddam Hussein of Iraq, his family and his mistress, and also hitting downtown
Baghdad, would undermine international support for the operation in Saudi Arabia
by implying that the United States had unilaterally decided on a military
strategy of decapitation of the Iraqi leadership.

General Dugan's blunt comments, as well as remarks by unidentified officials on
the general's plane about Israeli assistance with such an operation in providing
missile and targeting advice, also created a potential political problem for the
Bush Administration's relationship with Arab Governments, and was the latest in
a series of problems between Mr. Cheney and the Air Force.

Under the best of circumstances, the Pentagon is a sprawling, balkanized
bureaucracy of vested interests, which is very difficult to manage. But at a
time of budget tightening and crisis in the Persian Gulf, both of which have
placed the Pentagon under greater strain than any time since the Vietnam War,
Mr. Cheney has moved to assert central control.

The circle of power around the 49-year-old Defense Secretary, who has never
served in the military, has been tightly drawn, with Mr. Cheney making decisions
with the help of a handful of top officials, senior aides and his military ally,
Gen. Colin L. Powell, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.

When it comes to budget decisions, a Defense Secretary cannot autocratically
impose his will on the military and still hope to see his program carried out
faithfully. And Mr. Cheney believes that he must get the Chiefs on board to
carry out his plan to restructure the armed forces. Cheney aides say he knows
that the military, which has seen Defense Secretaries come and go, has too many
chances to sabotage the plan by appealing to Congress or by bureaucratic
inaction.

To this end, the Defense Secretary has given the military a forum to express
their views. But the final decisions have been Mr. Cheney's.

He has told the uniformed services, in effect: If you don't like the cuts I have
ordered, consider what they are going to do to you in Congress, where the
appetite for reductions in military spending has been intense.

When Mr. Cheney feels that his authority has been challenged, however, he has
responded with the full weight of his office. One of his first acts was to
publicly chastise then-Air Force Chief of Staff, Gen. Larry D. Welch, for
exploring a budget compromise with Congressional leaders over the land-based
missile force.

''Everyone's entitled to one mistake,'' Mr. Cheney warned ominously in what was
interpreted as a blunt signal to the military that he was establishing control
over the Pentagon.

Since then he has had a couple of run-ins with the Air Force, which he has
largely tried to settle out of public view.

The Chain Incident

Gen. John T. Chain, the commander of the Strategic Air Command, aroused Mr.
Cheney's ire in May when he expressed doubt about the feasibility of President
Bush's plan to ban land-based missiles with multiple warheads.

Specifically, General Chain said at a breakfast meeting with reporters that he
did not think Moscow would go along with the proposal because such weapons are
the centerpiece of the Soviets' land-based missile force. And General Chain also
questioned whether such such missiles were ''destabilizing'' as President Bush,
Mr. Cheney and Brent Scowcroft, the President's national security adviser, have
argued.

Mr. Cheney's spokesman said at the time that the Pentagon leadership was not
disturbed by General Chain's comments. But Mr. Cheney quietly ordered General
Chain to to fly to Washington for a private dressing down, officials said later.
The incident was never publicly disclosed.

And when the Air Force earlier failed to inform the Defense Secretary about the
flawed performance of its Stealth F-117 aircraft in Panama, Mr. Cheney expressed
displeasure without a public rebuke.

Mr. Cheney privately expressed his concern to Air Force Secretary Donald Rice
and General Welch and then let it be known that he had ordered the Air Force
Inspector General to investigate why the Stealth planes had failed to drop their
bombs with the accuracy that the service had initially claimed.

But no resignations were ordered and Mr. Cheney's spokesman said later that the
Secretary accepted the Air Force assertion that it did not mean to mislead Mr.
Cheney about the performance of the F-117 in Panama. A Pentagon official said
that Mr. Cheney felt that he had made his point and more severe steps were not
needed in that case.

Other top American commanders have talked on the record in recent weeks about
mounting an all-out air assault against Iraq if war breaks out. But Mr. Cheney
said that he was disturbed by the explicit references by General Dugan to making
targets of the Iraqi leadership, the specific numbers provided by the general
about American aircraft in the region and the general's service parochialism in
asserting that the Air Force would play the central role with supporting roles
to be played by the Army and the Marines.

Effect on Mideast Diplomacy

Comments by military officials on General Dugan's aircraft about Israeli
cooperation with the American military operation in Saudi Arabia, including
furnishing air-to-ground missiles for United States B-52 bombers and advising
the targeting of the Iraqi leadership, also brought to the surface a delicate
issue for the Bush Administration, which is trying to build up the Arab role in
the multinational force.

Gen. H. Norman Schwarzkopf, the top American force commander in the Persian
Gulf, has asserted that Israel was not involved in the operation.

Given the high political stakes, Mr. Cheney decided that General Dugan, who had
been in office only since July, would not get a second chance, sending a signal
to all of the generals and admirals to withhold much of their counsel from the
public and putting political distance between the bush administration and the
general's comments.

''He thought General Dugan's comments set a bad example for the military. It was
not anything he wanted to let go by,'' a Pentagon official said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Defense Secretary Dick Cheney talking to reporters at the
Pentagon after dismissing Gen. Michael J. Dugan as Air Force Chief of Staff.
(Paul Hosefros/The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              323 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 18, 1990, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Equity Council Approves Accord on 'Miss Saigon'

BYLINE: By MERVYN ROTHSTEIN

SECTION: Section C; Page 14, Column 3; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 465 words


The council of Actors' Equity approved an agreement late yesterday with Cameron
Mackintosh, the producer of ''Miss Saigon,'' to clear the way for the hit London
musical to come to Broadway. But neither Mr. Mackintosh nor his spokesmen could
be reached for comment, so it was not immediately clear whether the producer
would reinstate the show, which was to have begun performances in March at the
Broadway Theater.

Neither Mr. Mackintosh nor Alan Eisenberg, the union's executive secretary,
would disclose details of the agreement. But theater people familiar with the
negotiations said it gave Mr. Mackintosh permission to use two non-American
Asian actors in the Broadway production for one year. Mr. Mackintosh, however,
reportedly must ask for special permission if he wishes to bring to Broadway Lea
Salonga, the Filipino actress who created the leading role of Kim, a Vietnamese
bar girl who falls in love with an American G.I. in Saigon in the waning days of
the Vietnam War.

It was Equity's refusal to permit the British actor Jonathan Pryce to come to
Broadway in the show to repeat his award-winning role as the Engineer, a
Eurasian pimp, that led to the original dispute. The union said on Aug. 7 in
rejecting Mr. Pryce that it could not ''appear to condone the casting of a
Caucasian in the role of a Eurasian.'' The next day, Mr. Mackintosh canceled the
$10 million Broadway production, which had a record advance ticket sale of $25
million, saying that Equity had no legal basis to bar Mr. Pryce, and that the
only issue Equity had the right to consider was whether the actor was a star and
that it had declared him one in the past.

Members Asked Reversal

In August, after the union rejected Mr. Pryce and Mr. Mackintosh canceled the
show, Equity received petitions from many members asking it to reconsider. The
union's council met again on Aug. 16 and reversed its original decision, saying
it had ''applied an honest and moral principle in an inappropriate manner.''

But a few days later, Mr. Mackintosh said that although Equity had finally
approved Mr. Pryce, he would have to be given a free hand in casting other roles
before he would go ahead with a New York production. He also said that a
poisonous atmosphere had been created by the dispute over Mr. Pryce and that the
union would have to work with him to establish a relationship to dissipate that
atmosphere and preclude more controversy about the casting of other roles in the
show, to allow the musical come to Broadway. Equity then invited him to meet on
the issue.

The agreement also reportedly acknowledges that the role of the Engineer in the
show is open to actors of all races, but states that Mr. Mackintosh confirms his
commitment to seek suitable candidates for the role in the future.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              324 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 19, 1990, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Excerpts From Solzhenitsyn's Article on Soviets

BYLINE: Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 8, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1875 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW, Sept. 18


Following are excerpts from an article, ''How to Revitalize Russia,'' by
Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn, published today in Komsomolskaya Pravda, as translated
by The New York Times:

The death knell has sounded for Communism. But the concrete structure has not
yet toppled, and we face the danger of being crushed by the debris instead of
finding freedom.

Who of us does not know our troubles, covered as they are with mendacious
statistics? Having been dragging in search of the blind and malicious
Marxist-Leninist utopia for 70 years, we put a full third of our population upon
the executioner's block during the incompetently conducted, self-annihilating
''patriotic war.'' We have lost our abundance and destroyed the peasant class
and its villages. We have driven away the very instinct for growing wheat for
our bread.

We have spoiled the perimeters of our cities, poisoned our rivers, lakes, and
fish with the wastes of primordial industries. Today we are finally spoiling the
last remaining water, air and soil with the additives of atomic death, and
purchasing radioactive waste in the West. Ruining ourselves for the sake of
grand invasions under insane leadership, we have cut down our rich forests,
robbed our incomparable natural resources, the irreplaceable property of our
great-grandchildren. Without mercy we have sold everything abroad.

We have exhausted our women by forcing them to do laborious work. We have torn
them from their children. The children were left to suffer from diseases, lack
of discipline and corruption of education. Health has been completely neglected,
and we do not have medicines. Even healthy food has been forgotten, and millions
do not have a place to live. Lawlessness reigns over all depths of the country.
And we cling only to one thing: not to be deprived of stupefying drunkenness.

A Look at the Union

But such is man, that we can bear all this senselessness and distruction through
all our lives - if only no one dares to offend or hurt our NATION! In this case
there is no stopping us in our eternal humbleness. In this case we grab at
stones and sticks, spears and guns and rush to our neighbours to set their
houses afire and kill. Such is man: Nothing can convince us that our famine,
poverty, early deaths, degeneration of children - that any of these misfortunes
takes priority over our national pride!

And that is why, trying to propose certain steps for our recovery, we have to
start not with the nagging ulcers, not with the exhausting sufferings - but with
the question: What is going to happen with the nations of the union? Within what
geographical boundaries we are going to recover or die? Only then may we think
of a treatment. ...

In many of the remote republics, the centrifugal forces are moving at such speed
that they cannot be stopped without violence and blood, and it should not be
done at this price. Everything is racing forward so haphazardly that in any case
the ''Soviet Union'' will fall apart anyway.

And we do not have a real choice. There is nothing to debate. We can only move a
little faster to prevent new misfortunes so that the split will take place
without extra sufferings of the people, and only the split that is really
unavoidable.

An Urgent Call

So that is what I see as necessary to declare, urgently and loudly. . . . Back
in the beginning of the century our major national intellect S. Ye. Kryzhanovsky
predicted: ''The core Russia does not possess a reserve of cultural and moral
forces to assimilate all the provinces. This exhausts the Russian national
nucleus.''

But that was said in a rich, flourishing country, before millions of people were
killed, and not millions chosen at random, but the selected ones, the elite.
Today it sounds thousands of times more convincing: We have no resources for the
provinces, neither economic nor spiritual. We have no resources for the Empire,
and we do not need them. Let it fall from our shoulders: It weakens us, sucks
all juices from us, speeds up our death. ...

A People in Need

I see with concern that in the awakening Russian national self-consciousness, we
cannot, to a great extent, get rid of grand imperial thinking inherited from the
Communists, the inflated ''Soviet patriotism'' that never really existed and
takes such pride in the ''great Soviet power,'' which during the epoch of the
Pig Ilyich-the-Second (Leonid Brezhnev) simply wasted our last resources on
unlimited and unnecessary armaments, disgracing us by showing us to the entire
planet as a savage, greedy, insatiable aggressor, at a time when our our knees
were trembling and we were about to fall down exhausted.

This is the most harmful deformation of our consciousness, to say: ''But with
all this, we are a great country and everybody takes our opinion into
consideration.'' That is, at the time when we are dying, we exhibit the selfless
support of Communism. Look how Japan could calm down, give up the idea of both
its world mission and irresistible political adventures - and so it flourished
at once. . . .

We have to make a choice once and for all: between the empire, killing, in the
first place, ourselves, and the spiritual and physical salvation of our people.
Everybody knows our death rate is growing and exceeds our birth rate; we could
disappear from the face of the earth. To keep a great empire means to kill your
own people. . . .

We must strive not for the size of the state but for clearness of our spirit in
its remnants. By the secession of 12 republics, Russia, with this seeming
sacrifice, will liberate itself for precious inner development. At last it will
be attentive and industrious toward itself. Consider the current mixture of
nationalities. Is there any hope for preserving, developing Russian culture?
Less and less. Everything is wasted.

A People's Mirage

Unfortunately, this mirage of the union's ''integrity and indivisibility'' has
been successfully carried through all the poverty and miseries of our staunch
and worthy Russian emigration. . . . Did Russia become poorer after the
secession of Poland and Finland? It only stood up straighter. And so we could
stand straighter still by getting rid of this ''central Asian under-belly,'' the
thoughtless conquest of Alexander II. . . .

We have to stop repeating, like parrots: ''We are proud that we are Russians.''
''We are proud of this immense country.'' We must understand that after all that
we had been proud of, our people indulged themselves in the spiritual
catastrophe of 1917. . . .

Since then we are not what we used to be, and we cannot plan how to restore the
power and surface might of the previous Russia. . . .

We cannot be proud of the Soviet-German war, in which more than 30 million
people perished at home, 10 times more than the enemy, and we merely
strengthened despotism over ourselves. We must not be ''proud.'' . . . Instead,
we must recognize that our own people are now in an abyss of debilitating
illness, and we must pray for God to send us health and reason to recover.

An Immediate Split

And if it is true that Russia has given its vital juices to the republics for
decades, then we would not suffer any economic losses. We will save our physical
forces. ...

The indubitable right of the republics I have cited for complete separation must
be declared firmly and immediately. And if any of them have doubts about
seceding, with the same indubitable right we will have to declare our separation
from them.

It has been in preparation for a long time. It is unavoidable. we will have
explosions here or there. Everyone can see that we cannot live together. And
only by separating will we have a clear view of the future. . . .

For three-fourths of this century we got so poor and tired and lost all hope
that many are now helpless and resigned, and sometimes we think only heaven's
intervention can help us. But such help is not given to those who are not moving
towards it. The fate of our children and our will for life, as well as our
1,000-year-past, with the spirit of our forefathers - all that will help us find
the strength to overcome this. . . .

The Sense of Labor

Everything is terrible in our economy and everything is weeping in our economy.
But it should keep seeking its way. There is no life without it. It is necessary
to develop the people's sense of labor, and this has to be done as soon as
possible because for half century no one has found any reward in work. There is
no one to grow wheat for bread, no one to take care of cattle. Millions are
living in conditions that can not be called dwellings, and they spend decades in
stinking hovels. The elderly and invalids are poor as beggars. Roads are in
terrible condition, and nature itself is taking revenge. . . .

For how long will we continue supplying and reinforcing the tyrannic regimes
planted by us in various parts of the earth, those bottomless embezzlers of our
wealth: Cuba, Vietnam, Ethiopia, Angola, North Korea . . . thousands of our
advisers are still all over the world. How much blood was shed in Afghanistan?
We just would not let it out of our grasp and we pumped our wealth into it,
billions. . . . ...

The Party's Property

As to the immense property of the Communist Party . . . they have looted lots of
peoples' wealth, used it for 70 years. Of course they will never return all that
has wasted, thrown about, stolen. But you Communists should return at least what
you still have: buildings and sanatoriums, special farms, and publishing houses.
And you should live on your party membership fees.

And for purely party work you should pay pensions on your own, not from the
state treasury. All this nomenklatura bureaucracy, millions of the parasites of
the administrative apparat, paralyzing all public life with their grand
salaries, privileges and special shops - we must put an end to feeding them!
They must be involved in a socially useful labor and live on the money they
earn. ...

What has five or six years of noisy perestroika brought us but a halfhearted
reshuffling of the party Central Committee and an ugly, fake election system
with only one goal: for the Communist Party not to lose power?

No road for the people for the most urgent things will ever be open, and nothing
useful will ever be reached, unless the Communist-Leninist party yields not just
one point of its constitutional power but is completely separated from any
influence on economic and state life, completely gives up control over us or any
aspect of our lives. It would be better if this happened without force and
through the party's own public repentance of the fact that, with a series of
crimes and atrocities, it has led the country into an abyss and it does not know
the way out. . . .

The K.G.B.'s Goal

Towering high above us is the granite monolith of the K.G.B., blocking our
access to the future. Their tricks are as transparent as their claims that they
are especially needed today for international intelligence. Everybody sees this
the opposite of the truth. Their only goal is to exist for themselves and
suppress any movement by the people. There is no justification, no right for the
Cheka-K.G.B. to exist, with its 70 years of bloody history.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Text

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              325 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 19, 1990, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

CONFRONTATION IN THE GULF: THE GENERAL'S ERROR;
Others Have Said as Much as Dugan But 'on Background,' Not on Record

BYLINE: By R. W. APPLE Jr., Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 11, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 941 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 18


In the final analysis, the problem wasn't really what Gen. Michael J. Dugan said
that hurt him so much.

What cost the former Air Force Chief of Staff his job, Bush Administration
officials and Pentagon-watchers on Capitol Hill agreed today, was the timing of
his speculation on American contingency plans in the Middle East, how he went
about it and who he was.

He was unguarded, speaking on the record, meaning that he could be quoted by
name; he spoke at a moment when the diplomatic situation was delicately poised,
and he made it sound as if generals, not civilians, decided such matters.

''In this town, in a crisis, you talk about options, not about decisions, unless
you're the President,'' a White House aide said. ''I guess nobody told this guy
Dugan about that.''

Undoubtedly an Option

No one in official Washington, or in Baghdad or Riyadh, for that matter, doubts
that an air attack on the Iraqi capital is one option under serious
consideration as President Bush ponders how he might force President Saddam
Hussein of Iraq to pull his troops out of Kuwait if United Nations economic
sanctions fail to do the job.

Military analysts in Washington think tanks, members of Congress knowledgeable
about such matters and even a few Pentagon experts have been quite willing, in
recent days, to discuss such an attack and evaluate its pros and cons. In fact,
one of the commonplaces of discussion here has been the observation that it
would be a mistake to engage in a war of attrition on the ground with the
million-man Iraqi Army, and that air power would therefore have to carry a heavy
burden.

For example, Senator John McCain of Arizona, a Republican, said last week that
''the very worst strategy we could follow would be a land battle in which we
trade American bodies for Iraqi bodies'' and advocated the use of air and naval
power rather than infantry, at least in the early stages of any conflict.

'On Background' Comments

A variety of Pentagon planners and other military authorities surveyed the week
before said that Mr. Bush would inevitably seek to exploit vastly superior
American technology, including lasers and infrared equipment as well as air
power in general, to overcome the marked Iraqi advantage in numbers and
familiarity with combat terrain and climate. Several of them mentioned the
possibility of trying to kill or even kidnap Saddam Hussein.

But saying such things ''on background'' - not for attribution to any individual
- is not the same as a member of the Joint Chiefs saying flatly that they have
adopted a plan to ''decapitate'' the senior Iraqi leadership by making President
Hussein and his inner circle the primary targets, as General Dugan did. And it
is not the same as declaring that ''the cutting edge would be in downtown
Baghdad.''

It may well be that the general was engaged in a bit of truth-telling, drawing
back the curtain for a few moments on Pentagon contingency planning. It may be
literally true that the Joint Chiefs of Staff believe, as he said, that only
killing Mr. Hussein would do the job - although there were plenty of senior
people in the Administration and more outside it who were willing to say today,
on background of course, that they did not believe the Joint Chiefs held any
such view and that if they did, it was thoroughly wrongheaded.

But nearly all Presidents, not just the security-conscious Mr. Bush, dislike the
publicizing of staff recommendations, because that cuts down their freedom of
action - especially on life-and-death matters of military tactics.

It Might Not Work

What is more, there are many reasons why the President might choose to disregard
any advice from the Joint Chiefs to put ''the cutting edge,'' in the form of
heavy bombardment, in downtown Baghdad. To cite just three: It might not work,
any more than similar attacks on downtown Tripoli or downtown Hanoi forced Libya
or North Vietnam to reverse their policies; it might be unacceptable to European
allies in the campaign to isolate Iraq, such as France and the Soviet Union, and
it would almost certainly inflame Arab public opinion, if not push Egypt and
Syria back into Mr. Hussein's embrace.

Judgments on such political and diplomatic matters have to be mixed, in any
ultimate decision, with whatever military judgments reach a President.

General Dugan may have been attempting a pre-emptive strike, trying to state the
Air Force case in such a way that Mr. Bush would find it hard to ignore. But
that cannot be done directly; the accepted Washington procedure is for a general
to put ideas into the ear of a sympathetic columnist or commentator, or to ask a
friendly Senator or Representative to make the public argument.

Some officers at the Pentagon were reported to have said that they would feel
more inhibited about talking to reporters as a result of Defense Secretary Dick
Cheney's decision to dismiss General Dugan. But in fact, it is hard to imagine
that there are many officers with significant experience, either in Washington
or in the field, who would have taken it upon themselves, even before the Dugan
episode, to state publicly what course of action the Joint Chiefs were
recommending.

Quite apart from angering Presidents, quite apart from diplomatic
considerations, such disclosures could help actual or potential enemies, which
is not what military officers ordinarily seek to do. General Dugan, who also
made public Air Force strength figures in the Persian Gulf that the Pentagon had
been guarding closely, apparently thought the security risk small.

He had few defenders today at the Pentagon or elsewhere in Washington.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: News Analysis

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              326 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 19, 1990, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

EDUCATION;
At U.S. Military Bases, Schools Help Children Deal With Gulf

BYLINE: By JON NORDHEIMER

SECTION: Section B; Page 7, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1022 words


For thousands of American children, school began in the midst of a family crisis
few other Americans share.

Older elementary school pupils, acting more like kindergartners or first
graders, balked at going back to school in the first days. Distraught children
would blurt out in the middle of class, ''I want my daddy to come home.'' Or
''Where is Mommy? Is Mommy O.K.?''

These pupils are the children of American troops sent to the Persian Gulf, and
they fear for their parents' safety.

At the military bases that deployed tens of thousands of troops in Operation
Desert Shield, schools have moved quickly in the last few weeks to help the
children express their fears and cope with them.

Guidance in Expression

At schools at Fort Bragg, N.C., home of the Army's 82d Airborne Division, and at
other schools with large numbers of military dependents, coloring books were
provided to children too young to articulate their worries fully so they could
express them on paper. For older pupils, there was guidance in writing stories
or letters to parents. Photographs of parents in uniform were posted on
classroom bulletin boards.

At Fort Campbell, Ky., home of the 101st Airborne Division, each base school had
set up a child support system under the supervision of a guidance counselor by
the time school began. Personnel whose teaching experience went back to the
Vietnam War were consulted on how military children reacted during that
conflict.

''There are similarities but with one big difference,'' said Ray McMullen,
Assistant Superintendent at Fort Campbell. ''The buildup in Vietnam took place
over years; now it's taking only a few short weeks.''

Frightening TV Coverage

The television coverage of the troop buildup, along with the repeated showings
of victims of Iraqi poison gas, is frightening for the children.

''We saw a lot of separation anxiety in fourth and fifth graders. which tells us
they are worried,'' said Rob Richardson, assistant principal of an elementary
school at Fort Bragg, noting that this is a condition usually observed in
kindergartners or first graders, who are more likely to worry about being
separated from their parents.

About half the 4,750 military dependents educated on the base have parents,
mostly fathers, on duty in the Mideast, he said. Still more children of military
personnel attend public schools off the base in the Cumberland County district,
and administrators, counselors and teachers there have also moved with dispatch.

''In August we instructed our principals to discuss the issues with their
teachers to understand some of the worry the kids would be dealing with,'' said
Dr. Rick Hollings, the supervising psychologist.

''We were not only concerned with the military dependents but also with Arab
kids in the schools who may be scapegoated, and children of working people in
the community who will bear a severe economic blow if the deployment lasts long
enough.''

Fort Bragg is also the home base of the Army Special Forces units and the Delta
Force unit formed for quick deployment, all heavily involved in the Mideast
operation. More than 12,000 of the 44,000 pupils in the Cumberland schools are
military dependents, and many of the teachers are spouses of service members.

''We had a taste of this in the Panama and Grenada fighting but nothing as
prolonged or as dangerous as this,'' said Dr. Joe Guiendon, Deputy
Superintendent of Schools.

The military has no systematic crisis intervention program exclusively for
children, said Maj. Doug Hart, a Pentagon spokesman. He said the Defense
Department monitored each school to insure that children's needs were met, with
administrators devising their own strategies based on established methods of
relieving stress and emotional trauma.

Anxiety From First Day

Dr. McMullen, the Fort Campbell school official, said: ''We detected anxiety in
the children from the first day of school. No doubt it reflected the anxiety
felt in their home. They were withdrawing from other children, there was an
increase in hyperactivity, and they brought up in class what they had seen the
night before on television news.''

Mike Hoover, a Colorado pscyhologist, has helped schools on military bases set
up crisis intervention programs patterned on those developed to deal with
suicides, gang violence and multiple-death accidents at schools.

''Depression in schoolchildren tends to go unnoticed by parents and teachers
because children act it out differently,'' Dr. Hoover said. ''When adults become
depressed they are less energetic and may go without eating. Children do the
exact opposite. They act out verbally and often get into fights.''

The Fort Campbell teaching staff got firsthand experience dealing with crisis
intervention with children in 1985 when a chartered airliner carrying 101st
Airborne troops home from Europe crashed at Gander, Newfoundland, killing 248
soldiers.

Both Parents Sent Away

In the Mideast deployment, some children have both mother and father shipped
overseas, and many others are in single-parent military households. Finding
family, friends or neighbors to care for them indefinitely has been a problem
and has exacerbated the anxiety of the children.

''The chance for abuse exists and we are watching out for it,'' said Dr. Eleanor
Herndon, supervisor of counseling in the Cumberland schools outside Fort Bragg.
''We also have a lot of wives under a lot of emotional and financial stress who
are moving in with other families to cut expenses.

''If the Gulf crisis goes on for another month or so, I'm afraid we'll see these
women pull their kids out of school and move back home to grandma. Some kids may
lose a full year of school.''

School administrators shudder when they contemplate the possibility of Mideast
combat and high American casualties. Dr. Richardson said the crisis intervention
programs in the base schools were prepared to handle isolated incidents like a
plane crash with 50 or 100 deaths. But he said they would be quickly overwhelmed
''with 2,000 to 3,000 killed in a day, which Saddam Hussein is telling us is
going to happen.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: The new school year has been especially tense for children who
have parents serving in the Middle East. At Jackson Elementary School in Fort
Campbell, Ky., Leslie Dreaden, left, helped kindergarten and first-grade pupils
put up pictures of parents in Saudi Arabia. (Dan Loftin for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              327 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 19, 1990, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Dispute Settled, 'Miss Saigon' Is Broadway Bound

BYLINE: By MERVYN ROTHSTEIN

SECTION: Section C; Page 11, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 644 words


Cameron Mackintosh, the producer of ''Miss Saigon,'' announced yesterday that he
was reinstating his New York production of the hit London musical, which is to
begin performances as previously scheduled in March at the Broadway Theater.

The announcement apparently brings to an end a two-month dispute that began when
objections were raised about Mr. Mackintosh's plan to bring the British actor
Jonathan Pryce to Broadway to re-create his award-winning role as the Engineer,
a Eurasian pimp.

Mr. Mackintosh's decision came after the council of Actors' Equity approved an
agreement between the producer and the union on Monday to clear the way for the
$10 million show, which had an advance ticket sale of $25 million, to come to
Broadway.

'To Be Reinstated on Schedule'

A joint statement released by Mr. Mackintosh and Equity yesterday said the two
parties had ''reached a mutually satisfactory accord on the principles of
casting necessary to allow the Broadway production of 'Miss Saigon' to be
reinstated on schedule next spring.''

Both sides declined to comment further or to release details of the accord,
which reportedly allows Mr. Mackintosh to use two non-American Asian actors in
the New York production for one year. Theater people familiar with the agreement
said those two actors could be used only for the role of Kim, a Vietnamese bar
girl who falls in love with an American G.I. in Saigon in the waning days of the
Vietnam War. That role is expected to be played on Broadway by two actresses.

They also said the permission to use non-American Asian actors was given because
of the special requirements of the role, which is for a woman approximately 17
to 19 years old with a very strong singing voice.

On Seeking Permission

Lea Salonga, the Filipino actress who created the part in London, is reportedly
not included in this part of the agreement. Should Mr. Mackintosh wish to bring
Miss Salonga to Broadway to re-create her performance, he would have to seek
special permission from the union.

Mr. Mackintosh canceled the Broadway production in August, the day after Equity
refused to allow Mr. Pryce to come to Broadway. On Aug. 7, the union said in
rejecting the British actor that it could not ''appear to condone the casting of
a Caucasian in the role of a Eurasian.''

After the cancellation, Equity received petitions from many members asking it to
reconsider. The union's council met again on Aug. 16 and reversed its original
decision, saying it had ''applied an honest and moral principle in an
inappropriate manner.'' But a few days later, Mr. Mackintosh said although
Equity had finally approved Mr. Pryce, he would have to be given a free hand in
casting other roles before he would go ahead with a New York production. Equity
then invited him to meet on the issue.

With Some Changes

Talks between Mr. Mackintosh and Alan Eisenberg, Equity's executive secretary,
began on Sept. 6, and a tentative accord was reached last Wednesday. The union's
council convened on Thursday but it recessed before voting. Further negotiations
were held over the weekend, and changes were made in the original accord before
the council accepted it on Monday night.

Bernard Jacobs, the president of the Shubert Organization, which owns the
Broadway Theater, said yesterday that he was ''gratified it's all been
resolved.''

The joint statement yesterday said: ''Equity acknowledges the artistic integrity
of the creative team of 'Miss Saigon.' Cameron Mackintosh acknowledges Equity's
efforts to improve equal employment opportunities for its ethnic members, and he
and his creative team support that goal. Together Equity and the creative team
of 'Miss Saigon' look forward to a happy and successful production.''

''An announcement will be made shortly,'' the statement concludes, ''as to when
ticket sales will resume.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              328 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 20, 1990, Thursday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

Vietnamese Pay a High-Level Visit to China

BYLINE: By NICHOLAS D. KRISTOF, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 9, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 628 words

DATELINE: BEIJING, Sept. 19


A Vietnamese Deputy Prime Minister arrived today to attend the Asian Games
beginning Saturday in the highest-level official visit here by a Vietnamese
since Beijing and Hanoi fought a brief border war in 1979. Both sides said they
hoped for a normalization of relations.

Relations between China and Vietnam have been gradually improving in recent
years, and the arrival today of Deputy Prime Minister Vu Nguyen Giap seemed
intended to take ties one step closer. In welcoming Mr. Giap, Chinese officials
dropped their normal criticism of Vietnam.

''We in China would like to see Sino-Vietnamese relations improve gradually
until normalization is realized, and this is the will of the Chinese people,''
Gu Mu, a vice chairman of the Chinese People's Political Consultative
Conference, told Mr. Giap at a welcoming meeting tonight, according to the
official New China News Agency.

The arrival of Mr. Giap follows an unannounced summit meeting between Chinese
and Vietnamese leaders on Sept. 3 and 4, apparently in either Nanning or Chengdu
in southwestern China, diplomats said. That meeting, which neither side has yet
officially confirmed as having taken place, was held to discuss a settlement to
the Cambodian war, but it is not clear if any major agreement was reached, the
diplomats said.

Li Reported on Hand

The Chinese side reportedly was represented at the summit meeting by Jiang
Zemin, the Communist Party General Secretary, and by Prime Minister Li Peng. The
Vietnamese were led by Nguyen Van Linh, the Communist Party leader, and Prime
Minister Du Muoi, diplomats said.

The Communist parties of Vietnam and China were close in the 50's and 60's, and
China gave North Vietnam considerable help during the Vietnam War.

Traditional rivalries between Vietnam and China resurfaced after the United
States withdrawal from Indochina, and officials in Beijing were furious when
Vietnam invaded Cambodia at the end of 1978 to oust the Chinese-backed Khmer
Rouge forces there. In early 1979, China mounted a brief border war against
Vietnam to punish it, and although diplomatic relations were never cut, they
have been strained ever since.

China has long said that no normalization of relations is possible until a
political settlement is reached in Cambodia. Nevertheless, trade has increased
sharply in recent years.

Mr. Giap, who played a key role in outmaneuvering both French and American
forces in Vietnam, told reporters at the Beijing airport that the time had come
to normalize relations, Reuters reported.

''The time is ripe for this,'' Reuters quoted him as saying.

Cambodian Talks Collapse

BANGKOK, Thailand, Sept. 19 (AP) - Talks between Cambodia's warring factions
collapsed today over disagreements on how to bring rebel leader Prince Norodom
Sihanouk onto a council seeking to end 11 years of civil war.

The factions accused each other of sabotaging the Supreme National Council,
formed last week to join members of the Vietnamese-installed Government and the
three-party guerrilla coalition.

The 12-seat council held its opening session Monday at the Cambodian Embassy in
Bangkok. Progress quickly stalled when the Government side rejected guerrilla
demands that Prince Sihanouk be the council's 13th member and its chairman.

The council, established under a United Nations-drafted peace plan, has six
seats for the Government and two for each of the three rebel factions. The plan
also allows for a 13th seat for a chairman.

Ek Sereywath, a spokesman for Sihanouk, expressed optimism the dispute would be
settled before the Oct. 18 deadline for Cambodia's new credentials to the
General Assembly of the United Nations. The Supreme National Council is supposed
to replace the rebel coalition in the United Nations seat.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: September 21, 1990, Friday, Late Edition - Final

CORRECTION:

An article yesterday about the Vietnamese Deputy Prime Minister's visit to China
misidentified him. He is Gen. Vo Nguyen Giap.

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              329 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 20, 1990, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

CONFRONTATION IN THE GULF;
Criticism of U.S. Gulf Policy Growing Louder in Congress

BYLINE: By R. W. APPLE Jr., Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 10, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1119 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 19


Congressional criticism of the Bush Administration's policies in the Persian
Gulf, nonexistent in the first days after Iraq's invasion of Kuwait, then muted,
is growing louder on both sides of the aisle as lawmakers openly attack the
President on several major points.

At Capitol Hill hearings in the last two days, both Republicans and Democrats
have sharply questioned top Administration spokesmen on plans for spending the
money contributed to the American military effort by allies; on American policy
toward President Saddam Hussein of Iraq before the invasion on Aug. 2; on the
sale of major weapons systems to Saudi Arabia, and on the forgiveness of
Egyptian and possibly other countries' military-aid debts.

Testifying this morning, Defense Secretary Dick Cheney asked the House
Appropriations defense subcommittee to permit the Pentagon to disburse billions
of dollars in allied contributions for operations in the gulf ''as the Secretary
deems appropriate,'' without the approval of Congress.

Representative John P. Murtha, Democrat of Pennsylvania, who heads the
subcommittee, dismissed the request as ''unacceptable'' and said the
Administration would be held fully accountable by Congress. Senator Robert C.
Byrd, Democrat of West Virginia, who heads the Senate Appropriations Committee,
called Mr. Cheney's plan an attempt to set up ''a military slush fund.''

Bush Threatens Veto

The military budget approved by the House today requires that expenditure of any
of the foreign funds go through the normal appropriations process. But Mr. Bush
has threatened to veto the budget measure on other grounds.

Later, Deputy Secretary of State Lawrence S. Eagleburger, appearing before
another House Appropriations subcommittee, this one specializing in foreign
operations, said the United States would increasingly ask its allies for money
to meet foreign-policy needs rather than further strain the already shaky
Federal budget. Then he ran into heavy flak over the Administration's plan to
forgive $7 billion in debts owed by Egypt for military aid.

Representative Mickey Edwards, an Oklahoma Republican, said he favored rewarding
Egypt but asked whether the United States was not ''doing more than we can or
should do.'' Representative David R. Obey, Democrat of Wisconsin, the
subcommittee chairman, argued that special treatment for Egypt would set off
requests from many other nations for the same sort of largesse.

But Mr. Eagleburger insisted that Egypt was unique, and told the legislators,
''We do not support forgiveness for any other country.''

Debt Write-Off Criticized

A third criticism was voiced by two other Congressmen, John E. Porter,
Republican of Illinois, and Robert J. Mrazek, Democrat of Long Island. They both
argued that writing off the debt looked as if Washington were buying Cairo's
support in the gulf.

''To the American people, this looks like a $7 billion payoff,'' Mr. Mrazek
declared.

''It looks like we're buying a policy from Egypt,'' Mr. Porter said.

In a broader sense, leading Congressional Democrats are worrying about how they
can have an effect on major Middle East policy decisions - especially the
question of offensive military action - that still lie ahead.

Trying to convey a message of American solidarity to Mr. Hussein, while at the
same time retaining some control on Capitol Hill, Speaker Thomas S. Foley,
Democrat of Washington, is said to favor a resolution that would endorse the
Administration's actions so far but require Mr. Bush to ask Congressional
permission before committing United States forces to combat in the region.

A Vexing Question

Representative Les Aspin, the influential Wisconsin Democrat, has said several
times recently that Mr. Bush ''has no mandate yet to go to war.''

The question of Congressional authorization of war or something approaching war
is highly vexing. Several American Presidents waged war in Vietnam with no
declaration of war, and Congressional resentment led to the passage of the War
Powers Act, which Republican Presidents have never accepted.

Although there is little disposition yet to criticize the broad lines of the
President's policy, given the overwhelming public approval of what he has done,
the mood on Capitol Hill has changed markedly. Two weeks ago, several members of
Congress went so far as to say they were awestruck by the deftness of Mr. Bush's
diplomacy; now the tone has become much more querulous.

Representative Lee H. Hamilton, a senior Democrat from Indiana, is an important
example of the shifting tone. Usually among the most evenhanded and tolerant of
Democratic experts on foreign policy, he snapped angrily at what he evidently
considered evasive answers on Tuesday from John H. Kelly, the Assistant
Secretary of State for Middle East affairs. Mr. Kelly had opposed sanctions
against Iraq on Capitol Hill on July 31, before the invasion but after the
Central Intelligence Agency had warned the White House that one was imminent.

''You left the impression that it was the policy of the United States not to
come to the defense of Kuwait,'' Mr. Hamilton said. Mr. Kelly replied that Mr.
Bush had admitted that United States policy toward Iraq, which included efforts
to win Mr. Hussein's cooperation, ''didn't produce results.''

''And was wrong?'' Mr. Hamilton demanded.

''It did not succeed,'' Mr. Kelly replied.

''That's for sure,'' Mr. Hamilton answered, grim-faced.

At the same hearing, a number of lawmakers who had backed the effort to impose
sanctions this summer denounced Administration policy at that time.
Representative Tom Lantos, Democrat of California, called the President's
earlier approach ''a policy premised on fiction and fantasy,'' and argued that
what he termed ''the obsequious treatment'' of Mr. Hussein by American officials
encouraged him to invade.

With Mr. Kelly clearly on the defensive, Representative Christopher H. Smith, a
Republican from New Jersey, came to his aid, recalling that President Hosni
Mubarak of Egypt had also been fooled about Iraq's intentions. Mr. Smith
asserted that ''if this develops into a blame-America situation, it would be
most hurtful to the sustainability of this policy.''

Congressmen who have been identified as strong supporters of Israel attacked the
Administration's proposed $20 billion arms sale to Saudi Arabia. Representative
Mel Levine, Democrat of California, commented: ''Both its magnitude and its
premises are outrageous. It has little or nothing to do with anybody's
legitimate defense needs.''

Henry S. Rowen, the Assistant Secretary of Defense for international security
matters, said Israel would be given a new arms package that would maintain its
advantage.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Conferring yesterday before a House Appropriations defense
subcommittee hearing were, from left, William M. Diefenderfer, deputy director
of the Office of Management and Budget; Representative David R. Obey, the
subcommittee chairman; Lawrence S. Eagleburger, Deputy Secretary of State, and
David C. Mulford, Undersecretary of Treasury for International Affairs. Man in
background was unidentified. (Paul Hosefros/The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              330 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 20, 1990, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

ESSAY;
Games Asians Play

BYLINE: By William Safire

SECTION: Section A; Page 21, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 770 words

DATELINE: BEIJING


Six thousand muscular young people, 3,000 foreign journalists and an estimated
700,000 ''watchers'' - Chinese assigned to make sure no unsuitable
demonstrations take place - are gathering for next week's Asian Games.

Drab Beijing has been transformed to play host to the 11th Asiad, an our-crowd
Olympics. A Disney-esque panda clasping a gold medal is the symbol; balloons and
banners bedeck the streets leading to Tiananmen Square; new luxury hotels
bedazzle visitors who never expected to find soft toilet paper in the Chinese
capital in this millennium.

To Americans, politics is sport; to Asians, sport is politics. Beijing's
authorities are using this event to assert their regional prestige, to unify
their nation behind the goal of winning gold medals, and to expunge the memory
of last summer's ''events'' at Tiananmen.

Chinese diplomacy is on an egg roll. A secret summit meeting two weeks ago with
Vietnam paved the way for an organized standoff in Cambodia. The deal has been
cut: Vietnam will get out of Cambodia on the understanding that the Chinese will
keep the Khmer Rouge under control. New relations have been established with
Indonesia and Singapore, and Saudi Arabia has been wooed away from its longtime
alliance with Taiwan. What's more, by voting with the civilized world to cut off
trade with Iraq, China's biggest arms customer, Beijing has been hailed for its
good behavior.

All this is part of a drive for respectability. With control of its political
system firmly re-established, the leaders have felt confident enough to end
martial law. They say they have released all but three dozen of what they call
''hooligans'' held in Beijing.

The Deputy Foreign Minister assigned to deal with the U.S., Liu Hua Qiu, tells
my New York Times colleagues and me that he heard some complaints about the deal
to release the leading dissident, Fang Lizhi, but is pleased that the impediment
is removed. Fang was ''small potatoes,'' he claims, and the Chinese are under
the impression that ''the U.S. Government would not make use of him in any way
that would embarrass China.''

These moves are sops to Cerberus - compromises that help establish the basic
posture of internal strictness and external relaxation. The Chinese leaders,
transfixed with the threat of chaos that may follow the death of Deng Xiaoping,
talk only of the need for stability.

This dichotomy - inward frown, outward smile - leads to some illogical
positions. Iraq is an example of this Pushmipullyu policy. China denounces the
invasion of Kuwait and votes in the U.N. for immediate withdrawal, but in the
next breath decries superpower intervention and the use of force. What to do if
Saddam Hussein does not budge? The Chinese do not want to face that decision.
Many here expect a military strike in November, after our elections, but they
will see how it comes out and proceed to second-guess.

The drive for respectability has a purpose: an end to sanctions imposed after
the bloody crackdown. The Chinese want most-favored-nation status, World Bank
and Export-Import Bank loans and a parade of American businessmen to these
snazzy new hotels. They talk about going to the Japanese and Europeans if we do
not hurry, and those economies are eager to move in, but they drive harder
bargains than we do; China wants the American trade.

Is it in our interest to forgive and forget? As an ''old friend,'' I think it is
more in our interest to induce and incentivize. We do China no favor by
endorsing the present leadership's policy of inner tension and outer relaxation;
we do the Chinese justice by linking inner and outer action.

That means we should urge China to worry less about stability and more about
rigidity. The reason that workers and peasants joined the students in last
year's demonstrations was not so much a yearning for democracy as a revulsion at
corruption and nepotism. A welfare state has at least the semblance of idealism;
a payoff state may suit the cynics for a time but is inherently unstable.

I get the sense that the post-Deng struggle has already begun, with Mr. Deng
belatedly swinging back to the reformist camp. A party plenum will be held here
after the Asian Games, and changes may begin at that conclave.

China's future cannot be with a command economy because that will not fit into
the world. The failure of Mr. Gorbachev's perestroika demonstrates that China's
future cannot be with a fake market system in which government sells power.

If capitalism is too much too soon, what's left? Answer: Some Chinese form of
untrammeled enterprise that uses government to enforce honesty.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              331 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 20, 1990, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

AIDS Advocates Report Quilt Vandalized

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section B; Page 5, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 167 words

DATELINE: MIAMI, Sept. 19


The handmade quilt that was put together as a memorial to people who have died
of AIDS was vandalized while on display here last week, and organizers said
today that it would be restored.

Jerry Suarez, of the South Florida group of the national Names Project, which
made the quilt, said two teddy bears had been cut from the quilt. It was being
shown at the Hotel Inter-Continental during a conference of the Council on
Foundations.

''It was very difficult to explain how much this meant,'' said Shelley
Rappaport. ''It's like, would someone walk up to the Vietnam War Memorial and
start scratching names off?'' Both bears will be sewn back on, she said.

A spokesman for the national group said that sections of the quilt have been
shown 257 times this year and that none had never been vandalized.

Mr. Suarez discovered that the quilt had been altered after he found it in a
closet on Saturday. It had been taken off display by a hotel employee at the
request of another group at the hotel.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              332 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 21, 1990, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Corrections

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 22 words


An article yesterday about the Vietnamese Deputy Prime Minister's visit to China
misidentified him. He is Gen. Vo Nguyen Giap.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Correction

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              333 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 21, 1990, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Lost Soldiers Are Identified

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 6, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 84 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 20


The Pentagon today disclosed the identities of four American servicemen killed
in Laos during the Vietnam War whose remains were recovered last January. The
men, all in the Army, were lost on March 5, 1971, and their remains were found
in a joint excavation by the Governments of the United States and Laos last Jan.
5-10. They were identified as David L. Nelson of Kirkland, Wash.; Ralph A.
Moreira Jr.; of Beaver Falls, Pa.; Joel C. Hatley of Albemarle, N.C., and
Michael E. King of Calhoun, Ga.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              334 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 22, 1990, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

OBSERVER;
Hell No More

BYLINE: Russell Baker

SECTION: Section 1; Page 23, Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 744 words


One of the breakfast shows used television magic the other day to reunite an
Army mother in Saudi Arabia for a few minutes with her husband and small son
back home in North Carolina.

Mother stood in the desert and smiled comfortably, and back home with Father
their child said, ''I love you, Mom,'' with such sincere affection that it must
have brought many a sentimental parent to the edge of tears.

This is a military man's dream of what television could be if only it would quit
sniping and get on the team: positive and heart-warming. There is a lot of such
television these days: shots of great-looking young soldiers, male and female,
standing in the desert, smiling, identifying themselves, saying hello to
parents, lovers and pals back home.

Arabian sun and sand suggest happy images of summer, beaches, vacations, and
though we know they are not out there to picnic, how can we not smile when we
see how great they look, how cheerful, how young and competent?

The TV reunion of mother and her loved ones back home produced a dialogue that
is common on television nowadays. Yes, said the mother, it was hard being parted
from her family, but the military was her job, and it was the kind of job in
which such separations were inescapable.

Her husband agreed. No, he didn't object to staying behind to keep the home
fires burning if that was what it took to support his wife in a job she liked.

What an astounding change in American life. War, which used to be hell, is now a
job. And an equal-opportunity employer to boot.

For a parallel you have to go back to the Civil War when men called to duty in
the Union Army could get out of it by paying other men (not women, though) to
take their places. There was a ready supply of men then willing to go to war for
the money.

There always has been, but in the United States the supply has never been so
ample that we could fight a major war - World Wars I and II, Korea and Vietnam,
for instance -without drafting citizens who would have preferred to stay home.

Americans usually liked it this way. They had the ancient democratic republic's
natural distaste for militarized states like imperial Rome and Bismarck's
Germany, and later Hitler's Germany and Mussolini's Italy. Their view was formed
by history, whose lesson was plain: Militarized states tended to destroy
democracy, and for a good military reason - to wit, you can't run a successful
war by majority vote.

Vietnam proved it again. Vietnam was the military's ultimate governmental
nightmare because, for one thing, popular war hatred began to destroy the old
citizen's draft, so essential to success in big wars. Then when Washington
decided the draft was a major cause of antiwar passion, the draft was killed and
the military went professional.

Which is where we are today. Without the draft, Americans had to regard the
military as a desirable outfit to join, rather as people used to regard I.B.M.
and the telephone company as swell outfits to work for.

This meant making the pay competitive, providing good fringe benefits,
emphasizing dandy career opportunities. Expensive advertising campaigns depicted
young men and women mastering the tricky technology necessary to succeeding in
civilian America after they took the sweet early retirement.

For obvious reasons, there were no TV commercials illustrating that the
military's job might also include the necessity to kill and risk being killed or
mutilated.

Well, yes, the Marines did have that commercial with the young man in snazzy
full dress uniform doing something ominously ritualistic with a sword, but
mostly the ads were all promise undiluted by warnings from the Surgeon General.

The result is this huge professional military in the Middle East who talk about
being there as an inescapable part of a pretty good job. They make the Pentagon
sound like one of those aggressive private corporations that tirelessly shift
their personnel from city to city to learn the corporate structure and test
whether they have the mettle for vice presidencies.

It's not surprising that women should want a chance to succeed in the military
business just as they want equal opportunities to succeed in other desirable and
highly respected enterprises. If it is only a job opportunity, are they not
entitled?

It is not a job opportunity, however, so much as a nasty obligation to do and
suffer dreadful things. When we had the draft, we weren't so easily fooled about
that.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-ed

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              335 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 22, 1990, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Suspect in 10 Sexual Murders Is Portrayed as Unremorseful

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Page 26, Column 2; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 292 words

DATELINE: ROCHESTER, Sept. 21


A man accused of being a serial murderer was easily provoked to kill and felt
little remorse for his victims, according to his confessions, which were
released today.

Arthur J. Shawcross, charged with the slayings of 11 women over the last two
years, told the police that he knew what he was doing was wrong. But Mr.
Shawcross said, ''that it didn't matter; that it was business as usual,''
according to the documents.

Over defense objections, Judge Donald Wisner of Monroe County ordered the
release on Thursday of a 79-page statement by Mr. Shawcross in which he
confessed to the slayings, and a 62-page report describing his questioning by
the police in January.

Jury selection for Mr. Shawcross's trial for 10 of the murders began on Monday
and is expected to last through next week. He will be tried later in Wayne
County for an 11th murder.

In the police report, Mr. Shawcross described how he had killed the women, most
of them prostitutes, during sexual encounters gone wrong.

Mr. Shawcross, who is 45 years old, said that he had trouble having sex and that
he killed two of the women when he was unable to perform sexually.

''Investigator Terrence Coleman asked Mr. Shawcross what he thought the police
should do to him,'' the police report said, ''and Mr. Shawcross said that he
should be put in jail for life because if he were ever released, he would kill
again.''

When asked how he knew how to kill, he said, ''Ask Uncle Sam.'' Mr. Shawcross
said he killed two Vietcong women while in Vietnam in the 1960's.

Defense lawyers, who have said they will use an insanity defense, have indicated
they will present evidence about the rape and torture of those women, as well as
the mutilation of some of Mr. Shawcross's later victims.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: ''It was business as usual,'' said Arthur J. Shawcross in a
confession released yesterday in the midst of jury selection in Rochester. He is
shown in January, when he was indicted for the murders of 10 women. (Associated
Press)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              336 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 22, 1990, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

After a Few Steps Tpward a New Life, an Untimely End

BYLINE: By DONATELLA LORCH

SECTION: Section 1; Page 25, Column 2; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 721 words


With his long hair and beard and old woolen coats, Thomas Ebbers looked like so
many of the homeless men who roam New York City's streets and subways. But
friends said he was special, a former recluse struggling not only to put his own
life back together but to help other homeless people do the same. He was
emerging from his shell.

On Thursday evening, as usual, he went to Seward Park on the Lower East Side,
near the church basement where he lived, to smoke a cigarette and drink a beer.
He liked to sit and watch the dusk, his friends said. Just after 9 P.M., police
officers found him dead, sprawled on the ground, stabbed numerous times in the
chest.

''It appears he was not someone who would go out looking for trouble,''
Detective Robert DeFlaminis said.

Wallet Is Untouched

Mr. Ebbers's wallet, with several dollars inside, was untouched, Detective
DeFlaminis said. The park, at East Broadway and Jefferson Street, was well
lighted, but the detectives had not found any witnesses to the stabbing and were
still investigating whether robbery or a dispute had prompted the attack.

Mr. Ebbers's death shocked his friends and colleagues at the various churches
where he spoke as part of the Homeward Bound program, an organization of
self-supporting homeless men and women who reach out to help other homeless
people.

His friends said he rarely spoke of his past life and did not want sympathy.
They said they came to care for him through his hard work and his willingness to
lend a hand and listen to others' problems.

Mr. Ebbers, a 47-year-old Vietnam veteran and photography buff, lived in the
basement of St. Augustine Episcopal Church at 292 Henry Street with a dozen
other men in Homeward Bound.

Terry LeConte, a friend who lived in the basement with him, said Mr. Ebbers came
from Chicago about three years ago. He had served in the Air Force in Vietnam as
a technician in a photography unit, Mr. LeConte said. But problems developed
when he returned home: He lost a job, got a divorce, and eventually suffered a
nervous breakdown. Leaving behind two children, he came to New York City, where
he was homeless and drank heavily. He was working to overcome his alcohol
problem, Mr. LeConte said.

Protesting City Policies

Mr. Ebbers had been with Homeward Bound for more than a year, said Connie
Foreman, the resource specialist for the program. For six months, beginning in
June 1989, he was among more than 300 homeless people who camped out in front of
City Hall to protest the city's housing policies, Ms. Foreman said.

About a year ago, he also joined the Interfaith Assembly on Homelessness and
Housing at the Cathedral of St. John the Divine.

''He had tremendous integrity,'' said Marc Greenberg, the director of the
program. ''He was very intelligent. But he was a very private person.''

Edward Gemerchak, an organizer for the Interfaith Assembly, said, ''He had a lot
of skills, a lot of talents he was learning to use.''

At St. John the Divine, Mr. Ebbers took speech classes. He was trained to teach
other homeless people everything from balancing their budget to self-esteem and
how to tell people their personal story, Mr. Gemerchak said. And he often spoke
to church congregations, relating his story and earning $25 an engagement. About
nine months ago, Mr. Ebbers began to feel more confident and more hopeful, Mr.
Gemerchak said. He talked more, he was more willing to help, he spent more time
in the company of others. ''He learned to be a community organizer,'' Mr.
Gemerchak said.

Mr. Ebbers knew that he had made many mistakes in his life and had alienated his
family, Mr. Greenberg said. ''He never cared about others until he came to
Homeward Bound,'' he said. ''He used to say he hoped to give back all the
support he had been given.''

On Thursday afternoon, Mr. Ebbers left St. John the Divine about 2 P.M.,
Detective DeFlaminis said. As was his custom, he walked home all the way
downtown to the Lower East Side. As evening fell, he went out to buy bagels for
his friends in the basement, Ms. Foreman said. Then he went to Seward Park. He
liked the solitude. He would sit alone and think, Ms. Foreman said.

''Tom had a lot of smarts,'' Mr. LeConte said. ''But more than that, he was very
lovable, very understanding. He always put his best foot forward.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              337 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 23, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

SOME BOAT PEOPLE WILL BE RETURNED

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 9, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 426 words

DATELINE: HANOI, Vietnam, Sept. 22


Vietnam, Britain and the United Nations refugee commission have reached an
agreement on the repatriation of Vietnamese boat people from camps in Hong Kong.

Officials representing Hanoi, London, Hong Kong and the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees initialed a statement late Friday that laid out steps
in the new program.

The statement said the goal of the program was to send back those Vietnamese
''who, while not volunteering to return to Vietnam, are nevertheless not opposed
to repatriation.''

The agreement, initialed at the end of three days of talks in Hanoi, gives the
United Nations commission an important role in insuring that there is no
coercion. The commission has said that it will not endorse forcible
repatriation.

'Significant Step' Seen

A British spokesman said today that the agreement marked a significant step
toward resolving the situation of the Vietnamese boat people.

''It opens up the possibility of increasing the rate of returns'' of Vietnamese
from Hong Kong, he said.

The agreement covers only Hong Kong. The British crown colony is holding in
camps an estimated 54,000 people who are seeking asylum. Most do not qualify as
refugees under international criteria and are ineligible for resettlement in the
West.

There are also thousands of Vietnamese in camps in Indonesia, Malaysia, the
Philippines and Thailand.

Under the new agreement, the United Nations commission will submit to the
Vietnamese Government lists of people to be repatriated from Hong Kong. Hanoi
will then have one month to confirm the lists and authorize the people's return.


Vietnam Has Reacted Cautiously

Hanoi, which is trying to break out of its political and economic isolation, has
been reluctant to take part in any program considered inhumane.

It came under heavy criticism from the United States when it allowed Britain to
send back 51 boat people from Hong Kong in December 1989. The members of the
group were awakened and taken to the airport in the middle of the night.

The British spokesman said the agreement had been initialed by Deputy Foreign
Secretary Vu Khoan of Vietnam; Ambassador Emrys Davies of Britain; Sergio Vieira
de Mello, the aide in official of the United Nations High Commissioner's office
in Geneva with responsibility for Asia, and Alistair Asprey, Hong Kong's
Secretary for Security.

Under a United Nations voluntary return program begun in March 1989, 4,361 boat
people have returned to Vietnam. But countries playing host to the boat people
said that program was moving too slowly.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              338 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 23, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

In the Gulf, the Danger of a Diplomatic Solution . . .;
. . . And the Horrors of a Desert War

BYLINE: By James Webb; James Webb was Assistant Secretary of Defense and
Secretary of the Navy in the Reagan Administration.

SECTION: Section 4; Page 21, Column 2; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 1108 words

DATELINE: ARLINGTON, Va.


President Bush has not only embarked on his own voyage into the Persian Gulf,
that Bermuda Triangle of Presidencies. Unlike his two immediate predecessors, he
has dragged more than a hundred thousand of our troops with him. And as the
President struggles at home, our troops have been learning to cope with a sun
that can melt electrical wiring, sand so fine that few filters can keep it out
of gear boxes and a growing ennui that seeps through even the most careful
monitoring of our press corps.

The debate over our role in the Persian Gulf crisis has focused on national,
rather than specific military goals. The fundamental questions, upon which all
others inevitably rest, have not been addressed. Why did we send such a huge
contingent of ground troops in the first place? And under what conditions are we
going to use them or bring them home?

Answers are not forthcoming. Military officials intimate that the question would
expose tactical options. Administration officials talk in vague terms: Defense
Secretary Cheney is telling us to prepare for a commitment that may take years.
Others have been quoted as saying we may be there for a decade. At the same time
we are being reassured, amidst many loud calls to initiate a war with Iraq, that
the U.S. military commitment is wholly defensive.

As one who opposed the Reagan Administration's overt tilt toward Iraq which
caused the Persian Gulf problems in 1987 and 1988, I have no desire to give
consolation to Saddam Hussein now that he is getting the attention he deserves.
But if our experience since World War II tells us anything, it is that
justifiable national goals are too frequently lost through unfocused and
ineffective military policy. And the strongest likelihood is that our ground
buildup in Saudi Arabia is the product not of conscious strategy, but of an
initial overreaction that compounds itself with the arrival of every C-5
transport.

The Kuwaiti dilemma is not new. This is the third time since 1961 that Iraq has
asserted, militarily, its claim to Kuwaiti territory. As such, positioning U.S.
aviation units into Saudi Arabia with ground forces to defend them was
appropriate as a short-term guarantee of Saudi sovereignty. But the huge buildup
of forces began after it became clear that Iraq had no military designs on Saudi
Arabia. And coupled with escalating rhetoric, it has created an intractable
siege, with the survival of President Bush, as well as Saddam Hussein, hanging
in the balance.

The U.S., whose interests in the region are far less than Kuwait's, Saudi
Arabia's, Israel's, Europe's and Japan's, is carrying the overwhelming burden.
True, others are involved in small scale - the Egyptians, who stand to benefit
to the tune of at least $7 billion in forgiven debts, the Syrians, traditional
enemies of Iraq, who are sending a few thousand soldiers, other Arab nations
whose royal families are also threatened, European and other allies who are
throwing in a ship or two here, and a military unit there. We appear to have
traded the promise of greater economic help to the Soviets for Mikhail
Gorbachev's rather noncommital statement of support.

And now we are out on the international hustings, asking for financial
contributions for our effort. Mr. Bush hastens to assure us that this does not
make our soldiers mercenaries, but anyone with a relative or loved one in Saudi
Arabia will quickly argue that this is not a fair trade.

And what is the impact, strategically, of the introduction of all these ground
forces? In grand sum, it can only be judged as negative.

Those who have called for massive, pre-emptive air strikes against Iraq must now
contemplate the detriment of tens of thousands of American soldiers within range
of Iraqi chemical weapons, as well as possible terrorist attacks from Iraq and
now Iran.

Those who worry about the possibility of crisis in other parts of the world must
recognize that a large percentage of American maneuver forces - including as
much as half of the Marine Corps - are tied down in a waiting game in the
desert.

Those who believe we should use these forces offensively should realize that
this would galvanize the Arab world, invite chemical retaliation and an
expansion of the hostilities, produce great numbers of casualties and encourage
worldwide terrorism - in short, open up a Pandora's box. This is not to say that
our soldiers and marines would not fight well. The Iraqi army is not a very good
army; it is also war-weary. But it demonstrated against Iran the time-honored
maxim that the armies of totalitarian nations are capable of absorbing huge
losses - recall the 3.7 million German soldiers who died in World War II, and
the million Communist soldiers who died in the Vietnam war.

The President should be aware that, while most Americans are laboring very hard
to support him, a mood of cynicism is just beneath their veneer of respect. Many
are claiming that the buildup is little more than a ''Pentagon budget drill,''
designed to preclude cutbacks of an Army searching for a mission as bases in
NATO begin to disappear.

Others wonder about the predominance of Texans in the Administration, and the
dual benefit that higher oil prices will bring to the Southwest: a more robust
economy and the concomitant salvation of many S.& L.'s. Others, myself included,
worry greatly about a military commitment that has taken on a momentum of its
own - or perhaps a hidden strategy.

General Colin Powell is said to have advised the President that the U.S. should
take this sort of military action or it would no longer be a superpower. This
calls to mind the Suez Crisis of 1956, after Egyptian leader Nasser nationalized
the Suez Canal. The British were reeling from a budget affected by the military
costs of maintaining the Empire. The Suez Canal was vital for transporting oil.
And Anthony Eden, the British Prime Minister who had great antipathy toward
Nasser for his anti-British rhetoric, wanted him ''destroyed.''

Britain went forward, largely to preserve its place at the table of the great
powers, drawing in the French and the Israelis. Their attack sputtered in the
desert. The U.S., their banker, threatened to withhold support for the British
pound if they did not cease their invasion. The Soviets moved into Hungary. And
sure enough, when the dust settled, Britain was no longer a great power.

Too much is at risk, and too many questions remain for this buildup to continue
without the Administration clarifying its direction. And if offensive action is
in the cards, it should be taken only after the President receives a declaration
of war from the Congress.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              339 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 23, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

UNIVERSITY PRESSES;
Wild in the West: The Land, the Men, the Tales

BYLINE: By BARBARA KINGSOLVER; Barbara Kingsolver's most recent book is ''Animal
Dreams,'' a novel.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 33, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1153 words



RIVER OF TRAPS
A Village Life.
By William deBuys and Alex Harris.
Illustrated. 238 pp. Albuquerque:
University of New Mexico Press. $19.95.

My favorite Georgia O'Keeffe legend tells of a magazine writer who landed on the
artist's doorstep in Taos, N.M., declaring, ''I've come all the way from New
York to see you!'' O'Keeffe replied, ''Well, this is the front.'' She turned.
''And this is the back. Now you've seen me.'' She strode to her studio and
slammed the door.

Nowadays, cow skulls over the mantel are enjoying their 15 minutes of fame and
visitors are welcome to besiege Taos, but astute tourists might suspect the real
northern New Mexico is somewhere behind a slammed door, lurking with its lip
curled. They are right. Any who wish to know it can skip the galleries full of
pink howling coyotes, stay home and read an exceptional documentary book,
''River of Traps.''

The story is framed by the photographer Alex Harris and the writer William
deBuys, who, with Mr. deBuys's wife, the painter Anne deBuys, fled the moral
flatlands that ''years of Nixon and Vietnam'' had rendered unsympathetic for a
New Mexican mountain village so remote that ''even the barbed wire in the fence
gates seemed to creak in the old-fashioned, backwoods Spanish that was spoken
there.'' They bought a ramshackle farm and spent the next decade learning to
live up to its demands.

In the story's center stands their neighbor, Jacobo Romero, who seems
picturesque but in fact is about as cute as Georgia O'Keeffe. The book opens on
old Jacobo shoeing his horse by a dusty road, mumbling greetings to the
recreational vehicles that roll past, completing a quaint tableau. The greeting
he quietly offers in Spanish is not printable here.

Jacobo, who also speaks an inventive form of English, is the village's oral
historian extraordinaire and Democratic Party chairman (he gives each voter a
dollar and a beer). He takes his young neighbors under his wing, showing them
the arcane art of irrigating their fields from acequias, the community canals.
Water rights, more precious than money, are shared on a timetable, and
repeatedly Jacobo admonishes William and Alex to watch their water closely. When
they follow his advice they discover in the dead of night that Jacobo, whose
orchard lies upstream, is stealing water from them. They close his water gate
and never mention it.

Jacobo calls them ''the gringos,'' sometimes affectionately and sometimes, they
observe, with the sound of an epitaph: ''Here lies Bill deBuys, gringo. He
always had more ideas than sense.'' Meanwhile, the author pecks at his
typewriter, feeling rather guilty for producing nothing more useful than words.
And Alex ''bore a camera seemingly attached to his anatomy, like a large goiter.
It was a bad habit, but not a dangerous one, and people forgave him for it.''
Preoccupied with art and farm work, the gringos listen to Jacobo's tales of
seven decades in the mountains, but won't understand for many years that his
stories are parables, that Jacobo is what they came looking for.

Because it was assembled after the fact, their portrait of him has a pleasantly
jumpy, associative structure, like human memory, and is blessedly free of the
self-consciousness of a premeditated ''memoir.'' Instead, it brims with gifts of
language and vision: an old barn's ''resistance to collapse appeared less
structural than metaphysical.'' The writer's horse has ''a roman nose, feet as
big as frying pans, and a lower lip like a bicycle tire. Bareback, its withers
would threaten your genetic future.'' The poetry of the text is matched by Mr.
Harris's photographs, which are emotionally lean and visually rich. Jacobo in
his collapsing barn, striped by light, looks aristocratic; telling a story
inside the steamed windows of a truck cab, he betrays the claustrophobia of
crippled old age.

Slowly Jacobo wins us over. Near the end he describes his bootlegging days. He
was crooked, he admits, but not any more. The gringos suggest he may still be a
little crooked: ''Maybe you know that ladron who used to steal the water.''

'' 'IHijole!' He covers his grin with a thick hand. 'If I find that son of a
bitchy I gonna hit 'em with the shovel!' ''

The greatest surprise in ''River of Traps'' is that it is not, finally, a
portrait of one old man with arthritis-splayed fingers and remarkable memories,
nor is it simply ''a village life,'' as the subtitle modestly purports. It's an
account of a unique American circumstance. The Hispanos of northern New Mexico
have held their lonely frontier for more than three centuries - longer than it's
been claimed by the United States or Mexico. For most of that time their economy
was precapitalist. Jacobo's generation weighs neither goods nor lives against
cash. He seems insane when he irrigates in the rain, or when he cuts the
tractor-inaccessible corners of his hayfield by hand, with a scythe, though that
effort costs him more in pain than the hay is worth. He strives for a visible
perfection in his land, without keeping accounts, the way others of us might
seek it in our families. For the old ones, the value of the land and its
products is similarly unmeasurable.

''River of Traps'' is a timely book, for it reveals some of the genuine
underpinnings of the much-popularized Santa Fe Style: an economy of natural
materials with nothing wasted, an esthetic that embraces the land with
reverence. Long after pink coyotes have come and gone through the living rooms
of Manhattan, men like Jacobo will be cutting perfect fields of hay in the
mountains that capitalism forgot.

A REALLY HOT TAMALE

At the end of the summer his uncle paid him his wages: three silver dollars, the
most money he had ever touched that belonged to him. Juan de Dios had left for
El Valle a week or two earlier, and so his uncle put him on the train at
Antonito alone. It was a relief to leave his uncle and a moment of triumph to
set out on his first solitary journey.

''I remember there were many people at the depot, selling tamales, carne seca,
any kind of food. Everybody was pushing and calling. And the train made a lot of
noise too. ''I get on the train and lean out the window. There is a man right
there on the siding, and he say, 'You better buy some tamales so you don't go
hungry.' Then the train start to pull out. So I say, 'Bueno, dame dos tamales.'
And the train is moving now so he has to run a little to keep up. But he hands
me the tamales and I take them. And he say, 'Five cents.'

''And now the train is almost to the end of the depot, and I don't give him
nothing. The man curse me. He shake his fist and shout. But I just smile, and I
take a bite of that tamale.'' Closing his eyes, Jacobo licked his lips. ''That
was a good tamale,'' he said. ''I don't think I ever have another any better.
But I was a bad boy. I was a little crooked in those days.''

From ''River of Traps.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Jacobo Romero climbing a farm fence in northern New Mexico.
(From ''River of Traps'')

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              340 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 23, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Abandoned for Their Own Good

BYLINE: By ELIZABETH NUNEZ-HARRELL; Elizabeth Nunez-Harrell is the author of a
novel, ''When Rocks Dance.''

SECTION: Section 7; Page 22, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 893 words



BODIES OF WATER
By Michelle Cliff.
155 pp. New York:
E.P. Dutton. $17.95.

From beginning to end, ''Bodies of Water,'' Michelle Cliff's first collection of
short stories, is shadowed by dark but subtle images of the child immigrant,
sometimes the first-person narrator of these wonderfully rich and disturbing
tales. This Jamaican-born author seems to understand, as perhaps only one who
was a child immigrant herself can, the complex pain of the child whose parents
have sent her away to another country for her own good.

Jess, the character who dominates most of the stories, struggles to reconcile
her feelings of abandonment and alienation with her mother's good intentions:
''Your father and I want for you and your brother a better life.'' As an adult,
she anxiously presses a woman she has barely met about the fate of a boy child
she does not know: ''She, the child-immigrant, knows intimately the removal of
children. She takes the boy's part, her suspicion drenched in assumption.
'Didn't you want him?' ''

Each story in this collection tells a tale of abandonment, sometimes motivated
purely by callousness, sometimes by racism, sexism or homophobia, sometimes for
the good of the child. Regardless of the reason, it is the abandonment that
leaves such individuals damaged and scarred; these are the people Ms. Cliff
celebrates. She presents them not as passive players in their dismal fates, but
as people who struggle (though more quietly than not) to escape their condition
even when escape is not possible.

In the first tale, set in Jamaica, Ms. Cliff tells of a 14-year-old boy
''bartered . . . from his mother; a case of condensed milk, two dozen tins of
sardines, five pounds of flour, several bottles of cooking oil, permission to
squat on Charlotte's cane-piece - fair exchange.'' The boy becomes a servant in
the home of the narrator's aunt, but in spite of his almost total enslavement,
he manages to hide a secret that gives him some fulfillment. Ultimately that
secret is discovered, but Ms. Cliff skillfully focuses the reader's attention,
as she does in the other stories in this collection, not on the character's
downfall, but rather on his triumph, his courageous resistance to oppression.

Other tales follow this pattern. A gifted teen-ager destroys the prized car of
his mother's lover, but loses his battle for attention. A slave hangs himself on
his whipping post. A black woman trumpet player escapes racism in the United
States but finds a more virulent kind at the hands of the Nazis. A Vietnam
veteran successfully eludes guards at a V.A. hospital, then falls asleep in the
woods but meets a worse fate. A girl is impregnated by her brother and takes
revenge - at the advanced age of 75. A light-skinned girl, rejected by her
darker-skinned sisters, accepts the privileges of her color in Europe, but when,
homesick and repentant, she returns to the United States in 1963, she discovers
a cultural militancy that excludes her. A young man survives his parents'
attempt to ''cure'' his homosexuality, but is struck down with AIDS.

These bodies of water lapping against the shores of our common world remind us
of human indifference and cruelty, but tell us too of the courage of those we
would harm and of their will to survive. Michelle Cliff uses spare and taut
language that sharply underscores the harsh realities of the worlds she
re-creates. ''Bodies of Water'' is a remarkable collection, a testimony to human
endurance and the triumph of the spirit.

THE BEST PART OF YOU IS BLACK

The grandmother's prized possession sits against the wall in the front room,
souvenir of a happier time; when her husband was alive and her daughter held
promise. An upright piano, decorated in gilt, chosen by the King of Bohemia and
the Knights of the Rosy Cross, so says it. The grandmother rubs the mahogany and
ebony with lemon oil, cleans the ivory with rubbing alcohol, scrubbing hard,
then takes a chamois to the entire instrument, slower now, soothing it after
each fierce cleaning.

The ebony and the ivory and the mahogany come from Africa - the birthplace of
civilization. That is another of the grandmother's lessons. From the forests of
the Congo and the elephants of the Great Rift Valley, where fossils are there
for the taking and you have but to pull a bone from the great stack to find the
first woman or the first man.

The girl, under the eye of the grandmother, practices the piano each afternoon.
The sharp ear of the grandmother catches missed notes, passages played too fast,
articulation, passion lost sliding across the keys. The grandmother speaks to
her of passion, of the right kind. ''Hastiness, carelessness, will never lead
you to any real feeling, or,'' she pauses, ''any lasting accomplishment. You
have to go deep inside yourself - to the best part.'' The black part, she
thinks, for if anything can cloud your senses, it's that white blood. ''The best
part,'' she repeats to her granddaughter seated beside her on the piano bench,
as she is atilt, favoring one hip.

The granddaughter, practicing the piano, remembers them leaving the last place,
on the run, begging an old man and his son to transport the precious African
thing - for to the grandmother the piano is African, civilized, the sum of its
parts - on the back of a pick-up truck.

From ''Bodies of Water.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Michelle Cliff, (E.P. Dutton)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              341 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 23, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Why the Body Is Disgusting

BYLINE: By WENDY DONIGER; Wendy Doniger is the Mircea Eliade Professor of
History of Religions at the University of Chicago. Under the name of Wendy
Doniger O'Flaherty, she has written many books, including ''The Origins of Evil
in Hindu Mythology'' and ''Other Peoples' Myths.''

SECTION: Section 7; Page 27, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1912 words



SIN AND FEAR
The Emergence of a Western Guilt Culture,
13th-18th Centuries.
By Jean Delumeau.
Translated by Eric Nicholson.
677 pp. New York: St. Martin's Press. $39.95.

The sins of this book are greatly outweighed by its virtues. Jean Delumeau, a
professor of history at the College of France in Paris, is widely and
justifiably regarded as one of the leading historians of Christianity, and ''Sin
and Fear'' is a monument of flawless scholarship. Mr. Delumeau documents ''the
rise of the European guilt mentality,'' ''the history of sin (that is, the
history of a negative self-image),'' ''the fear of one's self.'' He traces the
development of Christian contempt for the world, for its vanity and
impermanence, the hatred of the body and the fear of death, culminating in an
evangelism of fear, ''the movement from the fear one feels to that which one
strives to share with others.''

The detailed text (supported by 3,771 footnotes) supplies us with hundreds of
examples of every relevant argument. It is well written and stunningly erudite.
Mr. Delumeau's translations are accurate and charming, even to the point of
committing terrible rhyming doggerel in French (now in English: Eric Nicholson's
translation, too, is first-rate) to render terrible rhyming doggerel in Latin.

The themes taken up by Mr. Delumeau are analyzed theologically and
psychologically. Woody Allen has provided what is probably the best theological
answer to the problem of evil: God is not evil; He is just an underachiever. But
the Christian theologians took another tack: ''Unhappiness exists because of
evil. Each explains the other, due to the sin whose daughter is melancholy,''
Mr. Delumeau paraphrases them. He defines ''excessive culpabilization'' as ''any
of the arguments that inflated the dimensions of sin over and against those of
forgiveness.''

There was a great emphasis on the dark view of life espoused by theologians who
followed the teachings of St. Augustine, he says. ''The result was a type of
preaching that spoke more . . . of sin than of pardon. . . . of Hell than of
Paradise.'' And he concludes: ''As a modern philosopher [M. Vienne] wittily puts
it, 'Timeo, ergo sum' [I fear, therefore I am], and it is true that, when viewed
in clear focus, fear is a 'call to being.' . . . Experienced postively, guilt
creates tensions that can redeem the elite. These tensions can actively foster
well being, stimulate creative anxiety, help to develop a sense of
responsibility, and also, thanks to introspection, open treasures locked deep
within ourselves. On the negative side, however, excessive fear as well as an
excessively promoted language of guilt can paralyze, discourage, and alienate. .
. . I have shown the religious discourse's slide from the moderate to the
excessive, as well as its astonishing misuse of biblical quotations, whether
ripped from their context or taken to the limit of their sense.'' As a scholar,
Mr. Delumeau laments the misquotations as much as he laments the blighted lives.

Psychologically, Mr. Delumeau traces the evolution of ''a guilt complex about
sexuality. . . . Sexual intercourse, even in the context of marriage, is thus
only a last resort; a remedy, but only because there is a disease.'' Not only is
sex dangerous - as a 17th-century preacher, Paul Beurrier, revealingly remarked,
''Our bodies resemble glasses that break when they touch one another'' - but the
body itself is nasty and disgusting. In the 13th century an influential treatise
commented: ''Man is nought but fetid sperm, a bag of excrement, and food for
worms. . . . In life, he produces dung and vomit. In death, he will produce
stench and decay.'' Yet, as Mr. Delumeau comments, ''At its root, there is mad
love.''

Mad, indeed. Mr. Delumeau shows how the Christian attitude to sin in its
exaggerated form became an obsessional neurosis, a paranoid combination of
perfectionism and narcissism. And he offers a historically specific explanation
for this cluster of macabre phenomena: ''When the presence of corpses killed by
plagues, famines, and soldiers becomes obsessive, the guilt-instilling sermon
with its nauseating imagery will find a new audience. Untiringly connecting
death and crime, sin and punishment, it seems confirmed by facts, and this very
confirmation feeds and thus fills it with even stronger force. It speaks of fear
to people who are afraid and, finally, it speaks their own fear. . . . The
macabre was linked with the plague. Yet it was also tied to war.'' Western
civilization was a paranoid who had real enemies. Certain factors, he argues,
led to the guilt complex, and when they vanished, the guilt complex receded:
''In the eighteenth century and after, the alleviation of serious threats to
daily life encouraged challenging the validity of . . . dire pronouncements'' by
preachers, he says.

But, as an American priest who was forced to speak Latin at the Gregorian
University in Rome was once heard to say, ''Haec opinio non tenet aquam.'' Not
only is Mr. Delumeau's explanation politically naive (what about the power of
the church to enforce its beliefs?), but it is psychologically and theologically
naive. Was there ever ''alleviation of serious threats to daily life?'' Was it
inevitable that these historical factors alone would produce the guilt complex?

Had Mr. Delumeau broadened his historical focus, he might not have assumed the
inevitability of the belief in sin, an assumption that he states candidly at the
start: ''I think that sin exists, I feel its presence in me. Furthermore, I
cannot see how one can eliminate the idea of an Original Sin, whose scars we
still bear.'' Mr. Delumeau realizes that the Christians were unique in the
tenacity with which they maintained their assumptions about sin: ''No
civilization had ever attached as much importance to guilt and shame as did the
Western world from the thirteenth to the eighteenth centuries. . . . Any history
of sin must also study the networks of relationships and attitudes that make up
the collective unconscious.'' But he does not begin to make such an apparently
Jungian study; in speaking of ''guilt and shame'' he does not even take into
account the useful distinction, long ago devised by anthropologists, between
''shame'' cultures and ''guilt'' cultures.

Though he repeatedly acknowledges the relevance of comparative data, he does not
make use of those data to modify his own assumptions. When noting certain
beliefs about ghosts in China, Madagascar and Mexico, he draws a conclusion that
serves merely to bolster his Eurocentricism: ''Although the customs described
above belong to non-European cultures, they help us to better understand our own
past and our own macabre tradition - which seem far less dismal when compared
with similar practices elsewhere.''

But horror of the body and the myth of a lost Golden Age, the concept of
transience and the vivid depiction of horrendous hells - all of these ideas,
together with the real historical factors of incessant wars and diseases that
make the Black Plague look like a bad cold, existed in India but did not lead to
any sense of ''the fear of one's self'' or a ''negative self-image,'' to use Mr.
Delumeau's own terminology. Instead, they led to several other concepts of the
origin of evil, including belief in karma, or the inheritance of the
consequences of good and bad actions committed in former lives. That doctrine
explains evil in terms of personal responsibility but not guilt, responsibility
without remorse; you are responsible for things you do not remember, but they
are not sins, and you may remedy them in various ways to make sure there will be
no future consequences. A similar distinction between conscious and unconscious
sin is made in Christianity. Thus a 17th-century sermon: ''If it is a horrible
sacrilege to willfully hide a deadly sin which one does not remember, it is also
one not to confess something one has forgotten through not using the necessary
means of remembering it.'' But the Christian forgets or remembers sin, the Hindu
a rectifiable mistake.

It is useful not only to compare 16th-century Europe with other places, but that
age with other periods as well, including our own age. Mr. Delumeau begins to
make such a comparison, but does not realize the degree to which it negates his
argument for the specificity or uniqueness of his historical explanation: ''Does
not our own epoch help us to understand the beginnings of European modernity?
The mass killings of the twentieth century from 1914 to the genocide of Cambodia
- passing through the various holocausts and the deluge of bombs on Vietnam -
the menace of nuclear war, the ever-increasing use of torture, the
multiplication of Gulags. . . . Here are so many factors that, gathered
together, create a climate of anxiety in our civilization which, in certain
respects, is comparable to that of our ancestors between the time of the plague
and the end of the Wars of Religion.''

Much of the nightmare world of the 13th century strikes an uncomfortably
familiar note. The remark of the early Christian theologian and apologist
Tertullian that ''nothing so pleases God as a thin body'' reminds us not only of
the medieval holy anorexia of which Caroline Bynum has written so eloquently,
but of similar manifestations in our own time that seek no divine justification.
Another modern echo of Delumeau's texts is the psychoanalytic version of the
myth of the Fall, the premise that ''a prehistoric event is the cause of the
feeling of collective guilt.''

These, then, are perennial problems, though each age experiences them in its own
way, and Mr. Delumeau has shown us the particular way in which Christians
experienced them for five vivid centuries. But there is one final, ironic link
between these Christian mythologies and the pagan mythologies Mr. Delumeau has
touched too glancingly. In addition to Eden, the time before lust, there was a
Golden Age that was distant not in time but in space, in which lust was not
absent but devoid of evil. This is the Land of Cockaigne, where people ''make
love without any moral anxiety,'' and the Eden people sought was an ''imaginary
geography of distant countries that Original Sin had not polluted,'' a place
that was soon imagined to be in the New World or the Orient. The early voyages
of discovery meant that for a time ''reality strengthened these illusions,'' he
says.

Again, Mr. Delumeau falls back on the history of his particular period, pointing
to the idea that there really was a place where the imaginary geography was
nourished. But this is to misunderstand the very nature of the myth. All
mythologies of a golden age teach us that we can conquer neither physical evil
nor moral evil; we cannot be immortal and we cannot be perfectly good. The
Hindus know that the present is always the Kali Yuga, the final, evil age; they
know that the Krta Yuga, the Golden Age, is always another time, another place.
As Lewis Carroll's Alice puts it: ''Jam yesterday, jam tomorrow, but never jam
today.''

In vain European explorers sought the garden of earthly paradise in the East.
But European theologians and historians might do well to emulate at least a part
of this ''Orientalism'' by seeking in the East the true myth of the earthly
paradise - that is, a human understanding ''unpolluted by Original Sin,'' a more
comprehensive approach to the problem of evil than has ever been contemplated in
the West.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              342 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 23, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

BRITAIN'S IRREPRESSIBLE PUBLIC MAN

BYLINE: By ANTHONY LEWIS; Anthony Lewis, a columnist for The New York Times, was
The Times's London bureau chief from 1964 to 1972.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 9, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1890 words



THE TIME OF MY LIFE
By Denis Healey.
Illustrated. 607 pp. New York:
W. W. Norton & Company. $29.95.

How many American politicians, asked what they were going to read on vacation
this past summer, would have listed the new Abram Tertz novel, ''Goodnight!,''
and said they might make their first serious attempt at Proust? Denis Healey
gave that answer to the British weekly The Listener. He added that he always
takes along the poetry of Yeats and Emily Dickinson for rereading. He meant it,
too.

Denis Healey is that rarity, the literate politician. The type is found more
often in Britain than most places. Harold Macmillan, while waiting for the
Conservative Party grandees to decide whether he would succeed Anthony Eden as
Prime Minister, read ''Pride and Prejudice.'' (''Very soothing,'' he remarked in
his memoirs.) Mr. Healey not only reads and writes books; he has a serious
amateur interest in music and painting, and he knows a dozen languages,
including Latin and Greek.

From all that, someone who does not know the man might think of him as an
effete, bookish sort of politician. Far from it. He is a large, ruddy,
boisterous man, at home in the knockabout politics of the Labor Party, a
sharp-tongued debater in the House of Commons. Challenged in the House once by
Sir Geoffrey Howe, a mild-mannered Conservative, Mr. Healey replied that being
attacked by Sir Geoffrey was ''like being savaged by a dead sheep.'' (He gives
Sir Geoffrey due credit for a delayed riposte. When Mr. Healey congratulated him
years later on becoming Foreign Secretary, Sir Geoffrey told the House that it
was ''like being nuzzled by an old ram.'') Wit and learning are ingredients for
an unusual political memoir. To them must be added Mr. Healey's range of
experience and his first-class judgment. He was Britain's Minister of Defense
and Chancellor of the Exchequer in the Labor Governments of the 1960's and 70's.
He has a broad acquaintance among European and American leaders, he has dealt
with the great issues of the postwar world and he is widely respected for his
good sense and his frankness in pointing out when the Emperor has no clothes.

The result is a wonderful book, an extraordinary mix of insight into world
politics and observation of human eccentricities, failings and splendors. ''The
Time of My Life'' will appeal almost as much to an American as to a British
audience. I know of no politician who has written an autobiography at the same
time so amusing and so informative.

On American Presidents, for example. Mr. Healey met President Richard Nixon for
the first time when Mr. Nixon visited London in 1969 soon after taking office.
''Nixon was sweating with anxiety when we met; he was more lacking in
self-confidence than any leading politician I have known.'' But then and at
later meetings Mr. Nixon knew the problems of his nuclear responsibility
''inside out, and discussed them with us [the NATO defense ministers] with great
frankness and courtesy. In this he was a marked contrast with President Johnson,
one of the few politicians with whom I found it uncomfortable to be in the same
room.'' Mr. Healey went to the White House in 1987 with Neil Kinnock, the Labor
Party leader, to meet President Ronald Reagan. ''When we entered the Oval
Office, President Reagan strode immediately towards me, thrust out his hand, and
said: 'Nice to meet you, Mr. Ambassador!' The real Ambassador murmured
plaintively: 'But I've already met him, eleven times.' ''

Recurring themes in the book are Communism, the cold war and nuclear weapons.
''My generation,'' Mr. Healey writes, tended ''to see the communist regimes as
absolute evil and incapable of change - except through some external
intervention. My visits to Eastern Europe cured me of such illusions. No
external power could destroy national traditions which were rooted in centuries
of history. Moreover . . . once Stalin died, it was clear that Soviet Communism
already carried the seeds of its own destruction. The Russia of Tolstoy,
Tchaikovsky and Herzen was still there beneath the surface.'' Mr. Healey wrote
that before the events of the last year in Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union.

Mr. Healey argues compellingly that the West missed an important opportunity to
ease the cold war in the late 1950's. He points out that Nikita Khrushchev cut
Soviet troop strength between 1955 and 1960 from 5,763,000 to 2,423,00 - a fact
that most of us have forgotten. Moreover, he writes, ''in order to maintain the
loyalty of the East European Governments, Khrushchev was obliged to allow their
peoples higher living standards than the people of the Soviet Union itself. . .
. Russia was beginning to learn what Britain had already learned - that the
economic cost of empire is higher than the economic gain.''

He makes sense even of that numbing subject, nuclear weapons. After first
embracing the concept of limited nuclear war, Mr. Healey concluded that there
was no such thing - that any use of nuclear weapons would lead to devastating
exchanges. When Mr. Nixon and Henry Kissinger were negotiating the first
Strategic Arms Limitation Treaty, Mr. Healey urged that it include MIRV's - the
multiple independently targeted warheads developed by American scientists. He
argued that though the Soviet Union was then behind in that development, it
would in time be able to put more warheads in its larger missiles. The Americans
rejected the advice, but, Mr. Healey says, ''Kissinger later admitted that
[this] was a serious mistake. [Now] Washington looks like making the same
mistake by refusing to include sea-launched cruise-missiles in the START talks.
Here too, Russia is bound to catch up with the United States, which would be far
more vulnerable to such missiles, since most of its population and industry lie
close to its Atlantic and Pacific coasts.''

Mr. Kissinger is generally treated with admiration here, but Mr. Healey pulls no
punches in discussing his great failure, Vietnam. America's Manichaean view of
world politics, Mr. Healey writes, combined with an inability to understand its
allies to produce the domino theory. ''This theory held that if the United
States lost one battle, or failed to respond to one challenge, all its alliances
would collapse like a row of dominoes. . . . Even the most sophisticated
Americans, such as Henry Kissinger, often used this argument. Yet when the
United States finally withdrew in humiliation from Vietnam, not one domino
fell.'' Mr. Kissinger came to Washington in 1969 with the advantage that the
Johnson Administration had moved toward disengagement in Vietnam. ''Determined
to withdraw with honour, he made the best the enemy of the good. By invading
Cambodia he prolonged the war unnecessarily, imposed unnecessary death and
suffering on a horrific scale, conjured up the appalling Pol Pot and the killing
fields, yet still failed to spare the United States the ultimate humiliation.''

British politics and politicians naturally get their share of the Healey rasp.
Harold Wilson, Prime Minister during most of Mr. Healey's years in Government,
''had no sense of direction, and rarely looked more than a few months ahead. His
short-term opportunism, allied with a capacity for self-delusion which made
Walter Mitty look unimaginative, often plunged the government into chaos. Worse
still, when things went wrong he imagined everyone was conspiring against him.''
There are delicious dissections of the Labor Party itself, ''the most
conservative party in the world,'' and of its left-wing ideologues. But one
still wonders why a figure as dismal as Mr. Wilson rose to the top while a
Healey or a Roy Jenkins, who eventually left to found a new center party, could
never make it to the Labor leadership.

I find Mr. Healey unconvincing on two other issues of British politics. One is
the European Community, on which he maintains a skeptical tone; surely by now it
is clear that Britain's future must lie in a Europe growing closer together. The
other is the question of civil liberty. Mr. Healey writes, ''Our devotion to
individual freedom limits our readiness to give central government the power to
override our traditional power structures.'' To the contrary, Margaret Thatcher
has shown that in a country without a written constitution enforced by judges,
the government of the day has far too much power to deprive individuals of
freedom - and neither major party has so far made an issue of it.

But for all the serious thought in this memoir, the fun is irrepressible. Nigel
Lawson, for a time Mrs. Thatcher's Chancellor of the Exchequer, ''had a raffish
insolence which reminded me sometimes of Steerforth in David Copperfield,
sometimes of a rather tubby Alcibiades.'' Mrs. Thatcher, for whom, Mr. Healey
told the House, ''I have great personal affection,'' is ''the Great
She-Elephant, She-who-must-be-obeyed.'' Mrs. Thatcher's Cabinet colleagues
joined in the laughter at that, Mr. Healey said, ''but Edna has never forgiven
me for suggesting a personal affection for Mrs. Thatcher.'' Edna, Mrs. Healey,
is a writer herself. In 1987 she was on the jury for Britain's foremost literary
award, the Booker Prize. ''While I was walking on the downs,'' Mr. Healey
writes, ''she was reading or riffling through some hundred and twenty modern
novels. She learned more about sex in those two months than in over forty years
of married bliss with me.''

INGREDIENTS FOR A MEMOIR

LONDON

Denis Healey has written that he entered politics as a young man ''who wanted to
save the world.'' Four decades later he has written ''The Time of My Life''
perhaps not to save the world, but at least to discourage it from making the
same mistakes he saw it make when he was young.

''I was hoping my book would give people a sense of how the world has developed
over the past 70 years, particularly since World War II, to enable them to
tackle the problems of the next 30 years more intelligently,'' said Mr. Healey
in his cubicle-like office at the House of Commons. ''In politics,'' he
explained, ''the only really useful guide is history.''

Mr. Healey said he hopes his American readers, especially those of his
generation, will find in his autobiography some thread of common experience.
''My generation has shared a lot of experiences,'' he said, ''perhaps without a
real understanding of how much we really have shared.''

It took him all of the spare time he could find over 18 months to write the
book. The material for it came from his own scrupulously kept diaries from his
time at Balliol College, Oxford, and from his ''spasmodically kept diaries'' and
''glorified engagement books'' from the years thereafter. ''Fortunately,'' he
said, ''I've got a very good memory and I kept everything I ever wrote.''

He also made extensive use of poetry, especially that of a fellow English-Irish
Protestant, W. B. Yeats, to give readers a better sense not only of Denis Healey
but of the times in which he has lived.

''I love poetry,'' said the 73-year-old Mr. Healey, adding, as his face broke
into one of his famous giggly smiles, ''Poetry reaches the parts that other
things cannot reach, as they say in the [beer] advertisement. . . . Politics
tends to encrust you in a horny carapace. Poetry, music and painting allow your
soul to breathe.''

SUZANNE CASSIDY

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: September 23, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

CORRECTION:

A picture caption in The Times Book Review today, with a review of ''The Time of
My Life'' by Denis Healey, misidentifies the building Mr. Healey is shown
leaving. It is the residence of the British Chancellor of the Exchequer, not the
Prime Minister's house.

GRAPHIC: Photo: Denis Healey, Britain's Chancellor of the Exchequer, holds up
his budget box as he leaves the Prime Minister's house in London, 1978. (United
Press International)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              343 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 23, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

ART;
AIDS Exhibition Pleads Its Case

BYLINE: By VIVIEN RAYNOR

SECTION: Section 12CN; Page 18, Column 1; Connecticut Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1269 words


UNVEILED at the Paris Salon of 1819, Theodore Gericault's ''Raft of the Medusa''
was met with mixed reactions, and though it attracted thousands of spectators,
the picture brought the artist neither critical nor financial success. He died
five years later, at the age of 33, having been wracked alternately with despair
and the desire to produce still more ambitious works. It is said that on at
least one occasion he dismissed the 18-by-24-foot canvas (now in the Louvre)
with: ''Bah! A vignette!''

Time and the reactions of other artists, notably Delacroix, have since proved
the picture to be not only the artist's magnum opus but also the first major
painting based on a topical event - in this case, a scandalous shipwreck that
had occurred three years before. The historian Lorenz Eitner said that
Gericault's motives may well have been political at the start, but ultimately
the ''Raft'' became a kind of catharsis for personal misery that seemingly was
rooted in a wretched love affair. He was later to say that he wanted to see
misfortune on trial.

There are no heroes in the picture, only a group of survivors sighting a brig
that does not see them. The whole episode lasted 13 days, involved cannibalism
and cost 150 lives. After attempts by the French Government to cover up the
scandal, the captain, whose incompetence caused the wreck, was demoted and
sentenced to three years in prison. A few years later, the ship's surgeon and a
naval engineer collaborated on a best-selling expose.

A disaster that threatens to engulf the whole world, AIDS, has yet to inspire
art comparable to Gericault's. The reasons for this are many and unfathomable.
But one of them may be that Romanticism is no longer a means to an end but an
end in itself, and a highly political one at that. ''AIDS-SIDA,'' an exhibition
at Real Art Ways, in Hartford, lends support to this idea, in that it comes on
like a demonstration against the Vietnam War.

Viewers are pelted with ''information'' that seems intended to arouse guilt and
panic. There are photographs of AIDS babies in Romania; T-shirts, one emblazoned
with Liberty raising a finger instead of the torch, another with the words
''Queen Nation''; statistics, like ''one AIDS death every half-hour,'' and
posters, some effective, others gratuitously nasty.

Since very little of this can be described or quoted, it remains only to say
that the show is something of a rabble rouser. It may aim to scare the world
straight (although not in the heterosexual sense of the word), but it does so in
a way calculated to turn off the very people who need to be turned on to the
situation - the religious, the socially respectable and those who fear anarchy
more than death.

This is a forum for pleading many causes, notably that of sexual freedom, and
there is a strong sense of paranoia and self-pity. It is as if the plague that
directly or indirectly threatens everyone is somebody else's fault, and to the
degree that doctors have failed to find a cure, it is. But like
artists-against-the-bomb shows, this one seems concerned primarily with going on
record against AIDS, as if there were a party in favor of the disease. It defies
the unconverted rather than reasoning with them, and if ever there was a time
for reasoning, this is it.

All the same, the display, for all its faults, marks the awakening of Real Art
Ways from its ''avant garde'' torpor. The director, Will Wilkins, and the
curator, Anne Pasternak, are still fairly new, and there is reason to believe
that they will continue to address a larger pubic without going down the
populist drain.

Also in Hartford, at the Old State House, is ''Vision and Imagination: The
Language of Artists.'' An exhibition by three painters, an assemblagist and a
sculptor, it was mounted by the Cooley Gallery, of Old Lyme. The painters are
Lisa Barsumian, Peggy Root and Linden Frederick. Landscapists all, they and
their colleagues represent the gallery's recent decision to espouse contemporary
art. Eventually, decisions as to the kind of contemporary art will have to be
made.

Ms. Barsumian focuses on land near the shore, presumably in the Madison area,
where still blue water reflects the reeds and grasses growing around it and the
clouds above. This is placid, somewhat photographic work.

Ms. Root uses the brush stroke of Impressionism but not the colors; indeed, she
seems uncomfortable with color. Her views of Connecticut fields in summer tend
to be doggedly green, although the one featuring a pigpen in a stand of trees is
relieved by flickers of sunlight. The best canvas, however, is a snowscape that
is all whites and grays, freely applied. A young painter fresh out of art
school, Ms. Root needs to sharpen her eye when selecting subjects and to study
more closely the nuances of light.

Seemingly the most experienced of the three, Mr. Frederick takes a methodical
approach, itemizing factory buildings in rural surroundings. He draws well and
at times achieves an effective sense of industry weighing heavy on the land. But
the greens of his vegetation and the browns of his buildings are needlessly
dingy.

Unfortunately, an accident had delayed the arrival of Stephen Huneck's
sculpture, so the viewer had only photographs to go by. A folk artist working in
wood, Mr. Huneck has appeared in numerous group shows throughout New England and
in New York City. He portrays all kinds of people and animals, but dogs take up
much of his attention. He has one in the permanent collection of the Dog Museum
in Manhattan.

Most of this grand space is taken up by the collage-assemblages of Maureen
McCabe - and rightly so, for they are good. Ms. McCabe has been on the scene for
almost 20 years, showing in New England, New York City and the Midwest as well
as abroad. More than half the selection consists of compositions arranged on and
imbedded in slabs of slate. The artist engraves her slates, inlaying the
incisions with gold, silver and sometimes color and, more often than not, adds a
garnish of black ostrich feathers. These feathers, along with porcupine quills
and what look like animal whiskers, are a recurring motif, as are minuscule
diamonds and dice.

Ms. McCabe draws on her Irish background - Catholic and, it seems, pagan, too.
Her symbolism includes grids filled with numbers, diagrams of lunar and
planetary orbits and spirals, and the effect occasionally recalls the late
Kandinsky. This is a personal cosmos with not a hair out of place. It bespeaks
an enormous amount of historical research.

It is not clear whether or not the other works are also of 1980's vintage, but
they are very different and, to this eye, less amazing. In them, the artist
falls prey to collagists' sentimentality. Furnished with rocks, feathers and
furs and inhabited by figures cut from photomechanical reproductions, the boxes
are peep shows. Catherine de Poitiers stands under an awning made of ermine,
while a man, also in 16th-century dress, stands below her on a tussock of
feathers stuck with red and black grasses (or whiskers); a lady in Regency
costume pauses on a rock with a sheep; Hedy Lamar, of all people, stands in an
arbor holding plastic flowers.

The scenes are beautiful, no doubt about that. But with their atmosphere of
romantic yearning, they are too close to the cliches committed by Ms. McCabe's
inferiors in the field. Nevertheless, this artist is the prime reason for
visiting the show.

''AIDS-SIDA'' continues through Saturday at Real Art Ways, 56 Arbor Street,
Hartford. ''Vision and Imagination'' runs until Oct. 28 at the Old State House,
800 Main Street, Hartford.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              344 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 24, 1990, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Caracas Journal;
Ex-Rebel in a Muumuu Becomes a Potent Force

BYLINE: By JAMES BROOKE, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 4, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1086 words

DATELINE: CARACAS, Venezuela, Sept. 20


Argelia Laya's disillusionment with armed struggle came one day in the
mid-1960's when a fellow guerrilla commander asked her to send ''nine women
guerrillas'' to his battle front.

''I said, 'What kind of women guerrillas - explosives experts, propaganda
experts, organizers?,' '' she recalled of her days with the National Liberation
Front. ''He said, 'Just send us some girls.' ''

Twenty-five years later, Ms. Laya's guerrilla uniform is long folded away, along
with her dreams of building Communism in the Caribbean. But never far from the
limelight of Venezuela's shifting left, Ms. Laya, now a feminist and a member of
Congress, has just been elected president of the nation's left-wing party,
Movement Toward Socialism, or MAS.

Last December the party's bright orange banners attracted hundreds of thousands
of new voters alienated by a long-running duet between Venezuela's traditional
parties, the Social Christian Party, or Copei, and Democratic Action, the
governing party. Almost a quarter of the votes in the gubernatorial elections
went to the Movement Toward Socialism, placing the party for the first time in
competition with Copei to become Venezuela's second political force.

A 'First' in Two Categories

In a political landscape long dominated by Latin men, Ms. Laya, a white-haired
African-Latina, stands out in her vaguely African muumuu. She is the first black
and the first woman to lead a major political party in Venezuelan history.

''When I was young, my father and mother taught me never to allow people to
discriminate against me, not for being black, not for being a woman,'' Ms. Laya,
now 64 years old, recalled in an interview at her office here at the party
headquarters.

Born in a Caribbean coastal village 60 miles east of here, Ms. Laya received a
fighting first name, Argelia - Spanish for Algeria, the North African nation
then starting to struggle free from French colonial rule.

In Ms. Laya's party biography, a black-and-white photo section illustrates her
political trajectory, a pilgrimage that could have been followed by any of
thousands of late 20th-century Latin American leftists.

Turning the pages, one finds her leading a teachers union in the 1950's,
visiting a toy factory in China in 1959, toting a gun and backpack with
guerrillas in Lara State, Venezuela, in 1965, and bearing a flower garland in
Moscow in 1969. The only travel photos missing are of frequent, clandestine
visits made in the 1960's to Cuba.

The Children Stay Home

''We were profoundly influenced by the Cuban revolution,'' she recalled of her
days as a Communist revolutionary. But in joining the guerrillas, she left her
three children in the care of her mother rather than accept a party offer to
send them to Cuba for schooling.

During five years with the guerrillas, she said, she gradually became
disillusioned by ''the generalized machismo of these revolutionaries who said
they had such great ideals.''

''The struggle for political and military power got mixed up with the struggle
for passion,'' Ms. Laya recalled.

Still a Communist - one photo shows her attending the annual fair of the French
Communist Party in 1970 - she became increasingly interested in women's rights.
But a study tour through Hungary, Romania, Bulgaria and the Soviet Union in 1969
proved to be decisive.

''I verified that women workers were often paid less for the same work than men
workers,'' she recalls. ''Cultural machismo had increased in the new
societies.''

The Nation Changes

At the same time, Venezuela was changing around her. An oil boom changed the
population from predominantly rural to predominantly urban and suddenly gave the
nation the highest per capita income in Latin America. In 1970, Ms. Laya gave up
a 20-year militancy in the Communist Party of Venezuela and, with other former
guerrillas, founded the Movement Toward Socialism.

''I no longer think that the armed struggle is the way for our people,'' she
said. ''With MAS we are seeking social justice through democracy.''

For many militants here, the break with the Communists came over the Soviet
invasion of Czechoslovakia in 1968. Over the years, the Movement Toward
Socialism has steadily moderated, becoming today, in the words of another
founder, Teodoro Petkoff, a party for social democracy.

The party has won supporters by attacking social problems on the local level and
by denouncing corruption on the national level.

Early anti-American oratory has been softened because of two factors. In 1975,
the Government nationalized foreign oil companies operating here. And with the
economic boom, Venezuelans' contact with Americans mushroomed. Today, there are
four daily flights between here and Miami.

''The struggle against the Vietnam War, the feminist movement, the environmental
movement, the black power movement have all brought our peoples together, if not
our governments,'' said Ms. Laya, who in 1988 visited the United States for the
first time - to visit a sister who lives in Michigan.

At Odds With Washington

Still at odds with Washington over many issues, Ms. Lara is a member of a local
group called the Women's Patriotic Front Against the Foreign Debt. She charges
that the United States has crippled Cuba with an economic ''blockade.'' But she
adds that most of Cuba's problems are homegrown.

''We broke with the concept of the dictatorship of the proletariat 20 years
ago,'' she said, referring to Fidel Castro's Communist orthodoxy. ''Now, they
are facing very serious economic problems.''

In Congress, Ms. Laya has cut a different figure, frequently bringing up
problems that Venezuela's political establishment would prefer to sweep under
the rug, like racial and sexual discrimination. For example, she is a board
member of a group called the Venezuelan Association for Alternative Sexual
Education and Defense of the Violated Woman.

But as president since July 29 of what may become the nation's second political
force, she is winning new acceptance and new audiences.

Last Thursday, a newspaper column that chronicles the daily goings-on at the
presidential palace included a brief item that Argelia Laya, president of MAS,
had breakfast at the palace with the President.

In a twist of political fate, Carlos Andres Perez, President of Venezuela, is
the same Carlos Andres Perez who as Interior Minister in the 1960's pursued
Argelia Laya the guerrilla.

''When I first met him, in 1974, I said, 'Ha-ha, you never grabbed me,' '' she
said with a laugh.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Argelia Laya, who was recently elected president of Venezuela's
left-wing party, Movement Toward Socialism, or MAS. (James Brooke/The New York
Times)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              345 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 24, 1990, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Warring Cambodian Factions Accept Proposal by Sihanouk

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Page 4, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 175 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Sept. 23,


Leaders of three Cambodian guerrilla factions agreed today to a compromise
proposal offered by Prince Norodom Sihanouk in efforts to resume talks that
could end the nation's long civil war.

The three factions, including the Khmer Rouge, agreed on the Prince's latest
proposal for the composition of a newly formed Supreme National Council, a
central element in a United Nations Security Council plan to end 11 years of
fighting.

A Foreign Ministry spokesman told Reuters in Phnom Penh on Saturday night that
Cambodia's Prime Minister, Hun Sen, agreed to this arrangement.

The first meeting of the council broke up Wednesday in Bangkok, the Thai
capital, when the guerrilla factions and the Vietnam-backed Phnom Penh
Government could not agree on how many seats each side should have.

Prince Sihanouk offered a compromise Friday from his home in Beijing. He
proposed that he be given a seat as chairman of the council, Phnom Penh be given
an additional seat, and that the guerrillas keep their six seats, raising the
council's membership to 14.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              346 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 24, 1990, Monday, Late Edition - Final

El Salvador Chief Lobbying to Stop U.S. Aid Cuts

BYLINE: By CLIFFORD KRAUSS, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 7, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 656 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 23


President Alfredo Cristiani of El Salvador begins an intensive three-day
lobbying campaign on Capitol Hill on Monday in an effort to thwart legislation
that would cut United States military aid to his country by 50 percent next
year.

Salvadoran diplomats here said Mr. Cristiani would try to meet with as many as
60 Senators and members of the House panel that has been investigating the
slaying of six Jesuit priests in El Salvador last November.

If Mr. Cristiani fails, the Salvadoran Ambassador, Miguel A. Salaverria, said
the lawmakers could inadvertently encourage leftist rebels to abandon
negotiations and begin a military offensive.

An influential Salvadoran Army officer, who spoke on the condition that he not
be named, agreed. ''President Cristiani knows a cut in aid might be
inevitable,'' the officer said, ''but he wants them to know what they are doing.
And maybe then they won't do it.''

The six Jesuits were among the leading critics of the Government in Salvadoran
intellectual circles. They, their housekeeper and her daughter were killed in
their university quarters by gunmen. An army colonel and seven lower-ranking
soldiers were arrested in January, but judiciary officials have complained that
tampering with evidence by the army has hindered prosecution of the case and
investigation into whether the slayings were ordered by higher military
officers.

Movement to Cut Aid

The slayings mobilized the strongest movement in Congress to cut military aid to
El Salvador since the early 1980's. The House has already passed a bill to
withhold 50 percent of the $85 million in military aid that the Bush
Administration had proposed to send El Salvador next year, and the Senate is
about to consider similar legislation.

More than $4 billion in economic and military support and hundreds of military
advisers have been sent to El Salvador since 1980, and many Democrats and
Republicans in Congress question whether the largest American investment in a
counterinsurgency campaign since the Vietnam War has been worthwhile. While they
grant that the Bush Administration has made a stronger pitch for human rights
there than did the Reagan Administration, they complain that a corrupt and
violent military still dominates the civilian Government.

Some members of Congress argue that Mr. Cristiani is a worthy politician but
lacks the power to change his country.

''It's not enough for him to say he's going to try and do this and try and do
that,'' said Representative Joe Moakley, Democrat of Massachusetts, the chairman
of the House Rules Committee. ''The members want to see results.''

'His English Is Perfect'

The argument for cutting back the United States commitment to El Salvador has
been strengthened by the realization that with the cold war over, the threat of
Soviet expansion in Central America has diminished, no matter who wins the
Salvadoran civil war.

''A lot of people think El Salvador is a tar baby and it's time to say
goodbye,'' said Senator Patrick J. Leahy, Democrat of Vermont, who is chairman
of the Appropriations Subcommittee on Foreign Operations, which early next month
will consider a bill to cut aid to the country. But Mr. Leahy added: ''Cristiani
could have an effect on some votes. People like him and think he's trying. His
English is perfect, too, and that helps.''

Bernard W. Aronson, the Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs,
has privately agreed that the Administration would accept some cuts in military
aid - up to 30 percent - as long as Congress gave President Bush more discretion
over the aid. Seeking to forge a bipartisan policy on El Salvador, Mr. Aronson
has proposed that military assistance be channeled through President Cristiani
rather than directly to the armed forces.

During his stay in Washington, Mr. Cristiani will also meet with Vice President
Dan Quayle. He will confer with President Bush in New York next week.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              347 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 25, 1990, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Slaying of Vietnamese Exiles in Washington Renews Refugee Fears

BYLINE: By B. DRUMMOND AYRES Jr., Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 10, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 693 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 24


An outspoken Vietnamese exile has once again been murdered in the capital,
raising new fears among refugees about speaking out in public or print.

Triet Le, an often caustic columnist for the Vietnamese language magazine Tien
Phong, was fatally shot Saturday night at his home in Virginia, along with his
wife, Tuyet Thi Dangtran.

He was the second member of the nationally distributed magazine's staff to be
slain in less than a year and one of about a half-dozen publicly active
Vietnamese refugees to be killed in this country in the last several years.

Followers of Mr. Le's commentary said his views could come from either the right
or the left but whatever the slant, it seldom failed to stir deep emotions among
exiles about the war in Vietnam and what the 800,000 Vietnamese refugees in the
United States should do about the lost homeland, whether to continue to oppose
the Communist regime that took over in the mid-1970's or whether to seek some
sort of accommodation.

Many Threats Reported

Mr. Le's friends and some of his neighbors said he had received many threats on
his life in recent years and had installed lights and other security devices.
Once, a neighbor reported, Mr. Le hung a sign outside his house that read: ''I
shoot first.''

The police said they had no suspect in the slayings. They acknowledged they were
looking into the possibility that the killings were politically motivated and
related to the earlier slaying of one of Tien Phong's layout artists, Nhan Trong
Do.

Mr. Do was shot last November at his home in Northern Virginia not far from Mr.
Le's home. He was sitting in his car when he was attacked, as were Mr. Le and
Ms. Dangtran.

Tien Phong, with offices in Northern Virginia, is published twice monthly and is
reported to have a circulation of about 15,000. Members of its staff of a dozen
or so editorial and business employees could not be reached for comment.

Agents from the Federal Bureau of Investigation were monitoring the
investigation of the Le-Dangtran slayings by local detectives. ''We stand ready
to offer any technical help we can and, of course, we want to know whether any
of this falls within our national jurisdiction,'' one agent said.

Murders in Other States

Besides the shootings here, other shootings and slayings of outspoken Vietnamese
exiles, particularly journalists, have taken place in recent years in Texas and
California. There are large Vietnamese communities in each place and, as in
Vietnam, each community has an active, often polemical press.

Few of the slayings have been solved. In Houston, Dam Phong, the editor of a
Vietnamese-language newspaper, was found murdered and the only clue was a
puzzling note by his body that read, ''Vietnamese Party for the Annihilation of
Communism and for the National Restoration.''

''These days it can be very dangerous to speak out if you're Vietnamese,'' said
Giang Huu Tuyen, the publisher of Viet Bao, a Vietnamese-language weekly
distributed to 3,500 Washington-area readers.

''I worry,'' he added, ''that one day somebody will come into my office and say
to me, 'I don't like your paper.' Then, 'Bang!' It's a risky business. People
are very emotional over all that has happened.''

Le Huu Em, an accountant and well-known figure in Washington's Vietnamese
community, said that Mr. Le's death had deeply disturbed exiles here but did not
greatly surprise them.

''He had many, many enemies,'' Mr. Em said. ''Sometimes he attacked from one
side and then from another. But always he attacked. He hurt people.''

Mr. Le, who was 61 years old, served in the South Vietnamese army before fleeing
to the United States after the war. His wife was 52 years old.

Neighbors said they were friendly but reserved, spending much of their time
working in their rose garden.

''I would talk to him sometimes,'' said Dorothy Jaszewski, who lives next door.
''He told me very frankly once that he was a columnist and that what he wrote
brought him a lot of threats. Once he told me that I should cut down the
shrubbery around my house so that nobody could hide in it. That's what he did.
But I guess it didn't help much.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              348 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 25, 1990, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Books of The Times;
Just 30 Years Later, Updike Has a Quartet

BYLINE: By MICHIKO KAKUTANI

SECTION: Section C; Page 13, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1348 words



Rabbit at Rest
By John Updike
512 pages. Alfred A. Knopf.$21.95.

The ideal novel, Stendhal once observed, is like ''a mirror that strolls along a
highway. Now it reflects the blue of the skies, now the mud puddles underfoot.''
It's a definition happily and abundantly fulfilled by John Updike's four Rabbit
novels: ''Rabbit, Run'' (1960), ''Rabbit Redux'' (1971), ''Rabbit Is Rich''
(1981) and now ''Rabbit at Rest.''

Taken together, this quartet of novels has given its readers a wonderfully vivid
portrait of one Harry (Rabbit) Angstrom, a small-town Pennsylvania basketball
star turned car salesman; and in chronicling the passing parade of Harry's life,
the books have also created a Kodachrome-sharp picture of American life - the
psychic ups and downs, enthusiasms and reversals experienced by this nation as
it moved from the somnolent 50's through the upheavals of the 60's and 70's into
the uncertainties of the 80's.

Although he lacks the refined upper-middle-class tastes of the Maples and the
author's other suburban sophisticates, Rabbit remains the quintessential Updike
hero - torn between sexual urgencies and vague spiritual illusions, between
freedom and responsibility, a yearning for independence and an old-fashioned
sense of duty. There is nothing forced or synthetic about Mr. Updike's portrait
of him, as there was in his recent depiction of characters in ''The Witches of
Eastwick'' and ''S.''; rather the reader has the sense that Mr. Updike knows
Rabbit intimately, that Rabbit is someone palpably real. Indeed, he comes across
as the author's doppelganger - the other self Mr. Updike might have become had
he remained in his hometown, Shillington, Pa., and never become a writer. Harry
himself tries to identify his own problems with the problems of America at
large. He self-importantly compares his own fall from grace to this country's
waning international power, his own business woes to the national budget
deficit. At one point, he even dresses up as Uncle Sam for a Fourth of July
parade. He sees himself, like America, as subject to irrational forces of
change; and, as depicted by Mr. Updike, his life becomes a mirror of the changes
sustained by this country in recent years.

In ''Rabbit, Run,'' which was written as a kind of reaction to Jack Kerouac's
''On the Road,'' Harry literally tries to run away from the domestic
constrictions of small-town life and discovers that his actions have lasting
consequences for himself and those around him. In ''Rabbit Redux,'' he realizes
that the new sexual mores of the 60's and the decade's bold imperatives of
self-fulfillment have wrought all sorts of confusing changes. He feels
threatened by the counterculture, by black activism and by the uproar over the
war in Vietnam, and his involvement with a hippie and a black friend of hers
leads to a tragedy that leaves his own family rattled and very nearly destroyed.

A period of consolidation and stock-taking followed in ''Rabbit Is Rich.''
Having come into money - his wife, Janice, inherited her father's lucrative
Toyota business - Rabbit begins to settle into the quiescence of middle age and
the comforts of the middle class. Prosperity has made him, like America in the
Reagan era, increasingly conservative and blase. That sense of stillness is
heightened further in Mr. Updike's latest novel, ''Rabbit at Rest,'' a somber,
elegiac book, whose narrative motion consists largely of guilty and nostalgic
excursions into the past and worrying speculations about the future. Rabbit is
55 years old now, but he seems considerably older. He has more or less handed
over Springer Motors to his son, Nelson, and spends half the year in Florida,
where he passes the time hanging out at the country club and watching
television. His sense of adventure is now confined to efforts to perfect his
golf game. During a sailboat outing with his granddaughter, Judy, he has a heart
attack, and the episode leaves him with cardiac damage and an equally irremedial
sense of spiritual fatigue.

More and more now, he allows Janice - who has metamorphosed from a slovenly
housekeeper into a spunky career woman - to manage their affairs. When it is
revealed that Nelson has been embezzling tens of thousands of dollars from the
Toyota business to support his cocaine habit, Rabbit can do little but observe
from the sidelines. It is Janice who brings in an outside accountant to assess
the damage and Janice who packs Nelson off to a drug rehabilitation center.

To Janice, Rabbit now seems ''drained of spirit,'' ''halting and blinky the way
her father became in his last five years, closing his eyes in the Barcalounger,
waiting for the headache to pass.'' Rabbit's fear that his erratic heart will
give out on him makes him cautious and fearful, and the old existential worries
that haunt him and every other Updike hero rapidly blossom into a full-blown
obsession with mortality. Worried about AIDS and disease, he cannot think of sex
without thinking of death; and he can't reconcile the Sunday-school vision he
has of himself as a ''God-made'' ''apprentice angel'' with ''an immortal soul''
with the doctors' pronoucements about his leaky, malfunctioning heart.

Everywhere around him, Rabbit sees the ghosts of the dead: his lover Thelma,
dead of lupus and kidney failure; Lyle, the accountant at Springer Motors, dying
of AIDS; everyone else aging, faltering, falling prey to illness and
disillusion. Even the newspapers and television strike him as overflowing with
reports of disaster and death.

Whereas the informing metaphor of ''Rabbit Redux'' was the moonshot (and all the
glorious if frightening possibilities it represented), the overarching metaphor
of ''Rabbit at Rest'' is the bombing of Pan Am Flight 103 over Lockerbie,
Scotland. It becomes a symbol - to Harry and to the reader - of the
precariousness of life, the fragility of the bonds of order and love that people
try to construct in their lives. ''He is just like the people he felt so sorry
for,'' Rabbit thinks, ''falling from the burst-open airplane: he too is falling,
helplessly falling, toward death.'' In giving the reader this fourth and
presumably final installment of Harry Angstrom's life, Mr. Updike is working at
the full height of his powers, reorchestrating the themes that have animated not
only his earlier Rabbit novels but his entire oeuvre as well. The sexual bonds
of passion and guilt that tie so many of his fictional couples together, the
nostalgia for small-town life that sparked his Olinger stories, the theological
preoccupations of ''Couples'' and ''The Coup,'' the familial concerns of ''The
Centaur'' and ''Of the Farm'' - all are expertly reshuffled here and filtered
through the middle-class prism of Rabbit's life.

At times the reader becomes overly aware of Mr. Updike's efforts to keep the
narrative topical - long lists of current events and popular television shows
keep popping up in the book, like irritating commercials. But whereas the
unfortunate ''Rabbit Redux'' tried to turn Harry's life into a timely parable by
awkwardly inserting relevant people and events into the plot, Rabbit's
adventures in this volume have a powerfully organic feel to them, as though they
were the outcome of all his past encounters.

Clearly the volume can be read on its own, but readers who are already familiar
with Rabbit Angstrom are treated to the additional pleasure of seeing a
character mature through time. We see how the geometry of familial emotions
changes over the decades: how Nelson has come to repeat Rabbit's mistakes, how
Janice has gained in vitality and confidence even as her husband has declined.
We see how emotional tics and behavioral patterns are repeated or side-stepped
year after year, how people constantly circle back on their earlier selves as
they blindly try to propel themselves into the future.

''Rabbit at Rest'' is a rich and rewarding novel, a novel that should be read by
anyone curious about the fate of Rabbit Angstrom and by anyone interested in the
vicissitudes of middle-class life in America today.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: John Updike, whose novel ''Rabbit at Rest'' has just been
published. (Davis Freeman/Alfred A. Knopf)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              349 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 26, 1990, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

CONFRONTATION IN THE GULF;
Iraq Is True Victim, Hussein Tells U.S. In Taped Broadcast

BYLINE: Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 8, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 431 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 25


President Saddam Hussein of Iraq told an American television audience today that
Iraq was not the invader when it entered Kuwait, but instead was the victim of
annexations and conspiracies.

It was only at the end of the 75-minute tape provided by Iraq that Mr. Hussein
appeared impatient and warned the American people that President Bush was
sending their sons to war, bringing back the sorrows of Vietnam. The Iraqi
leader warned, ''We will be more violent.''

The tape was delivered by the Iraqi Ambassador to the State Department, which
sent it to the United States Information Agency for duplication. It was then
delivered to CBS News, which released it by satellite to the other television
news organizations and newspapers at 3:30 P.M.

Entire Speech on CNN

Only the Cable News Network, among the major television networks, planned to
show the speech in its entirety. CNN immediately began showing excerpts from the
speech, including an edited, 20-minute version that was shown on its 6 P.M. and
8 P.M. news programs. CNN and its international subsidiary, CNN International,
planned to show the entire speech at 1 A.M. Wednesday. CBS, ABC and NBC said
they would use brief segments from the speech or refer to it on their regularly
scheduled news programs, as did the ''MacNeil/ Lehrer Newshour,'' the evening
news program shown on public television.

In the tape, Mr. Hussein wore a dark business suit, white shirt and plain gray
tie. He read from an inch-thick stack of papers, sitting at a large
cream-colored desk with only bright red flowers at his left elbow and the Iraqi
flag at his side.

Mr. Hussein's televised speech to the American people was in response to a
speech made by President Bush that was broadcast on Iraqi television on Sept.
15.

'An Embarrassing Situation'

Mr. Hussein said Iraq was capable of military strikes against United States
forces in the Middle East. ''If Bush started a war it would not be up to him to
end it,'' Mr. Hussein said.

''The U.S. Administration has placed you in an embarrassing sitation, at the
edge of a bottomless abyss,'' he said.

The speech, which was delivered in Arabic with English subtitles, contended that
the United States was part of a conspiracy to undermine Iraq.

''We have evidence that Bush was involved in the Irangate or Iran-contra
conspiracy against Iraq in 1986 when he was Reagan's Vice President,'' Mr.
Hussein said. ''This is a well-known fact.'' The United States had even
apologized to Iraq for its role in the Iran-Iraq war, Mr. Hussein said, adding,
''We accepted the apology.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: President Saddam Hussein of Iraq during his 75-minute televised
message to the American people. (CBS)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              350 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 26, 1990, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Bid Mellows Connecticut Conservative

BYLINE: By NICK RAVO, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1109 words

DATELINE: NEWINGTON, Conn.


The scene on Saturday at the Veterans Administration Medical Center was vintage
John Rowland. A color guard stood stoically in a drenching rain. ''When Johnny
Comes Marching Home Again'' crackled out of a loudspeaker. Mr. Rowland, the
Republican candidate for governor, helped lay two wreaths honoring American
soldiers who were prisoners of war or classified as missing in action.

''There is clear evidence of live sightings,'' Mr. Rowland said, referring to
American soldiers from the Vietnam War who he believes are being held in Laos or
Vietnam. ''Most of the live sightings have had them in farming-type activity
with moderate guard protection, some of them even married, speaking Vietnamese.
In many cases, they're insane or mentally anguished.''

Such statements fuel Mr. Rowland's reputation as Connecticut's most conservative
Congressman and as a leader of the faction that has taken over the state's
Republican Party and all but expelled former Senator Lowell P. Weicker Jr., a
liberal, and his supporters.

About-Face on Abortion Rights

But since his campaign for governor began last autumn, Mr. Rowland has softened
his edge and has seldom mentioned the two issues that have garnered him the most
attention during his six-year tenure in Congress: prisoners of war still in
Vietnam and legislation requiring the House of Representatives to say the Pledge
of Allegiance every day.

Mr. Rowland has also taken a 180-degree turn on abortion rights and now supports
not only a woman's right to have an abortion but Federal financing for some
abortions.

''If you look at comparisons in Congress, I am certainly a moderate
Republican,'' Mr. Rowland said. But naming other Republicans who have
represented Connecticut in Congress, he added, ''Compared to Stewart McKinney
and Lowell Weicker and even Nancy Johnson, I am far more conservative than they
are.''

Mr. Rowland has frequently defended his switch on abortion as being born not out
of political expediency but out of a genuine change of heart about whether
government should be involved in what he believes is a woman's personal
decision. ''People have a very firm position on abortion, and they are either
happy or sad about a candidate's position,'' he said.

The switch, however, has become the target of increasing criticism from Mr.
Weicker, who has remained an enrolled Republican but in March began an
independent campaign for governor under the Connecticut Party ticket.

Moderation Draws Critics

''Running as a Reagan Republican is fine for getting elected to a Congressional
seat, but in running for statewide office he has to moderate his tone,'' said
Morton J. Tenzer, a professor of political science at the University of
Connecticut at Storrs.

Last week, the Connecticut Party candidate for lieutenant governor, Eunice S.
Groark, held a news conference in Hartford and attacked Mr. Rowland for not
being ''intellectually honest.'' Mr. Weicker, like the Democratic gubernatorial
candidate, Representative Bruce A. Morrison of Hamden, is a longtime supporter
of abortion rights.

''John Rowland's so-called moderation on the issue of abortion was a calculated
decision aimed at his campaign for governor,'' Mrs. Groark said.

Carolyn S. Hopley, the president of the Connecticut chapter of the National
Organization for Women, also had qualms about Mr. Rowland's conversion. ''He
really hasn't been pro-choice until recently,'' she said. ''Considering his
record, we're rather wary of what the follow-through would be or how committed
he would be.''

Death for Drug Lords

Abortion aside, Mr. Rowland's campaign has retained much of the candidate's
conservative roots. Mr. Rowland is the only gubernatorial candidate who has
proposed capital punishment for so-called drug kingpins. He has proposed solving
the state's growing fiscal problem by slashing state spending, freezing salaries
and laying off state employees. He is also the only candidate to rule out state
income tax.

''Businesses have been burdened with financial problems, and people are losing
their jobs, and they don't have 100 percent health care plans, and they're not
getting 8, 9 percent increases in salary,'' he said, referring to benefits for
some state employees.

If elected, historians say, the 33-year-old candidate would be the youngest
person elected governor in the state's history, Mr. Rowland trailed both Mr.
Weicker and Mr. Morrison in the most recent poll conducted by Quinnipiac College
in Hamden. Mr. Weicker had the support of 34.3 percent of the respondents, while
Mr. Morrison had 20.6 percent and Mr. Rowland had 17.8 percent. Slightly more
than 18 percent said they were undecided. The rest, almost 9 percent, said they
were leaning toward one candidate but had not made up their minds.

Hoping for the Undecided Vote

The telephone poll of 799 Connecticut residents, who are registered voters and
said they intended to vote in the Nov. 6 election, was conducted between Sept.
12 and 14, just after Mr. Morrison's Democratic primary victory on Sept. 11 over
State Representative William J. Cibes Jr. of New London. The poll has a margin
of error of plus or minus four percentage points.

Mr. Rowland's campaign is betting that Mr. Weicker's support will level off
under 30 percent and come largely from voters who would have ordinarily
supported Mr. Morrison. ''Pretty soon, we are all going to be at a point where
we each have 25 percent, and we're all fighting for the 25 percent that's
undecided.'' Mr. Rowland said.

Lately, Mr. Rowland's campaign has been preparing for a visit by President Bush
in Stamford Oct. 4. Barbara Bush campaigned yesterday in Southington, Conn.,
with Mr. Rowland and raised $100,000 for his campaign, which has raised close to
$2 million. The presidential visit is expected to raise more than $250,000.

Mr. Rowland has also been busy extracting himself from a personal controversy:
He failed to renew his driver's license after it expired 16 months ago. His
press secretary, Jack R. Goldberg, said the failure was partly an oversight and
partly because the state Department of Motor Vehicles did not send him a renewal
application.

Mr. Rowland also used the episode to complain that news coverage of the
gubernatorial race had focused too much on trivial issues.

''I have had about 15 press conferences on everything from taxes and deficit to
drugs and crime to education, binding arbitration, workers compensation, and I
never made the front page of the newspaper with any of them,'' he said. ''Yet
when I don't renew my driver's license I made the front page of The Hartford
Courant as well as many other newspapers.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: John Rowland, left, Republican candidate for governor of
Connecticut, at the Veterans Administration Medical Center in Newington after a
ceremony honoring former prisoners of war and missing soldiers (Stephen
Castagneto for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              351 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 26, 1990, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Reviews/Film Festival;
Arms and the Portuguese, Roman Times to Angola

BYLINE: By VINCENT CANBY

SECTION: Section C; Page 9, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 698 words


''No, or the Vain Glory of Command'' (Nao, ou a Vao Gloria de Mandar), takes a
long view of Portuguese history, recalling great and terrible moments from the
second century B.C. through the mid-1970's.

At its best, it has the blunt, childlike charm of some sort of primitive
theatrical, though it's the work of Manoel de Oliveira, who will be 82 years old
on Dec. 10 and who has been making movies off and on since 1931.

The film will be shown at the New York Film Festival today at 9:15 P.M. and on
Saturday at 3:30 P.M.

''No, or the Vain Glory of Command'' begins and ends in Angola during the war
that concluded with the independence of the former Portuguese colony in 1975.

As they ride in an army truck traveling through the Angolan countryside, some
Portuguese soldiers debate the war in which most of them find themselves
reluctantly involved. Not, by any means, all of them. One fellow says that ''men
were created to fight, to do battle.'' Another wishes there could be a peace in
which neither side is humiliated. A third says it's a mistake to equate
Portugal's colonial war in Angola with the war in Vietnam.

The officer in charge, a historian, amuses his men by telling them stories of
Portugal's past. He begins with the tale of how Portugal's early inhabitants,
the Lusitanians, under the command of Viriatus (Viriato in Portuguese), defeated
the armies of Rome more than 2,000 years ago.

Mr. Oliveira flashes back to one of those battles, which is seen in a style that
evokes both a modest hometown pageant and a Monty Python sketch. The natives
throw rocks and an occasional spear at the Romans, who flee.

The officer suggests that Viriato was only interested in battle, the glory to be
won in victory. Being a soldier, Viriato didn't consider the possibility that by
turning back the Romans, he was also delaying the introduction of civilization
into the Iberian peninsula.

At least, that seems to be the point, but the English subtitles, which appear
not to have been checked by a proofreader, fly by like the phrases in a
speed-reading test.

The officer recounts, and the movie shows, various battles and negotiations in
Portugal's long-running unhappy relations with Spain. There is ''the famous
story of the dismembered,'' about a soldier who, in the course of a battle with
the Spanish, has both his hands chopped off. Still he embraces the Portuguese
standard. A contemporary soldier wonders, ''What is Portugal's destiny?'' Mr.
Oliveira's most spectacular reenactment, involving what look to be thousands of
extras, portrays the defeat of Portugal's King Sebastian, a stupid king, at the
hands of the Muslim infidels in Africa in 1578.

The movie takes on a distinctively camp personality in a sequence based on a
fanciful section of ''The Luciads,'' the Portuguese epic by Luis de Camoes
(1524-1580). Vasco da Gama's officers and men are seen as they are welcomed to
Venus's Isle of Love, where they are attended by beautiful, nude young women
whose only desire is to give pleasure.

While cherubs, who are played by nude little boys with wings pasted onto their
shoulders, dance ring-around-the-rosy in the background, da Gama's men give
themselves over to the drinking of wine from silver goblets and the eating of
grapes, held for them by the handmaidens.

The movie, which has been utterly literal up to this sequence, seems suddenly to
discover the world of the liberating imagination.

In this story, the officer is telling his troops that Portugal's gift to the
world has not been its empire, but its explorations and discoveries.

''War is cruel,'' a soldier says. The point is solemnly dramatized in the film's
concluding sequence set in Angola.

No, or the Vain Glory of Command
Directed and written by Manoel de Oliveira; in Portuguese with English
subtitles; photography by Elso Roque; edited by Mr. Oliveira and Sabine Franel;
music by Alejandro Masso; produced by Paulo Branco. At Alice Tully Hall, as part
of the 28th New York Film Festival. Running time: 110 minutes. This film has no
rating.

WITH: Luis Miguel Cintra, Diogo Doria, Miguel Guilherme, Luis Lucas, Carlos
Gomes, Antonio S. Lopes, Mateus Lorena and others.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: A scene from ''No, or the Vain Glory of Command.'' (Film Society
of Lincoln Center)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              352 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 26, 1990, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Review/Television;
A Veteran Interviewer Becomes the Subject

BYLINE: By WALTER GOODMAN

SECTION: Section C; Page 16, Column 4; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 764 words


Mike Wallace shows no symptoms of self-consciousness as he celebrates his career
tonight at 10 on CBS. But then, if he were self-conscious, what would there be
to celebrate? He introduces ''Mike Wallace, Then and Now'' with the promise that
viewers will be hearing from ''some fascinating people,'' but of course the
hour's attraction lies less in those he has interviewed over the last four
decades than in the confrontations themselves.

Several examples are offered of Mr. Wallace in a sentimental or light mood, but
who needs the scourge of ''60 Minutes'' for that? Television is not short of
performers who can polish up celebrities or warm the cockles of viewers' hearts.
No, it is the mean Mike that America tunes in for on Sunday nights.

''There are lots of people out there who do like to talk when they simply
shouldn't,'' Mr. Wallace observes. One engaging con artist, who had just awarded
a master of arts degree to a ''60 Minutes'' cameraman in return for $2,100 and
no homework, proved positively expansive. ''I wished he'd give me $3,550,'' the
con man crowed. His remarks oiled his way to jail. Mr. Wallace confesses to
enjoying his ''ambush interviews'' with cancer quacks, pornography peddlers and
others, but he concedes that they produced more heat than light and have been
largely abandoned. His interviews have also produced some libel suits, the first
one early in his career when he questioned the gangster Mickey Cohen for ABC.
Cohen called the Los Angeles police chief of the time ''a sadistic degenerate of
the worst type.'' The chief sued, and the network's insurance company paid up.
Gen. William C. Westmoreland was less successful with his suit against CBS in
1984 and 1985, in part over the implication in a Wallace interview that he had
misled the nation about enemy strength in Vietnam. All the general received was
an acknowledgement from CBS of his patriotic performance of his duties as he saw
them.

In the latest issue of The Videojournalist, a newsletter, Neil Postman, chairman
of communication arts at New York University, commented, '' '60 Minutes' is
generally awful because the emphasis is more expose than understanding.'' He has
a point, but the expose has long since proved its value, and Mr. Wallace, in
league with his less famous producers and researchers, deserves credit for
carrying on a useful tradition. What the expose lacks in analysis and,
occasionally, fairness, it often makes up for with revelations of facts and of
personality. A former Imperial Wizard of the Ku Klux Klan named Eldon Lee
Edwards, who donned the pointy hat, the elaborate earflaps and other regalia of
office for his interivew, showed himself, as Mr. Wallace notes, to be ''a
monumentally stupid man.''

Other juicy excerpts here come from an interview in which Margaret Sanger, the
early champion of birth control, criticized the Roman Catholic Church (''I mean,
after all, they're celibates! They don't know love; they don't know marriage.'')
and another in which Yasir Arafat said, at Mr. Wallace's coaxing, that he was
proud to be cooperating with Idi Amin, the former dictator of Uganda. In a 1968
interview, Richard M. Nixon, who Mr. Wallace says once offered him a job as
press secretary, announced, ''I hope to restore respect to the Presidency.''
Fairness does suffer. The camera assists Mr. Wallace by moving in so close on
his prey that you can see the facial pores. A camera could give Mother Teresa a
sinister look. Television will doubtless continue to exploit this technique
until how one is made to look on the tube becomes grounds for libel.

Toward the end of the hour, Mr. Wallace discloses that despite his fearsome
reputation he has friends, and that he lost at least a couple of them because of
a ''60 Minutes'' interview. He asked Nancy Reagan, when she was still his
friend, about the fee she and the former President were receiving for a visit to
Japan. ''I'm told it's a $2 million two weeks,'' Mr. Wallace said. Mrs. Reagan
replied that everybody who goes to Japan is ''well compensated'' and added,
''Now, you really didn't need that question.'' Hadn't she ever watched her
friend, or ex-friend, in action?

If you don't care for the Wallace style, tune in anyway for a vintage takeoff by
Sid Caesar and Carl Reiner that confirms the place Mike Wallace has made for
himself on network televison.

Mike Wallace, Then and Now
A CBS News Special, directed by Arthur Bloom; written by Mike Wallace and Brian
T. Ellis; edited by Paul Tascarella and Dennis Blakeley; Mr. Ellis, executive
producer. At 10 tonight on CBS.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Mike Wallace in an early CBS publicity photograph. (CBS)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              353 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 27, 1990, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

CONFRONTATION IN THE GULF: OPTIONS FOR BUSH;
If There Is No Provocation by Iraq, The U.N. May Offer a Route to Unity

BYLINE: By R. W. APPLE Jr., Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 11, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1022 words

DATELINE: AKRON, Ohio, Sept. 26


If Iraq should sanction a major terrorist strike, harm American hostages or
attack a United States warship or warplane, President Bush would certainly
respond with military action, citing ''provocation'' by President Saddam Hussein
to explain his decision.

''That much is clear,'' said a senior White House aide. ''If we have a pretext,
a casus belli, we go. But the much more difficult question is how we proceed if
the weeks and months go by, and there is no provocation.''

President Bush has suggested, without ever actually saying so, that at some
point soon, if United Nations economic sanctions do not persuade Iraq to pull
its troops out of Kuwait, he will use force to get them out. But it is not as
simple as issuing an order to his commander in the Persian Gulf, Gen. H. Norman
Schwarzkopf. There is the matter of Congressional acquiescence. Key Democrats on
Capitol Hill insist that their support for Mr. Bush's policies in no way
constitutes a mandate for offensive operations against Saddam Hussein.

This time, there will be no hastily passed, open-ended measure like the Gulf of
Tonkin resolution, which Lyndon B. Johnson and later Presidents used to justify
their military actions in Vietnam. Indeed, some influential lawmakers, including
a few Republicans, are searching for a formula that would give Congress a major
say in deciding when or whether to go to war.

There is the matter of public support. All the evidence in the opinion polls
suggests that the President has the backing of the overwhelming majority of the
American people for what he has done so far. So does the warmth with which he
has been received on his political forays out into the country, such as the one
he began today in Akron, Ohio and Chicago.

But so far Mr. Bush has sought support only for defensive action: guarding Saudi
Arabia and other Gulf nations. Neither the White House nor anyone else really
knows how enthusiastic the public would be, and for how long, about a desert
campaign against the Iraqi Army or an air offensive.

Interviews with Bush partisans who turned out for a fund-raising lunch here
today suggested that their support is highly conditional. Stuart Giller, an
Akron businessman, said: ''People are solidly behind Operation Desert Shield,
but they have their doubts about an Operation Desert Strike. They'd support a
short war - a week or so - but beyond that, heavy losses, body bags, he loses
support quickly, especially if we fire the first shots.''

Playing in Paris

A dental assistant who declined to give her name said, ''I'm afraid they've
thought a lot in Washington about how to get into battle and not enough on how
to get out.''

Finally there is the matter of allied participation. ''This administration has
made a basic decision that it can't handle this alone,'' says one of its
principal policymakers, and Mr. Bush is well aware that a justification for war
that may sell on Capitol Hill and in Peoria may be much less effective in Paris,
Damascus and Moscow. So the search is on for a predicate that would allow the
preservation of allied unity, or most of it.

The route, it appears, may lie through the United Nations.

French diplomats are making it clear that despite President Francois
Mitterrand's fury over Iraqi penetration of the French embassy in Kuwait, and
the dispatch of crack French troops to the Gulf, Paris has little enthusiasm for
a war policy. Other European countries that have backed Mr. Bush are firmly
opposed to a unilateral United States decision to attack, even if it were
dressed up with a round of ''consultations'' about the next step.

''Bush has three choices,'' said a minister from one European country who is
visiting the United States. ''He can do nothing, he can risk our opposition or
he can use the U.N. None perfect, but that's the way it is.''

The trouble with the United Nations in this context, from the Administration's
point of view, is that it is too slow and it is too public. But Secretary of
State James A. Baker 3d made it clear last Sunday that an appeal to the
international organization to authorize military action has by no means been
ruled out.

Taking Stock Before Christmas

Describing himself as ''extraordinarily pleased'' by the role of the United
Nations to date, Mr. Baker said on the NBC News program ''Meet the Press,'' ''If
the President felt it was necessary to use force, I think he would want to move
in a manner that would seek to preserve as much of the international consensus
as we could, and hopefully all of it.'' The Administration has been thinking
hard, he said, about ''how to implement U.N. resolutions'' calling for Iraqi
withdrawal from Kuwait ''in the absence of some specific act of provocation.''

Tom King, the British Defense Minister, said in Washington last week that his
country had placed no limitations on its support for Mr. Bush. But in New York
on Tuesday, a senior British official, speaking on condition that he not be
identified, said that when Mr. Bush and his allies ''take stock of the
situation'' sometime before Christmas, war would not be the only option; the
decision might be to give the sanctions more time.

Foreign Minister Eduard A. Shevardnadze of the Soviet Union indicated in a
General Assembly speech that, however cumbersome the United Nations Military
Staff Committee might be, giving it a major role might be Moscow's price for
participation in any military operations against Saddam Hussein. If it had been
working properly, he said, ''there would be no need now for individual states to
act unilaterally.''

That could cause problems in Washington, which is reluctant to put United States
forces under a United Nations flag, but a compromise might be reached under
which the United Nations authorized but did not control military action. Such a
deal was worked out to permit the imposition of a naval blockade.

A United Nations mandate might also make it easier for the Egyptians, Moroccans
and Syrians to commit their troops to battle alongside the Americans, despite
the opposition that might arouse from the Arab masses in their capitals and
elsewhere.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: News Analysis

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              354 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 27, 1990, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

U.S. Reports Poverty Is Down but Inequality Is Up

BYLINE: By ROBERT PEAR, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 14, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 942 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 26


The Census Bureau reported today that there had been a slight decline in the
proportion of Americans living in poverty but confirmed, more explicitly than
ever before, that inequality in the distribution of income has increased
substantially in the last two decades.

Last year, the bureau said, 12.8 percent of Americans had income below the
official poverty level, which was $12,675 for a family of four. The poverty rate
for 1989 was the lowest in the 1980's but was higher than for any year in the
1970's. The rate was 13 percent in 1988 and 13.4 percent in 1987.

The bureau estimated that the number of Americans living in poverty declined to
31.5 million in 1989, from 31.7 million in 1988.

But, in releasing its annual report on poverty, the bureau said, ''There seems
little doubt that the income distribution has become somewhat less equal over
the past 20 years.''

Women Narrow the Gap

Today's report does not take account of economic developments since December.
Many economists say poverty may rise this year, since the unemployment rate and
the number food stamp recipients have been increasing amid signs of a recession
after seven consecutive years of economic expansion.

The Census Bureau reported that the earnings of women who worked year round in
full-time jobs increased 1.8 percent last year, after adjustment for inflation,
while the earnings of men decreased 1.8 percent.

The median earnings for women, $18,780 last year, were 68 percent of the
earnings for men, $27,430. The gap has been narrowing slowly since 1980, when it
was 60 percent, the bureau said. The median is the midpoint; the number of
people with income above the median is the same as the number below it.

Edward J. Welniak Jr., a Census Bureau statistician, said in an interview: ''A
possible explanation for the increase in the earnings of women is the movement
of the baby boom generation into its peak earning years, which tends to occur
earlier for women than for men. The peak occurs from age 35 to 44 for women,
while for men it occurs in the 45-to-54 age bracket.''

Household Income Compared

The bureau reported that median household income rose 1.3 percent last year, to
$28,906, with black households showing an increase of 5.1 percent, to $18,083.

Household income was substantially higher for Asian-Americans than for whites:
$36,102, as against $30,406. One reason was that Asian-American households
tended to have more people than white households.

As used by the Census Bureau, ''Asian'' is a racial category that includes
people from Japan, China, the Philippines, Korea, India and Vietnam.

Last year half the nation's poor were either children or elderly. ''The poverty
rate for children continues, as it has since 1975, to be higher than that for
any other age group,'' the report said.

The rate was 19.6 percent for children under 18 years of age and 22.5 percent
for those under 6. Half of black children under 6 were living in poverty. Forty
percent of Hispanic children and 17 percent of white children under 6 were poor,
the bureau said.

The Poverty Level Defined

A family of four was classified as poor if it had cash income of less than
$12,675 last year. The poverty level is adjusted each year to reflect changes in
the Consumer Price Index. The official poverty statistics are based exclusively
on cash income. They do not reflect the value of a person's assets or of noncash
benefits like food stamps, Medicaid, public housing and fringe benefits provided
by employers.

If such benefits were counted as income they would reduce the poverty rate. But
Census Bureau officials said the trend in poverty over the last decade would be
very similar to that reflected in the official statistics.

Representative Lee H. Hamilton, an Indiana Democrat who is chairman of the Joint
Economic Committee of Congress, said, ''The figures released today paint a
discouraging picture of recent trends in poverty and income distribution.''

The Census Bureau observed that the share of all income going to the most
affluent fifth of all households last year was ''significantly higher than the
comparable figures for 1979 and 1969,'' while middle-income and poor households
received ''somewhat lower shares.''

For the most affluent 5 percent of all families in the United States, average
income rose to $148,438 in 1989, from $120,253 in 1979, the bureau reported. In
the same 10-year period, it said, the average income for the poorest one-fifth
of all families declined to $9,431, from $9,990.

Income distribution is an emotional issue in politics. Changes in such
distribution from year to year are small. The Census Bureau has been much more
cautious than many economists in commenting on the changes. But bureau officials
said the trend was now clear, so they had no hesitation in writing about ''the
growing inequality of the income distribution,'' as it was called in today's
report.

The bureau said the reasons for the increased inequality of American incomes
were not entirely clear. It listed several possibilities, including growth in
the number of elderly people, in the number of people living alone and in the
number of families headed by a woman, with no husband present.

Median household income for the elderly is about half that for the nonelderly,
even though the poverty rate for the elderly, 11.4 percent, is lower than for
the nation as a whole, the bureau said. Because of Social Security, many elderly
people have incomes just above the poverty level, the report said.

The poverty data were based on interviews with 60,000 households chosen to be
representative of the nation's population.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Graph: Percentage of each group living below the official poverty level
from '80 to '89 (Source: Census Bureau)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              355 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 28, 1990, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Lindsay Alumni Turned To Public Interest Law

SECTION: Section A; Page 26, Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 201 words


To the Editor:

Apropos your Sept. 5 article on former staffers of New York City's Mayor John V.
Lindsay, a small group of lawyers who worked on the 1965 Lindsay campaign,
Lawyers for Lindsay, went on to form a group that is a leading force in the
legal profession for public service by lawyers.

The Council of New York Law Associates was formed in 1969 by Neal Johnston, who
envisioned an organization that would involve young lawyers in political
activities and put them to work representing community groups and poor people in
all sorts of legal matters. The council was active in the anti-Vietnam War and
civil rights movements and later in international human rights and foster care
for children.

Today, we have more than 1,000 members and coordinators at more than 75 law
firms. More than 400 lawyers are working on pro bono projects that include
low-income housing development, creation of shelters for the homeless and
battered women, legal advice to job training programs, day care centers, social
service agencies, groups fighting AIDS, civil rights groups and environmental
groups.

ALLEN R. BROMBERGER
Executive Director
Council of New York Law Associates
New York, Sept. 7, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              356 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 29, 1990, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Beliefs

BYLINE: By Peter Steinfels

SECTION: Section 1; Page 11, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 1045 words


''Sing lustily and with a good courage. Beware of singing as if you were half
dead, or half asleep; but lift up your voice with strength.''

So directed John Wesley, the founder of Methodism, in 1761. ''Do not bawl,'' he
also instructed, but ''above all sing spiritually.''

It was a great age of hymn writing. Charles Wesley, John's younger brother,
wrote more than 6,000 hymns, hundreds of them still treasured today. John
himself collaborated with his brother, wrote hymns and translated French and
German ones into English. What the cathedrals were in stone and stained glass
for medieval Christendom, hymn-singing has been in sound for post-Reformation
Christianity: belief made tangible for the average person.

Not long after John Wesley put down his no-nonsense ''Directions for Singing,''
another British clergyman wrote the hymn that, more than any other, has seemed
to link Americans of every race, place and generation -elderly white congregants
of little churches in the valley, black civil rights marchers in Mississippi,
Bay Area flower children from the 1960's, young choir members in Harlem.

The hymn is ''Amazing Grace,'' which the Library of Congress says has been
recorded by more performers than any other. When a syndicated religion columnist
asked readers about their favorite hymns, ''Amazing Grace'' ranked first. A
month ago, when Bill Moyers presented an 80-minute film on ''Amazing Grace'' on
the Public Broadcasting System, it drew two to five times the number of viewers
that a P.B.S. special typically attracts in cities around the nation.

The Moyers broadcast has since been overshadowed by the P.B.S. series on the
Civil War, but it had a similar power, partly because it had a similar subtext,
the original sin of slavery and the complex relationship between black and white
that this sin bequeathed the nation.

Until Mr. Moyers's documentary, few of the millions who have been moved by
''Amazing Grace'' knew the dramatic story behind its words, written by a former
slave-ship captain, John Newton, who had been transformed into a country curate
and a stalwart opponent of the slave trade by the same wave of evangelical
fervor that Wesley was stirring.

That history lent an extra poignancy to Mr. Moyers's movement from one rendition
of the hymn to another, from the strong, clear version by the family of the
folksinger Jean Ritchie in Kentucky to the breathtaking one by the gospel singer
Marion Williams, who joyously stretched and bent notes, breaking syllables and
bouncing phrases back and forth with the chorus of a Philadelphia church.

In Georgia, white practitioners of ''shaped note singing,'' or ''sacred harp
singing,'' produced a haunting chant-like ''Amazing Grace,'' and in Alabama,
black practitioners of the same vocal tradition offered still further variations
as they gathered for the 91st birthday of their song leader, Dewey Williams.

Although the words of ''Amazing Grace'' are John Newton's, the music to which
they have long been sung is an early American melody of unknown origin. The
soprano Jessye Norman speculated that the reformed slave trader's words were
married to an African-American song.

Ms. Norman also wondered ''whether we're talking about the lyrics when we say
that it touches so many people, or whether it's that tune that everybody
knows.'' Ms. Williams said, ''The music is nice, but the words - they get more
to the people than anything.'' Mr. Moyers concentrated on the words, especially
the first three verses:

Amazing grace! How sweet the sound that saved a wretch like me!

I once was lost, but now am found; was blind, but now I see.

'Twas grace that taught my heart to fear, and grace my fears relieved; how
precious did that grace appear, the hour I first believed.

Through many dangers, toils, and snares, I have already come; 'tis grace hath
brought me safe thus far, and grace will lead me home.

Mr. Moyers engaged Ms. Norman, Johnny Cash, Judy Collins (whose 1970 rendition
of the hymn was a hit recording) and inmates at the state penitentiary in
Huntsville, Tex., in sometimes desultory, sometimes moving discussions of the
lyrics, especially of the word ''grace.''

But the theological power of hymns is in the music and the imagery rather than
the doctrine. Who notices the uncompromising theology of ''Rock of Ages?'' What
Trinitarian Christians worry that ''Nearer My God to Thee'' was written by a
Unitarian? Catholic hymnals now even include Martin Luther's ''A Mighty Fortress
Is Our God.''

For contemporary listeners, a key word in ''Amazing Grace'' is ''wretch.'' It is
not a word we commonly use. It is quaint, it is disturbing, and it tells us, in
the second line, that here are no greeting-card sentiments. Like ''blind'' and
''taught my heart to fear,'' this is not the language of self-esteem seminars.
Yet, to hear the Texas inmates tell it, ''Amazing Grace'' has probably done
considerably more for their self-esteem than any therapeutic exercises.

Occasionally, one encounters a bowdlerized version, in which the word ''wretch''
has been excised for something like ''soul.'' Obviously the wretches who
perpetrate this sort of thing belong to the same tribe that Thomas Day, a Roman
Catholic musicologist, assails in a witty book, ''Why Catholics Can't Sing,'' to
be published next month by Crossroad Publishers.

Among the several provocative reasons that Mr. Day offers for the musical
malaise affecting American Catholicism, and a few other denominations as well,
is the triumph of anemic pseudo-folk hymns, not muscular in their lyrics but
dreamy and narcissistic, not solidly singable by congregations but slippery with
touches of a performer's personality. ''The musical equivalent of the warm
bubble bath,'' Mr. Day writes.

That music is unlikely to have the effect that Mr. Moyers reported after an
advance showing of his documentary in an Austin, Tex., theater. With a
tear-streaked face, a Vietnam veteran spoke of his 15-year struggle with
memories of mindlessly firing on villages as a helicopter gunner. If John Newton
could come to terms with his responsibility for participating in the slave
trade, the veteran concluded, he himself could come to terms with his guilt and
grief over what he had done in Vietnam. Amazing grace.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              357 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 29, 1990, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

CONFRONTATION IN THE GULF;
As Gulf Crisis Solidifies the World Order, Cuba Feels Left Out

BYLINE: By CHRIS HEDGES, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 5, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 857 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, Sept. 28


The exuberance of Soviet and American officials about the new world order being
established after the cold war is not universally embraced at the United
Nations.

The Cubans, the lone dissenters in the 15-member Security Council's vote last
Tuesday to impose an air embargo against Iraq, watch warily as the vaunted new
world order plunges them into economic crisis and diplomatic isolation.

The decisions by the Soviet Union to slash aid to Cuba - in particularly the
huge shipments of oil - and to work with the United States to solve regional
conflicts have left the Cubans as one of the last standard bearers in the
ideological war against what they see as United States imperialism.

As many United Nations members, including the Soviets, edge closer to the tacit
acceptance of force to resolve the Persian Gulf crisis, the Cubans are faced
with the specter of the United States, a country they have frequently condemned,
assuming the mantle of the world's policeman.

''The U.S. is acting as if they have become the only superpower, the dominant
force in the world,'' said Ricardo Alarcon de Quesada, Cuba's chief delegate to
the United Nations. ''They are not only doing this unilaterally as a power, but
they are using the Security Council for this purpose. This is a very serious
development for the entire world.''

Scent of a Cigar

Western diplomats, however, see Cuba as a country that is politically ossified
and out of touch with the world.

''Cuba is the only country not being pulled into the center now,'' a Western
diplomat said. ''Five years ago Cuba and other radical states like Vietnam,
Yemen and Algeria, pulled the non-aligned nations to the left. Today nearly
everyone, with the exception of Cuba, has moved into the mainstream.''

The new order, adulated by nearly every visiting dignitary to the United Nations
this week, is nothing but a headache to the Cubans.

''This so-called new order has not yet benefited the third world,'' Mr. Alarcon
said, the acrid scent of a cigar wafting up from between his fingers. ''On the
contrary there are many reasons to be afraid that in the way some people
conceive this new order we will suffer more.''

The Cubans, while admitting that diplomatic affairs have become more ''complex''
since the end of the cold war, also contend that they will maintain their
rigidity against the United States.

Use of Force Opposed

''There is a perception that somehow Cuba will not be able to weather the
changes that have been taking place in the world,'' said Rene J. Mujica, a
member of the Cuban Mission, ''that Cuba will have to adapt and ultimately
become pliant to the U.S. This will not be the case.''

The Cubans say they condemn the occupation and annexation of Kuwait by Iraq,
along with the taking of hostages and the violations by Iraqi troops of
diplomatic missions in Kuwait.

But they say they will never sanction the use of force by the multinational
presence in the gulf.

''The resolutions the Council has passed in which we have reservations or
objections are those resolutions that deal with U.N. actions to counter Iraq's
illegal invasion, occupation and annexation of Kuwait,'' Mr. Mujica said. ''The
resolutions in the Council that deal with matters of principle have our full
support.''

The Cubans said the language of the eight resolutions condemning the invasion
have paved the way for armed intervention by the United States, an intervention
they believe would be in violation of the United Nations Charter.

''The Security Council, in accordance with the charter, is authorized to decide
when to use military force, but in a very specific manner,'' Mr. Alarcon said.
''This is a very fundamental question of prinicple that goes far beyond this
crisis. The Council, in our view, has violated the U.N. Charter. It is extremely
dangerous for any member state, particularly for a small state, to have this as
a precedent.''

'Gave the Green Light'

The Cubans argue that any military action sanctioned by the United Nations can
be organized only under United Nations auspices.

''The Council simply gave the green light to the United States and others to do
what they were doing already,'' Mr. Alarcon said.

The Cubans, who have been the object of a United States embargo for nearly three
decades, say they are especially sensitive to any resolutions that would keep
food and medicine from entering Iraq, although food and medicines will be
allowed into Iraq and Kuwait under international supervision.

''We cannot accept that economic sanctions can include depriving innocent
civilians of their normal food stuffs or medical supplies,'' he said. ''We are
perhaps the only country in the world that has been living for almost 30 years
under an embargo that has also deprived my people of food and medicines.''

The Cubans also argue that the call for sanctions against any country that
violates the embargo is too stringent.

''The resolution threatens specific measures against states that may be, through
their nationals or their territory, violating the embargo,'' Mr. Alarcon said.
''I think that this is going very, very, very far.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              358 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 29, 1990, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Congress Resists El Salvador's Chief on Aid Cuts

BYLINE: By CLIFFORD KRAUSS, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 676 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 28


President Alfredo Cristiani of El Salvador impressed several members of Congress
during his four-day lobbying visit to Washington this week, but he did not
succeed in altering Congressional sentiment on cutting military aid to his
country.

A dozen Senators considered undecided on a bill that would withhold 50 percent
of the $82.5 million in military aid requested by the Bush Administration have
not shifted one way or the other because of President Cristiani's visit, Senate
aides said.

The House has already passed a similar measure, which would only restore aid if
the guerrillas refused to take part in peace talks or waged an offensive that
endangered the Government's survival.

This year's Congressional debate over aid to El Salvador is the most heated
since the early 1980's, principally because of the killing of six Jesuit
priests, reportedly by an army squad, in November. Congressional staff reports
have documented evidence that officers of the Salvadoran Army have blocked an
investigation to protect themselves from prosecution, despite the fact that four
officers and four privates have been arrested.

Representative Stephen J. Solarz, a Brooklyn Democrat and member of the House
Foreign Affairs Committee, said: ''I think Cristiani is engaging and persuasive.
His sincerity is no longer in question, but I would be amazed if there aren't
cuts.''

Mr. Cristiani's visit was further complicated by a stern breakfast meeting with
Vice President Dan Quayle on Thursday, in which Mr. Quayle expressed his concern
that San Salvador is still moving too slowly on human rights. Mr. Quayle has
taken a personal interest in a massacre of 10 peasants in September 1988 in
which eight of the nine militarymen originally arrested in the case have been
released.

''Vice President Quayle told President Cristiani that Congress would look at
this very carefully,'' a White House aide said. ''He said unless there was
progress on the human-rights cases, it would be more and more harmful with
Congress.''

Mr. Cristiani met with more than 70 members of Congress to assure them that he
was committed to prosecute the Jesuit case and to improving his country's
human-rights record. He urged that if Congress did withhold aid, it tie any cuts
to the requirment that the guerrillas agree to a cease-fire first.

Bill Calling for Aid Cuts

''President Cristiani makes a good impression with his integrity,'' said Senator
Dennis DeConcini, Democrat of Arizona. ''But whether or not he has enough
credibility to temper some Congressional conditions on military aid is yet to be
seen.''

Long a backer of military aid to El Salvador, Senator DeConcini said he was
leaning in favor of the Dodd-Leahy bill cutting aid, which the Senate
Appropriations Committee is to consider next week.

Senator Arlen Specter, Republican of Pennsylvania, said he was undecided on the
Dodd-Leahy bill before the Cristiani visit, and he remained undecided because of
his concern for several human-rights cases and the lack of judicial revisions.

''I'm listening to President Cristiani,'' he said. ''But I'm more interested in
what's happening there. We need to apply the most pressure to bring peace and
democracy to that country.'' $4.5 Billion Since 1979 ''I think the President's
visit was helpful to his cause,'' said Senator John H. Chafee, Republican of
Rhode Island. ''Whether it was helpful enough I do not know.'' Mr. Chafee said
he was leaning against the Dodd-Leahy bill before Mr. Cristiani's visit, and he
remained undecided.

The United States has sent El Salvador more than $4.5 billion in economic and
military aid, as well hundreds of military advisers, since the civil war began
in 1979. The United States counterinsurgency program in El Salvador has been the
largest since the Vietnam War. More than 75,000 people have died in the
fighting.

A senior State Department official who deals with El Salvador policy said he
thought Mr. Cristiani's visit was positive because ''he got his message across
and heard Congress' concern on the Jesuit case.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              359 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 29, 1990, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Lawrence O'Brien, Democrat, Dies at 73

BYLINE: By ALBIN KREBS

SECTION: Section 1; Page 29, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1750 words


Lawrence F. O'Brien Jr., the Democratic Party strategist who organized the
successful senatorial and Presidential campaigns of John F. Kennedy, died
yesterday at New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center in Manhattan. He was 73
years old. His family said he died from complications of cancer.

Mr. O'Brien was twice named chairman of the Democratic National Committee and
while he was chairman the committee's offices in the Watergate office and
apartment complex in Washington were burglarized, resulting in scandals that led
to President Richard M. Nixon's resignation on Aug. 9, 1974, as the House
prepared to act on three articles of impeachment against the President.

Mr. O'Brien, who served as the Congressional liaison representative for
President Kennedy and President Lyndon B. Johnson, had a varied career in
politics, government and business and was widely admired for his organizing
talents. He served as Postmaster General in the Johnson Administration, and put
into motion a plan to modernize the postal system, making it a quasi-private
corporation.

From 1975 to 1984, he was the commissioner of the National Basketball
Association, and under his leadership the league made financial and rule changes
that provided stability in an era of uncertainty.

Of Eggheads and Winners

Noted for his savvy, no-nonsense approach to winning elections, Mr. O'Brien
disdained ''windmill-tilting amateurs'' who failed to see that elections were
not won by those who insisted on always taking the high road.

''The eggheads want the candidate to win on his own terms - to defy the party
and interest groups,'' he said in an interview in 1988. ''The egghead thinks
it's worthwhile to be defeated. I think it's worthwhile to be elected.''

Mr. O'Brien was born into politics. His father and mother were immigrants from
County Cork, Ireland, who settled in Springfield, Mass.

''My father ran into bigotry,'' Mr. O'Brien said. ''It made him a strong
Democrat. It was a place for him to go. He wasn't wanted elsewhere, and he
became a Democratic Party fighter in a Republican stronghold.''

Early Exposure to Politics

Lawrence Francis O'Brien Jr. was born on July 7, 1917, in the Roland Hotel, a
boardinghouse and restaurant that was one of his father's properties.

The Roland's kitchen became the informal Democratic headquarters in western
Massachusetts, and Larry O'Brien grew up on close terms with politicians like
James Michael Curley, the flamboyant Mayor of Boston, and David I. Walsh, the
first Irish-American elected to the United States Senate from Massachusetts.

''My father would say, 'All right, now we'll get the signatures,' '' Mr. O'Brien
recalled years later. ''It was organizational politics, signatures on petitions,
door-to-door canvassing. He was a great one for planning - all the things I
wound up being involved in myself.''

In 1942 Mr. O'Brien received a bachelor of law degree from Northeastern
University, but he had no designs on a career in law. Instead, he stumped the
state with his father, a party committeeman, building up valuable contacts with
ward leaders.

Elected as Union Leader

At the age of 22, while he was a bartender at his father's restaurant, Mr.
O'Brien won his first and only elective office, as president of the Hotel and
Restaurant Employees Union. Soon afterward he was drafted into the Army but
because his poor vision barred him from combat duty, he spent the war at Camp
Edwards, Mass.

He was discharged in 1945, shortly after his marriage to Elva Brassard of
Springfield. They had one son, Lawrence Francis O'Brien 3d.

Mr. O'Brien ran his first political campaign for Foster Furcolo, an old friend
from Springfield who had been best man at Mr. O'Brien's wedding, and was seeking
a Congressional seat in 1946. Mr. Furcolo narrowly lost that race, but he was
elected in 1948 and took his campaign manager to Washington as his
administrative assistant.

In 1952 Kennedy, then a Congressman from Boston, persuaded Mr. O'Brien to help
in his campaign to unseat Senator Henry Cabot Lodge, Republican of
Massachusetts.

'The O'Brien Manual'

Mr. O'Brien tackled the job with zest, and in the process perfected his own
formula for political organization. He recruited 340 local political amateurs,
calling them ''Kennedy secretaries'' so as not to offend entrenched party
leaders, and charged them with working neighborhood to neighborhood for
Kennedy's campaign.

He gave them ''The O'Brien Manual,'' a 68-page handbook stressing the importance
of voter registration, mobilization of women as volunteers, telephone canvassing
and intensive press relations. He also encouraged the secretaries to organize
teas around the state; Kennedy's popular mother and sisters went to those
receptions and shook hands for hours.

Despite the Eisenhower landslide of 1952, Kennedy defeated Senator Lodge by
70,000 votes. In 1958 Mr. O'Brien's smooth-running organization helped Kennedy
win re-election by 874,608 votes, a record for Massachusetts.

When Kennedy decided to run for the Democratic Presidential nomination in 1960
he again turned to Mr. O'Brien, who established Kennedy headquarters and
recruited volunteers nationwide. Kennedy won all seven of the state primaries he
entered and, with Mr. O'Brien's guidance, won a first-ballot victory at the
Democratic National Convention in Los Angeles. In November 1960, Kennedy, with
Johnson as his running mate, went on to a narrow victory over the Republican
ticket led by Mr. Nixon.

A Vital Link to Congress

As Kennedy's special assistant for Congressional relations, Mr. O'Brien was a
crucial bridge between the White House and Congress, helping Kennedy's New
Frontier programs became law. He did so with persuasion, patience, arm-twisting
and an occasional favor.

After Kennedy was assassinated in Dallas on Nov. 22, 1963, President Johnson
persuaded Mr. O'Brien to stay on. He also served as a leading political adviser
to Johnson in the 1964 election, which Johnson won with a plurality of 16
million votes.

As the President became preoccupied with the Vietnam War, Mr. O'Brien was given
the authority to negotiate substantial changes in the Administration's stalled
legislation. In 1965 he won approval of 84 of the 87 major bills proposed by the
White House, and in 1966 he won approval of 97 of 113 measures proposed.

Among the bills passed in Mr. O'Brien's tenure as White House liaison officer
were those creating the Peace Corps and the Alliance for Progress, Medicare, the
model cities program, the Civil Rights Act of 1964, related voting rights
legislation, a nuclear test ban treaty and increased aid to education.

Mr. O'Brien sought to leave Government service in 1965, but Johnson persuaded
him to stay in Congressional liaison and also to serve as his Postmaster
General. In that post Mr. O'Brien attacked the longstanding problems of
inefficiency and mismanagement in the postal system.

'A Race With Catastrophe'

In 1967 he told the House Appropriations Committee that the system was ''in a
race with catastrophe.'' He proposed replacing the Post Office Department with a
nonprofit governmental corporation managed by professionals. His recommendations
were not approved by Congress until two years later, but in the interim he put
in motion a postal mechanization program.

In 1968 Mr. O'Brien resigned to coordinate Senator Robert F. Kennedy's campaign
for the Democratic Presidential nomination. But in June 1968, after the Senator
was assassinated, Mr. O'Brien returned to Springfield ''with nothing to do and
nothing I wanted to do.''

He was soon persuaded to become campaign director for Senator Hubert H.
Humphrey, who won the Presidential nomination and installed Mr. O'Brien as the
Democratic national chairman. But the party was going through some bad times,
starting with the tumultuous and divisive convention in Chicago. Mr. Nixon
narrowly defeated Mr. Humphrey in the 1968 election.

Mr. O'Brien served briefly as president of the Wall Street brokerage of
McDonnell & Company, then set up his own public relations and management
consultant firm, O'Brien Associates. In 1970 he again became the Democratic
national chairman and oversaw sweeping changes in the selection of delegates,
the reorganization of the committee's staff and the recruitment of
communications experts as volunteer consultants.

The Watergate Burglary

As President Nixon's re-election campaign neared, his Committee for the
Re-election of the President viewed Mr. O'Brien as ''the Democrats' most
professional political operator,'' and arranged three separate audits of his tax
returns by the Internal Revenue Service.

His offices at the Watergate complex were secretly wiretapped by agents of the
re-election committee. When they returned on June 17, 1972, to replace their
listening devices they were discovered by a watchman and arrested, setting off
the chain of investigations, Congressional hearings, indictments and trials that
led to Mr. Nixon's resignation in 1974.

After the Democratic ticket's defeat in 1972, Mr. O'Brien returned to O'Brien
Associates and worked on his 1974 autobiography, ''No Final Victories: A Life in
Politics from John F. Kennedy to Watergate,'' in which he recommended the public
financing of all Federal elections.

In 1975, as commissioner of the National Basketball Association, he set about
mitigating internal and legal disputes plaguing the league. In 1976 he persuaded
the team owners to let drafted players become free agents after two years.

Later he conducted the negotiations that led reluctant N.B.A. owners to accept a
merger with the American Basketball Association, in which the four top A.B.A.
teams, in exchange for a cash payment, joined the N.B.A.

Mr. O'Brien was commissioner of the N.B.A. at a time when players' demands for
higher alaries, coupled with widespread drug abuse, threatened the existance of
the league. He initiated a cap on players' salaries in order to stabilize the
league financially and began the most comprehensive drug and alcohol abuse
policy in professional sports. He is also credited with improving competition
and with introducing the three-point shot.

After he resigned as commissioner in 1984 he served as president of the
Basketball Hall of Fame in Springfield.

Mr. O'Brien, who lived in New York City after leaving politics, is survived by
his wife, their son, Lawrence, who lives in Washington; a sister, Mary Placzek
of Wilbraham, Mass., and two grandsons.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Lawrence F. O'Brien with President John F. Kennedy in 1962
(George Tames/The New York Times, 1962); Lawrence F. O'Brien

TYPE: OBITUARY

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              360 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 30, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

CONFRONTATION IN THE GULF;
Troops in Gulf Talk of War, And of Vietnam and Respect

BYLINE: By JAMES LeMOYNE, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 1, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1144 words

DATELINE: IN SAUDI ARABIA, Sept. 29


The uniformed men and women the United States has deployed in the desert of
Saudi Arabia may have only vague notions of why they are here, but they seem to
have few doubts that it is the right thing to do.

''If the President of the United States felt it was necessary for us to be here,
that's 100 percent enough for me,'' said an army sergeant, Sinclair Thorne, in a
fairly typical comment.

But after declaring their readiness to fight, many American servicemen and
servicewomen here added that their one worry is that their lives and the meaning
of their commitment could be squandered by inept political leaders, shifting
international opinion and the fickleness of the American public.

In expressing this sense of political vulnerability, the word ''Vietnam'' came
up often.

''I am proud to represent our nation by being over here, and I'd like our nation
to be proud of me,'' said Lieut. Brian Vaughn, 26 years old, who is in the
Army's 24th Support Battalion. ''But I had a brother and an uncle who fought in
Vietnam, and we all know what happened to the Vietnam vets. They were
disrespected by the American people for being there.''

''Well, that's a big concern to us out here, and we talk about it every night,''
he said, as his men looked on and nodded. ''We are ready to defend our country,
but we want to be supported and respected for what we're doing.''

Clear Definition Is Difficult

But in more than 50 interviews with American personnel from several units, it is
not easy to get a clear definition of what it is that Lieutenant Vaughn and the
rest of the Americans here are doing.

Senior American officers say their battalions may dig in and remain for six
months to a year. But neither they nor their troops can say conclusively if
their mission is only to defend Saudi Arabia or to prepare at some point to
attack Iraq.

Nor do American troops appear certain whether they are here to keep the price of
oil in check, to destroy an Iraqi dictator or to liberate the small nation of
Kuwait that he has seized. Some soldiers emphasize one goal, others another.

Nor, when asked, do they find it easy to explain why they as Americans should
principally bear the burden of blood and tears this war will bring if leaders in
Washington, Riyadh or Baghdad say war must come.

Not surprisingly, these issues matter to Americans who are being asked to stake
their lives in a foreign country of which they know little, a land whose Islamic
and monarchical values in many instances directly contradict the founding
principles of American public and private life.

When asked why, exactly, he is here, Lieutenant Vaughn answered in a crisp
military tone, ''I am deployed here to protect our nation's interests and will
do whatever the mission requires me to do.''

'Protecting American Interests'

Sgt. Morris Tolly, 24, agreed. ''I'm protecting American interests,'' he said.

''Saddam Hussein is a menace to world peace, and if he doesn't leave Kuwait he
should be kicked out,'' Sergeant Tolly added. ''America shouldn't do this alone
- but if it must, we should.''

Sergeant Tolly said his wife also is in the Army and may be sent here soon. She
has just sent their baby to live with in-laws. He says they recognize that their
child could become an orphan if war comes.

''We have discussed it and accepted it,'' he said.

A group of soldiers listening also strongly declared that they are committed and
ready to fight. But they again referred to Vietnam as a metaphor for possible
confusion and a consequent feeling of betrayal.

Precautions for Speaking Freely

One soldier asked that his name not be used and also asked that an officer step
away to permit the soldier to speak freely to a reporter.

''I have a lot of friends who were Vietnam vets,'' the soldier said. ''Some of
us are scared that once we start going home in body bags, the country will turn
against this and it will become another Vietnam.''

''When we deployed here, people cheered and waved flags,'' he added. ''But if I
go back home like the Vietnam vets did and somebody spits on me, I swear to God
I'll kill them.''

These troops, like tens of thousands of other uniformed Americans here, were
children when the war in Vietnam was fought. And even as they grapple with its
legacy, in most other ways they seem very far removed from its trauma.

Proud of the Military

This is now a volunteer military made up mostly of 20- to 35-year-old Americans
who during more than two weeks of visits to the field seem in the main to be
highly trained, genuinely motivated and intensely patriotic. They say they want
to be in the American military and are proud of it.

''We wear the uniform for a reason,'' said Capt. Carl Edge, an Army medical
officer deployed far out in the desert. ''If you never wanted to do this, you
should have gotten a job at K-Mart.''

Many of the Americans here have a minimal understanding of Saudi Arabia, Iraq
and the Middle East. They occasionally seem to confuse Iraq with Iran,
incorrectly describing Iraq as a Muslim fundamentalist nation led by a religious
fanatic.

But in a ready expression of what could be described as a central tenet of
popular American ideology, American troops will often say they are here to
defend freedom or liberate the underdog, Kuwait, from the bully, Iraq.

''The United States has been the one in history that is first to help and do
what it says it will do,'' said Anthony Broadnax, a 28-year-old private and
driver in an Army field unit. ''You know, the land of the free.''

Doubt About Kuwaitis and Saudis

When told that Kuwait had strongly criticized American policy in the Middle East
and that both Kuwait and Saudi Arabia are monarchies with limited freedom of the
press and assembly and no freedom of religion, the soldiers sometimes seem
confused.

''Well, then mainly it's about oil,'' said Staff Sgt. Henry Bishop, 30, as he
worked on the engine of an ailing truck. ''We're here to protect our supply of
oil.''

When asked if that was a good enough reason to be here, Pvt. Daphne Butler, a
truck driver, said, ''No.''

''I don't think we should be here,'' she said. ''It's a problem between Iraq and
Saudi Arabia. Let them settle it. We have enough oil in the United States to
last 10 years.''

Pvt. Sharon Kirkpatrick, 20, stood nearby. ''I don't want to be here,'' she
said. ''But if we have to fight to accomplish the mission, we'll fight.''

'There's Almost No News'

Pvt. Tina Amalong, a 21-year-old radio operator deployed deep in the desert, had
a similar view.

''I joined the Army to pay for college,'' she said. ''I also thought it would
look good on my resume.''

She said morale was suffering because ''no one knows when they're leaving, and
there's almost no news.''

''But we'll fight,'' she added. ''If we are ordered to, there is no doubt we'll
all fight.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Members of the 82d Airborne Division during an exercise with
60-millimeter light mortars at a frontline position in the Saudi desert.
(Associated Press)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              361 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 30, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

U.S. AND VIETNAM REPORT PROGRESS ON RESTORING TIES

BYLINE: By CHRIS HEDGES

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 1, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1033 words


In their highest-level discussions in more than a decade, the United States and
Vietnam took what appeared to be a significant step toward the resumption of
diplomatic relations yesterday.

Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d and Nguyen Co Thach, Vietnam's Deputy Prime
Minister and Foreign Minister, talked for 30 minutes at the Waldorf-Astoria
Hotel in what a senior State Department official said was ''an exceptional
meeting.''

The official said the meeting was ''a step in the direction'' of normalization
of relations, but that it technically ''did not constitute the commencement of
normalization discussions.''

Travel Restrictions Waived

The United States has not had normal diplomatic relations with Vietnam since
North Vietnam's defeat of the United States-supported South Vietnamese
Government in 1975. In the late 1970's, President Carter sent Leonard Woodcock,
the head of the United Auto Workers Union, to Hanoi to discuss the renewal of
relations, but the effort ended when Vietnam invaded Cambodia at the end of
1978. Since then talks between Washington and Hanoi have been conducted by
middle-level officials.

At the meeting yesterday, Mr. Baker waived the travel restrictions imposed on
Vietnamese diplomats to allow the Foreign Minister to travel to Washington to
meet with Gen. John W. Vessey Jr., a retired Army general and former Chairman of
the Joint Chiefs of Staff who is the President's special envoy to Hanoi on
humanitarian issues. Two Stumbling Blocks The Administration wants the
Vietnamese to cooperate more fully on solving the issue of 2,300 servicemen who
were listed as missing in the war in Indochina or who failed to return from
prisoner-of-war camps. About 70 percent of those men are missing in Vietnam,
with the remainder missing in Laos and Cambodia.

That and the Cambodian issue are the two main stumbling blocks to the
normalization of relations. The Bush Administration has tied renewed relations
to verification of a complete removal of Vietnamese military forces from
Cambodia.

At his meeting with Mr. Bush, Mr. Thach promised that Vietnam would withdraw all
its troops and advisers from Cambodia and work to solve the conflict.

In a communique after the meeting, the Vietnamese said the two countries agreed
''to take concrete steps that are conducive to the normalization of relations
between the two countries.''

The State Department spokeswoman, Margaret D. Tutwiler, said, ''The Secretary
urged the Vice Premier to accelerate Vietnam's unilateral efforts to resolve the
P.O.W.-M.I.A. issue, thereby pre-positioning both countries for improved
relations once a Cambodian settlement is achieved.''

The Vietnamese, who said that Mr. Thach would travel to Washington in two weeks
after meetings with other world leaders in New York, praised the outcome of the
meeting.

''Both sides reiterated their support for an early agreement on Cambodia in the
Paris International Conference,'' the Vietnamese statement said. ''The two sides
also agreed to accelerate the resolution of humanitarian issues of mutual
concern, including the M.I.A. and the humanitarian needs of Vietnam.''

Prisoner Issue Stressed

The Vietnamese invaded Cambodia, then under the control of the Khmer Rouge, in
1978 and installed the Hun Sen Government. Vietnam announced the withdrawal of
its troops last September, but there have been reports that some units and
advisers remain to assist the Hun Sen Government in its war against the Khmer
Rouge-dominated guerrilla movement.

The Secretary and Foreign Minister began by discussing prisoners of war and the
missing in action, State Department officials said.

''The Secretary emphasized his and the President's personal commitment to the
fullest possible accounting,'' a senior official said.

''The pace and scope of normalization will be directly effected by progress on
this issue,'' the official said. ''To emphasize the priority that the President
and the Secretary give to this issue, the Secretary said he was prepared to make
an exception to our travel restrictions that normally keep Vietnamese officials
within 25 miles of New York City.''

The waiver would allow the Foreign Minister to hold a one-day meeting with
General Vessey and Ann Mills Griffith of the National League of Families of
American Prisoners and Missing in Southeast Asia.

The Foreign Minister has also received an invitation to meet with the Senate
Foreign Relations Committee.

U.S. Stand Reiterated

The second part of the discussion centered on a Vietnamese withdrawal from
Cambodia.

''The Secretary reiterated our standing position that normalization of relations
with Vietnam could take place only in the context of a political settlement in
Cambodia, again with the pace and scope of normalization affected by the
P.O.W.-M.I.A. issue,'' the senior State Department official said.

The official said progress had been made in the last few weeks on the Cambodian
problem.

''Vietnam has played a constructive role in these developments,'' he said.
''Much more remains to be done as we move first to an agreement that would be
signed at a Paris conference and beyond that to full implementation of that
agreement.''

Mr. Baker told Mr. Thach that he saw a satisfactory conclusion to the Paris
conference on Cambodia as an important step toward the establishment of
diplomatic relations, State Department officials said.

''The Vietnamese have heard this before, but I think it was important for them
to hear it from the Secretary,'' the senior official said.

The Next Step to Peace

Vietnam's recent decision to cooperate with the United States in resolving the
conflict in Cambodia was a major factor that led to the warming of relations,
American officials said.

They said the next step in the peace process there would be final agreement on
the composition of a Supreme National Council.

The issue ''hanging up final action'' has been the number of people who should
be on the council and who should head it, the senior official said. ''That
subject was discussed,'' he added.

Mr. Thach briefly raised the issue of the United States economic embargo against
Vietnam, State Department officials said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d, left, with Foreign
Minister Nguyen Co Thach of Vietnam before their meeting yesterday. (Reuters)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              362 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 30, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

From TV to Antietam, Musings on the Civil War

BYLINE: By B. DRUMMOND AYRES Jr., Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 22, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 939 words

DATELINE: SHARPSBURG, Md., Sept. 27


It is little more than a long depression in the ground now, weathered smooth and
benign by time, like the rest of Antietam Battlefield, America's deadliest
killing ground.

But there was hardly a moment today when some tourist was not standing in that
depression, the former Sunken Road, trying to imagine what it must have been
like to have been there 128 years ago during the bloodiest single day of the
Civil War, or of any American war.

''Just think . . . ,'' said Carol Adams of Mohnton, Pa., her voice trailing off
as she surveyed the now-grassy place that became known as Bloody Lane after
4,000 Union and Confederate soldiers fell there in four hours on Sept. 17, 1862,
when Lee first invaded the North.

Mrs. Adams and her husband, Jim, said they were impelled to make the 125-mile
trip from their home to this rural, rolling corner of western Maryland by ''The
Civil War,'' the 11-hour public television series that was broadcast nationwide
this week. They were not alone.

Rediscovering a War

Suddenly the nation seems to be rediscovering the Civil War, with interest in
its causes, its lessons and its plain horror greater than at any time since the
centennial observances.

The series is given most of the credit for the rediscovery, having competed
solidly with other prime-time shows, drawing close to 15 million viewers each
evening and causing a run on videotapes. But considerable credit is also given
to a recent string of articles, books and films about the war, including one of
last year's most popular films, ''Glory,'' a tale about the role that black
soldiers played in the war.

''We'd been saying to ourselves for a long time that we ought to visit
Antietam,'' said Mr. Adams, a school administrator. ''But after watching a
couple of nights of the series this week, we just piled into the car and started
driving. This series really brought it all home to us.''

According to the National Park Service officials, tourism is up about 20 percent
this week at the visitors' center, situated in the middle of the 12-square-mile
battlefield, where, in all, 23,000 men fell in a fight that ended as a draw.
''Actually,'' said Ranger Joseph Nicodemus, ''attendance has been climbing all
year. We think it's mainly because of the increased emphasis about the war in
various media, and we expect the figures to climb even more.''

Seared by Old Photographs

The renewed interest in the war takes several forms, not the least being a
renewed pondering about a great nation's being ripped apart by the basest of
issues, human slavery. But something new seems to be at work, too.

The Public Broadcasting Service series, and to an extent ''Glory,'' drove home,
as perhaps never before, just how horrificly violent the war was.

The grainy still battlefield photographs by Matthew Brady and others have been
around for more than a century and a quarter, the soldiers' bloated bodies,
broken muskets and the scorched earth already fixed in many minds. But those old
photos achieved new impact being shown night after night on national television.

''Somehow they seemed more real, almost like the evening news,'' Marianne
Voight, a telephone saleswoman from Washington, said as she toured the
battlefield. ''I wonder what it would have been like if there had been
television back then, like we had in Vietnam.''

As he studied a map of the battlefield, which the South called Sharpsburg, John
Trombetta, a Korean War veteran from Towson, Md., said the series had ''brought
it all back to me, made me remember the futility of fighting, how bad and
unromantic it really is.'' He and some neighbors, he reported, had been talking
a lot this week about the Civil War and its meaning.

For Mr. Trombetta's wife, Lucille, the series increased fears about war in the
Middle East oil fields.

''We've got thousands of our boys over there,'' she said. ''We have to do what
we have to do. But the series made me see just how awful fighting can be.''

A Lost Eloquence

On a far different plane, the PBS series seems to have reminded many viewers
that there was a time, long before television, when Americans relied more
heavily on the written word. And in the judgment of some of those viewers, the
earlier generation was much more accomplished with the pen.

''The eloquent quotes that were reproduced each night from Civil War letters and
diaries left me really concerned about how much we have slipped when it comes to
using the English language,'' said Mr. Adams, the school administrator. ''We had
a nation of letter writers back then, and people could express themselves very
well. Look at us today. That's gone to a large extent. It's a very serious
loss.''

Finally, and probably inevitably, the series has provoked some new fighting.

In an essay in today's Richmond Times-Dispatch, the morning paper of the former
Confederate capital, Douglas A. Cohn, a Civil War writer from Burke, Va.,
complains that the series ''has made war against defenseless, silent pictures,
has opened old wounds with old lies and defamed a generation of Americans.''

''Here we go again, rounding up and adding to the usual fictions,'' Mr. Cohn
asserts, alleging that the series portrayed Lee and Jackson as no more than
killers and Lincoln as the nation's greatest President.

Likewise, the Georgia branch of the Sons of Confederate Veterans has contended
that the series was shot through with Yankee bias.

To which Shelby Foote, the author of a three-volume history of the Civil War and
a major on-camera commentator in the series, replied, ''I'm as Southern as any
man doing the protesting, and I claim it is not true.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: October 7, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

CORRECTION:

A map caption last Sunday with an article about visitors to the Antietam
battlefield referred incorrectly in some copies to the number killed in the
Civil War battle there. About 4,800 troops were killed.

GRAPHIC: Photo: Jim and Carol Adams of Mohnton, Pa., at the Antietam
Battlefield, where 4,000 Union and Confederate soldiers died on a single day in
1862. (George Tames for The New York Times); map: Maryland indicating the
Antietam battlefield. (The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              363 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 30, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

For Thai Politician, a Break From Retirement

BYLINE: By STEVEN ERLANGER, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 6, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 686 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand


Now 79 years old, Kukrit Pramoj, one of the most revered figures in Thai
political and intellectual life, has embarked on what he agrees is a kind of mad
second childhood.

The Social Action Party he founded in 1974, the second-largest party in the
current Government coalition, had run into trouble over allegations of
corruption. Its leader, Foreign Minister Siddhi Savetsila, seemed paralyzed, and
rumors had it that Prime Minister Chatichai Choonhavan would drop the party in
an imminent reshuffle. Suddenly, in August, the party asked Mr. Kukrit to return
as its leader, at least for a time, and pushed Mr. Siddhi into a summary
retirement. Mr. Chatichai, who had once served Mr. Kukrit as his Foreign
Minister, kept the Social Action Party in the Government in the reshuffle.

''Well, honestly, I'm surprised at myself for doing the job,'' Mr. Kukrit said
in an interview.

''This has already taken away a lot of the happiness of my life,'' he said,
gesturing toward the exquisite Thai house and compound where he has been
thinking, writing and holding court since his first retirement from politics.
''But the necessity seemed to be there, and the disastrous result if I didn't do
this seemed quite visible to me.''

Mr. Kukrit has in his varied life been a banker, a bureaucrat, a university
professor, a newspaper publisher, editor and columnist, a novelist and an actor
and dancer. He has also been Prime Minister, serving from March 1975 to April
1976, as American policy collapsed all over Indochina. It is a measure of his
political skill that, with only 18 members of Parliament to his name, he managed
to lead a coalition for that long.

With Mr. Chatichai as his Foreign Minister and Vietnam seemingly on the march,
''we made history,'' he said, restoring diplomatic relations with China, meeting
with Mao, and expelling the American military from Thailand. ''I was very proud
of that,'' he said. ''I think the Americans have learned something of the world
since then.''

Some analysts and diplomats have suggested that former Foreign Minister Siddhi,
whom Mr. Kukrit chose as party leader in 1985, has been treated shabbily after
long service to the nation. But Mr. Kukrit disagreed.

''I don't know how to treat Siddhi in a way that would please all people,'' Mr.
Kukrit said. ''He's been showing that he's tired for the last three years, and
he's not really a politician. And there has been no foreign policy out of him.
The Prime Minister set out foreign policy. Siddhi wasn't too happy about that,
but he didn't know what to do.'' Two junior ministers from the party had to be
dismissed on allegations of corruption, and one of them asserted that Mr. Siddhi
requested his ministers to make large contributions to an election campaign
fund.

''That's very unhealthy and very unpleasant,'' Mr. Kukrit said. ''I respect him,
but I don't think he's wise enough politically to know what's right and what's
wrong.''

Mr. Kukrit makes few apologies. ''I think I saved the party in the coalition and
saved the party from itself,'' he said. ''Now I have to build up a feasible
heir.''

He said he had discussed a party merger with Gen. Arthit Kamlang-ek, a former
Supreme Commander whose smaller party has just joined the Government. But any
leader of Social Action must be more than an officer - ''a man of the world,''
Mr. Kukrit said.

''You've got to be a person who has committed crimes in your career,'' he said,
smiling, ''so you understand what's being done around you, and you have to
understand the excruciating desire to become prime minister of all of your
members.''

And what crimes had he committed to be qualified as party leader? ''Oh, I
haven't really, actually committed any crime,'' he said, ''but I've seen a lot
of people who are corrupt. I stay friends with them until they're taken off to
prison in front of my eyes.''

Next year he turns 80, he said. ''There comes a time to stop everything and just
go to bed, and be fed by tubes,'' he said. But Thai politics enthralled him.
''It breaks your heart to go on,'' he said. ''But you can't give it up as easily
as all that.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              364 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 30, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Hong Kong Unsure of Value of Refugee Pact

BYLINE: By BARBARA BASLER, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 4, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 545 words

DATELINE: HONG KONG, Sept. 29


When a new accord on the return of Vietnamese boat people from Hong Kong's
crowded detention camps was announced last weekend, Government officials here
hailed it a breakthrough. But in the past few days, officials have admitted no
one is certain if the program will have any effect at all.

The new accord, signed by Britain, Hong Kong and Vietnam, calls for the office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees to arrange for the return
of boat people here who have not volunteered to go home, but who do not object
to returning. But officials of the High Commissioner's office conceded this week
that they were not certain that non-volunteers who are willing to return even
exist.

''Quite frankly, there are two schools of thought on this - one, that this is
only an imaginary category, that these people don't exist,'' said Jamshid Anvar,
regional director for the High Commissioner. ''Then, there are others who
believe they do exist and we have to test it to see which school of thought is
the right one.''

Suzy Comerford, a spokeswoman for Refugee Concern Hong Kong, a group of refugee
relief workers, said many relief workers question the plan because ''the
screening process that determines who is and who is not a refugee is still
deeply flawed.''

Moreover, the new plan raised the question of exactly how much pressure would be
exerted on boat people to return. This is a provocative issue here in light of
the international outcry last December after 51 men, women and children were
forced onto a plane for Hanoi in the middle of the night. There have been no
additional forced repatriations, but Hong Kong has continued to regard that as a
necessary method of returning boat people.

The High Commissioner's office has stressed that it would play no role in forced
repatriation. But officials told diplomats this week that its counselors would
now take an active role in trying to persuade Vietnamese who have been denied
refugee status to return home.

In interviews several months ago with boat people inside Whitehead, the largest
detention center here, Vietnamese said they had no real outside help with their
problems because the United Nations workers were so preoccupied with lining up
Vietnamese for voluntary return. ''All they ever talk about is volunteer,
volunteer, volunteer,'' a young man said.

Under the volunteer program that began 18 months ago, about 4,500 Vietnamese
have been returned home by the United Nations, which provides pocket money,
resettlement aid and the promise that it will monitor their treatment at home.

The new accord affects the largest segment of Hong Kong's boat people population
- those regarded by the colony as illegal immigrants ineligible for relocation
in a third country, and not as genuine refugees fleeing persecution. There are
45,000 Vietnamese in detention camps here, and 13,000 of them have been denied
refugee status. Of 32,000 still to be screened, officials say, only a small
fraction will qualify as refugees. This year the number of boat people fleeing
Vietnam has dropped 85 percent from 34,000 last year, Government officials said.

Officials are convinced that the forced repatriation in December convinced the
Vietnamese that there was little hope to be found in Hong Kong.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              365 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 30, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 2, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1035 words



International?/21



The United States and Vietnam took what seemed to be a big step toward resuming
diplomatic relations, holding their highest-level talks in more than a decade.
           Page 1



Hong Kong unsure of value of refugee pact           4



For Thai politician, a break from retirement           6



The first World Summit for Children begins today at the United Nations with
leaders of more than 70 countries gathering to adopt an ambitious set of goals
to improve life for poor children throughout the world.          1



Reporter's Notebook: The protocol for silencing kings           14



How St. George arrived at the U.N.           17



Bush in New York for conference and gulf diplomacy           17



Some children in developed nations, like residents of central Harlem, are
ravaged by health and other social problems that make their lives as horrible as
those of poor children in under-developed countries.          1



Scientists seek one-shot children's vaccine           15



The fighting spirit of U.S. troops in the desert of Saudi Arabia does not seem
to be suffering any residual effects of the crisis of confidence that America
suffered during Vietnam.          1



Behind Iraqi's oratory, cautious game is seen           20



Kuwaitis say U.S. doubts embargo will get Iraq out           21



U.S. considers new plans to stem weapon proliferation           20



G.A.O. cites flaws in anti-tank helicopter           25



The P.L.O. has taken a big gamble in the Gulf crisis. By deepening ties with
Saddam Hussein, it has moved to secure a constituency on the streets while
possibly alienating the so-called moderate Arab states.           21



Germany is subdued on unity's eve. People are anxious about the future, while
also grumbling about present hardships. But few fear a revival of an agressive
nationalism.          12



Top German court rejects vote rule           13



Soviet stores are waiting halls where patience withers between sporadic
offerings of limited products. Shoppers say the nation is in the worst food
crisis in 30 years.          12

Gorbachev approves direct flights to Israel           8



A fierce artillery duel in Liberia was fought between rebel armored units and
Government troops trapped inside the executive mansion and the main army
barracks in Monrovia.          3



Holiday quiets northern India after week of rioting           3



Bhutto to face judge in response to corruption charges           11



Congress may cut Afghan rebel aid           9



U.S. urges Nicaragua to forgive legal claim           18



Haiti, easing uncertainty, plans elections for December           19



National/22-29



A tax break for capital gains will no longer be insisted upon by the White
House, according to people with direct knowledge of the budget talks. The change
of policy opens the way for a compromise with Congress on reducing the budget
deficit.          1



Public schools for black males would be created under plans approved by the
Milwaukee school board in an effort to fight the social maelstrom now devouring
so many young black men.          1



A renewed interest in the Civil War seems to be sweeping the nation, catalyzed
by the successful 11-hour public television series and a recent string of
articles, books and films about the war.          22



A radioactive waste storage law, that requires states to find ways to deal with
their own low-level waste, has created political difficulties for several
Governors, including Kay A. Orr of Nebraska.          24



California lawmakers feel pinch as voter anger promises curbs           28



Los Angeles Journal: Fighting for rights of nerds           22



Los Angeles County deputies accused of brutality           23



Paper reports six officers may be tied to slaying           28



Old angers still fresh as Indians meet Lujan           22



Criticizing sentencing rules, U.S.

Judge resigns           22



Youth program's mixed day: $100,000 won, $250,000 lost           26



Regional/30-36



A man believed to be a burglar was found shot to death in a Brooklyn church.
Police have questioned the pastor, one of a group of ministers who once
acknowledged that they had taken up arms to protect themselves and their
churches.          30



Babar visits the courthouse? The beloved pachyderm is the focus of a legal
battle over the contractual rights to market his image.           1



Three New York City unions are in the middle of difficult contract negotiations
with the Dinkins administration. A year ago the unions were among the Mayor's
most influential supporters.          30



Ministry to aid homosexuals perseveres           30



For Jews, the holiest of all days           30



Transit Authority faulted on hiring of bus drivers           31



Court rules grandparents can be denied visitation rights           36



Passaic official indicted in voter-registry fraud           32



Reporter's Notebook: Howard Beach case continues           33



Obituaries          14


John Grady, director of music for St. Patrick's Cathedral

Arts/Reviews          56-57, 59


Music: Met's first ''Rigoletto'' of the season           56


Film: Biographies at festival           57



Campus Life          41-44



Fashion          50-51



Life Style          46



Pastimes          58-59



Weddings          52-56


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: SUMMARY

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              366 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 30, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

HOME ENTERTAINMENT: AND KEEP IN MIND
Here are some notable releases of the last few months.


SECTION: Section 2; Page 31, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 734 words


ALL DOGS GO TO HEAVEN - Don Bluth's film for very young viewers ''is so
overcomplicated that it becomes difficult to follow.'' (Janet Maslin) 1989.
MGM/UA. $24.98. 1 hour, 25 minutes. Closed captioned. G. BAD INFLUENCE - As a
charming drifter who takes over the life of a Los Angeles yuppie (James Spader),
Rob Lowe helps make this ''a refreshing exercise in glossy decadence.'' (Vincent
Canby) 1990. RCA/Columbia. $89.95. Laser disk, $34.95. 1:39. CC. R. BLUE STEEL -
Jamie Lee Curtis is so appealing as a rookie cop that Kathryn Bigelow's
good-looking thriller ''holds together even when it has no reason to.'' (Maslin)
1990. MGM/UA. $89.98. LD, $24.98. 2:03. CC. R. BORN ON THE FOURTH OF JULY - Ron
Kovic returns from Vietnam a bitter paraplegic. Oliver Stone's film has
''enormous visceral power'' and is ''stunning when it is most specific.''
(Canby) 1989. MCA/Universal. $91.95. LD, $39.98. 2:25. CC. R. CRY-BABY - John
Waters's story of 50's high-school America is a new Presley movie made ''in the
manner of a teen-crazed Cecil B. DeMille.'' (Canby) 1990. MCA/Universal. $91.95.
LD, $34.98. 1:26. CC. PG-13. DRIVING MISS DAISY - On screen, starring Jessica
Tandy and Morgan Freeman, Alfred Uhry's play opens up with a ''singularly
theatrical lightness of touch.'' (Canby) 1989. Warner. $92.95. LD, $24.98. 1:39.
CC. PG.

FAMILY BUSINESS - Sean Connery, Dustin Hoffman and Matthew Broderick make up a
three-generation crime family in a film that doesn't leave the stars much to
work with. (Canby) 1989. RCA/Columbia. $89.95. LD, $34.95. 1:53. CC. R.
FLASHBACK - Dennis Hopper and Kiefer Sutherland give fine performances in an
engaging comedy that ''ends upwoozy and sort of distraught.'' (Canby) 1990.
Paramount. No price listed. LD, $34.95. 1:48. CC. R. GLORY - Edward Zwick's film
about a black regiment in the Civil War ''celebrates in a manner that insists on
acknowledging the sorrow.'' (Canby) 1989. RCA/Columbia. $91.95. LD, $39.95.
2:02. CC. R. THE HANDMAID'S TALE - Natasha Richardson gives a perceptive
portrayal of a woman whose job is to bear children. Volker Schlondorff's
adaptation of Margaret Atwood's novel has a ''clear and insidious visual
scheme.'' (Maslin) 1990. HBO. $89.99. LD, $39.95. 1:49. CC. R. HARD TO KILL - As
a pony-tailed Los Angeles cop out for revenge, Steven Seagal is the ''latest
inheritor of the Charles Bronson-Chuck Norris-Bruce Lee action-film mantle.''
(Maslin) 1990.

Warner. $92.95. LD, $24.98. 1:36. CC. R.8/12

HOUSE PARTY - Reginald Hudlin's effervescent first feature is a ''buoyant,
perceptive comedy of teen-age manners.'' (Canby) 1990. RCA/Columbia. $89.95. LD,
$34.95. 1:40. CC. R. INTERNAL AFFAIRS - Richard Gere and Andy Garcia star in a
dizzying police thriller by Mike Figgis, a ''master of steamy sex appeal and
brooding, nocturnal murk.'' (Maslin) 1990. Paramount. No price listed. LD,
$34.95. 1:55. CC. R. THE LITTLE MERMAID - The Hans Christian Andersen story is a
marvel of skillful animation. ''The best animated Disney film in at least 30
years.'' (Maslin) 1989. Disney. $26.99. LD, $29.99. 1:23. CC. G. LORD OF THE
FLIES - In William Golding's classic story of mayhem among castaway schoolboys,
''there is almost nothing to keep the mind from wandering.'' (Maslin) 1990.
Nelson. $89.98. LD, $34.98. 1:30. CC. R. MOUNTAINS OF THE MOON - Bob Rafelson's
film about the African explorations of Sir Richard Francis Burton and John
Hanning Speke is big in technical ways, but the principals look ''somewhat
smaller than life.'' (Canby) 1990. Nelson. $89.98. LD, $34.98. 1:30. CC. R. NUNS
ON THE RUN - Two London hoods join the Missionary Brides of Christ in a genial
farce with ''something of the licentiousness of 'A Fish Called Wanda.' ''
(Canby) 1990. CBS/Fox. $89.98. 1:30. PG-13.

PETER PAN - The inventions in the animated version of the J. M. Barrie classic
are as ''skillful as they have ever been in Disney films.'' 1953. Disney.
$24.99. LD, $29.99. 1:16. CC. G. ROSALIE GOES SHOPPING - Brandishing bad credit
cards, Marianne Sagebrecht is the ''shrewd, beatific center'' of Percy Adlon's
film about merchandise-mad America. (Maslin) 1989. Vidmark. $89.95. 1:34. CC.
PG. WHERE THE HEART IS - John Boorman's film about a New York demolition king
and his children has an ''undeniable grandeur even in the midst of its broadest
lapses of sense, taste and style.'' (Maslin) 1990. Touchstone. $89.95. LD,
$29.99. 1:47. CC. R.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              367 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 30, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

FILM;
Barry Levinson Reaches Out to a Lost America

BYLINE: By MERVYN ROTHSTEIN

SECTION: Section 2; Page 13, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1957 words


From a black screen, the Yiddish-accented words ring out nostalgically. ''I came
to America in 1914, by way of Philadelphia,'' a gentle voice recalls. ''That's
where I got off the boat. And then I came to Baltimore. It was the most
beautiful place you've ever seen in your life.''

The voice is that of Sam Krichinsky, a wallpaper hanger, a Jewish immigrant, and
suddenly he is walking down a Baltimore street festooned with lights, lights
hanging in an arch from one side to the other. ''There were lights everywhere,''
Sam says. ''What lights they had. It was a celebration of lights. I thought they
were for me.'' And then there are fireworks, for it is the Fourth of July. ''The
sky exploded,'' Sam says. ''People cheered.''

The man walking down the street and intoning the words is the German actor Armin
Mueller-Stahl; the words themselves are by Barry Levinson, Baltimore native,
screenwriter and director, for whom the sky has been exploding and people
cheering loudly in recent years in Hollywood. The movie is ''Avalon,'' which is
set in Baltimore and opens Friday.

Mr. Levinson won an Academy Award for his direction of ''Rain Man,'' which has
grossed an estimated $500 million and which also won Oscars for best film of
1988 and for Dustin Hoffman as best actor. The previous year, he directed ''Good
Morning, Vietnam,'' which starred Robin Williams and has grossed about $250
million. Before that, his Baltimore films, ''Diner'' and ''Tin Men,'' which he
both wrote and directed, garnered him critical raves and a reputation as a
creative and idiosyncratic film maker, one not wedded to, or even largely
interested in, the action and violence endemic to modern movie-making.

Now Barry Levinson is back in Baltimore. But this is not the late-1950's
Baltimore of ''Diner,'' with its high school buddies hanging around and talking
mostly of girls, or the 1963 Baltimore of ''Tin Men,'' with its aluminum-siding
salesmen ever on the make for a profit. This is a different Baltimore; the humor
of the earlier movies is there, but it is longer ago, and the memories are more
melancholy. The time is just after World War II, and the story is the story of
Mr. Levinson's closely knit family, his parents, his grandparents, his aunts,
his uncles, his cousins, and of how the postwar society led to the breakup of
that family, and, by extension, of almost everyone's.

The cast includes Lou Jacobi and the Yiddish-theater star Leo Fuchs as two of
Sam Krichinsky's brothers, the veteran British actress Joan Plowright as Sam's
wife, Aidan Quinn and Elizabeth Perkins as their son and daughter-in-law (Mr.
Levinson's parents), and Elijah Wood as Michael, who is really the young Barry.
The producer is Mark Johnson, who has worked with Mr. Levinson on all of his
films.

As ''Avalon'' continues, the audience sees that the voice of Sam Krichinsky is
the voice of an older man telling a group of young children how he came to this
country. It is the late 1940's, and the setting is a family circle meeting at
Sam's row-house home in Baltimore. Sam's tale is one of five brothers, all of
whom become wallpaper hangers, and all of whom work together to help one another
to get ahead in America. But even as Sam is telling the story, both outer and
inner forces - the advent of suburbia, the prosperity of some family members
that is unshared by others, the invention of a piece of living-room furniture
that talks and shows images - are beginning to conspire to change that way of
life and banish that closeness forever.

''I was always intrigued by some of the stories my grandfather told me,'' says
the 48-year-old Mr. Levinson, speaking by telephone from his Southern California
home. ''But for a long time I couldn't make any sense of them in terms of how
they could be used in a movie. But then I began to think of them in terms of his
story - the immigrant experience - and my father's life. And I connected them to
the advent of television. Now those ideas seem on face value to be radically
different from one another. But it all suddenly began to make sense to me.'' He
hesitates. ''I know it sounds like a crazy combination,'' he says.
''Immigration, assimilation and the effects of television on the family is a
peculiar blending. But it made sense.''

It all began, Mr. Levinson says, with one line of dialogue, a line that is
spoken by the grandfather at the end of the movie: ''If I knew things would no
longer be, I would have tried to have remembered better.''

''You know how somehow you remember something, and it stays in your head, but
you don't know where it came from?'' Mr. Levinson says. ''The line was just
there. And it seemed very important.''

For a long time, though, he says, he did not realize what the importance was.
And then, as the movie came together in his mind, the meaning of the line began
to cohere for him in a very crucial way. He understood that what he was trying
to do was to preserve something from the past.

''We're at a crossroads,'' he says, ''which in fact may lead to the complete
breakup of the family structure in America. It is drifting and coming apart, and
as it deteriorates it means less and less. It's responsible for less of our
behavior. It doesn't monitor us in any way. Remember the old idea that you would
bring shame upon your family if you did certain things? Do you ever hear it any
more?''

''For thousands of years, people lived in an extended family,'' he says. ''You
could turn to an uncle or an aunt. There were people around; there was support
in times of trouble and tragedy. The children could learn from their elders.
There was a real education. Now people say to the schools and to the police,
'You take care of everything.' The family, the individual, is no longer
responsible.'' Many things are responsible for this breakup, Mr. Levinson says.
One is the great mobility of society. Suburbs and long distances do not engender
closeness, and a move to suburbia causes great problems in ''Avalon.'' Another
is television. Indeed, the moment a small, black-and-white television set is
introduced at a later family-circle meeting in the movie, the family members
begin talking to one another less and less. Instead, they stare at the screen,
even at the test pattern that was broadcast much of the time in those first
television screen days.

''You can say that in one way television brings the world closer together, in
terms of communication, in terms of things like live feeds from Saudia Arabia,''
Mr. Levinson says. ''And I guess it does. But you would also assume that we
would be more aware and perhaps more educated because of it. And we're not. You
just look at the surveys that show that only 50 percent of students can identify
North America on a map. And that 50 to 60 percent of high school students do not
know who fought in World War II, did not know who we were fighting against.

''You wonder, what do they think when they watch a movie on television in which
the Nazis are running around? But I guess basically they're just staring into a
box and blocking out real communication, real interaction. In the last 40 years,
television has just moved through the house - from the living room to the
bedroom to the kitchen - and wherever it goes, we just talk and communicate less
and less.''

In the movie, Mr. Levinson never communicates precisely what Avalon is. It is a
name and a place associated with the Krichinsky family's first years in this
country, a word the family elders often allude to fondly, but it could be a
neighborhood, a street or a building. The vagueness was purposeful, Mr. Levinson
says: ''What Avalon is supposed to be is the time when things were good.''

But why did he choose the name? ''I don't know,'' he says. In Celtic legend, of
course, Avalon was an island paradise where heroes like King Arthur were taken
after their death.

''I don't know if it's because there used to be a movie theater in Baltimore
called Avalon,'' he says. ''But the name made sense for Baltimore, which was an
English city and has quite a few English names all over the place. And I also
thought the name made some kind of sense for the line 'We're getting further and
further away from Avalon,' the premonition that everything is going to continue
to get further away from Avalon until there won't be any center any more.''

Mr. Levinson acknowledges the risks of making such a clearly personal movie. He
has, after all, taken such risks before. His Baltimore movies contain little or
none of the modern staples of movie making: sex, violence, crime and four-letter
words. And ''Diner'' was almost never released in New York and Los Angeles
because its talky nature convinced studio executives that it would do no
business.

''My father saw 'Avalon' recently,'' Mr. Levinson says. ''My mother said he was
very quiet after seeing it; he didn't really talk about it. I have a feeling
that he really enjoyed it but that he was afraid that because it was so personal
no one would go to see it. That's the businessman in him. When I first started
in films and I had written some things that hadn't been selling, he said to me,
'Well, at least you have inventory.'

''So I said to him, 'What do you care whether anyone comes to see it? What's the
difference?' I can't even begin to guess what an audience will or won't like. I
like to make the movies that interest me, and if the audience goes it's
terrific.''

And then Mr. Levinson brings up a pet peeve, or rather a couple of pet peeves.
''Audiences now have no patience and don't want to watch things you have to
interpret,'' he says. ''And everything seems to revolve around crime. We seem to
tell all our stories through crime. I have an aversion to the amount of material
that is crime-generated. It's reached a point that's insane. I find it
absolutely frightening the degree to which we use crime to create drama.''

Though Mr. Levinson's next project is a movie about the gangster Bugsy Siegel
(with a script by James Toback), he sees no contradiction. ''I'm doing that film
mainly because I'm interested in a romantic relationship Siegel had,'' he says.

He adds that he would never want to confine himself to directing his own
scripts, that he greatly enjoys working on movies for which he has not written
the screenplay, as was the case with ''Rain Man,'' ''Good Morning, Vietnam'' and
''The Natural.'' ''I want to work both worlds,'' he says, ''because there are
certain things that I would not think to write that I am excited by as a
director.''

Mr. Levinson is, of course, going far away from Avalon for his next movie, but
he expects to be back, at least in the city that spawned the title. ''I have
more ideas in my head for Baltimore films,'' he says, ''although I don't know
when I'll get to them.''

What he does know, however, is the kind of movie he wants to continue to make.
It is a movie, he says, ''that people can talk about later.

''I don't want to make movies that people see, and five minutes after they've
left the theater the movie doesn't exist for them anymore,'' he says. ''Too
often we watch something, and the second we turn it off it's gone. It's nice if
people leave the theater and argue about the movie. It's nice if the movie can
just hang in your head and resonate in some way.

''A friend of my wife's saw 'Avalon' at an early screening,'' he says, ''and
when it was over she was kidding around with some people there. And then, about
a half hour later, she suddenly started crying. Something about it affected her,
in terms of her family or her personal experience. I don't think she could be
specific about it, but something got to her. And I kind of like the idea that it
had that delayed effect, and that things are not always so specific.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Leading roles in the autobiographical comedy-drama are played
by Joan Plowright, Armin Mueller-Stahl, Elizabeth Perkins, Aidan Quinn and Kevin
Pollack (Tri-Star Pictures) (pg. 13); Elizabeth Perkins on location with Mr.
Levinson while making the film, opening Friday-''We're at a crossroads,'' he
says. (Tri-Star Pictures) (pg. 23)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              368 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 30, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

So Young!

BYLINE: By JOYCE CAROL OATES; Joyce Carol Oates's most recent book, the novella
''I Lock My Door Upon Myself,'' will be published next month.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 1, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1767 words



RABBIT AT REST
By John Updike.
512 pp. New York:
Alfred A. Knopf. $21.95.

With this elegiac volume, John Updike's much-acclaimed and, in retrospect,
hugely ambitious Rabbit quartet - ''Rabbit, Run'' (1960), ''Rabbit Redux''
(1971), ''Rabbit Is Rich'' (1981) and now ''Rabbit at Rest'' - comes to an end.
The final word of so many thousands is Rabbit's, and it is, singularly,
''Enough.'' This is, in its context, in an intensive cardiac care unit in a
Florida hospital, a judgment both blunt and touchingly modest, valedictory and
yet enigmatic. As Rabbit's doctor has informed his wife, ''Sometimes it's
time.'' But in the nightmare efficiency of late 20th-century medical technology,
in which mere vegetative existence may be defined as life, we are no longer
granted such certainty.

''Rabbit at Rest'' is certainly the most brooding, the most demanding, the most
concentrated of John Updike's longer novels. Its courageous theme - the
blossoming and fruition of the seed of death we all carry inside us - is struck
in the first sentence, as Harry Angstrom, Rabbit, now 55 years old, more than 40
pounds overweight, waits for the plane that is bringing his son, Nelson, and
Nelson's family to visit him and his wife in their semiretirement in Florida: he
senses that it is his own death arriving, ''shaped vaguely like an airplane.''
We are in the final year of Ronald Reagan's anesthetized rule - ''Everything
falling apart, airplanes, bridges, eight years . . . of nobody minding the
store, making money out of nothing, running up debt, trusting in God.''

This early note, so emphatically struck, reverberates through the length of the
novel and invests its domestic-crisis story with an unusual pathos. For where in
previous novels, most famously in ''Couples'' (1968), John Updike explored the
human body as Eros, he now explores the body, in yet more detail, as Thanatos.
One begins virtually to share, with the doomed Harry Angstrom, a panicky sense
of the body's terrible finitude, and of its place in a world of other, competing
bodies: ''You fill a slot for a time and then move out; that's the decent thing
to do: make room.''

Schopenhauer's definition of walking as ''arrested falling'' comes to mind as
one navigates Rabbit's downward plunge. There is an angioplasty episode,
recounted in John Updike's typically meticulous prose, that is likely to be
quite a challenge for the hypochondriacs and physical cowards among us. (I'm not
sure I met the challenge - I shut my eyes a few times.) There are candid and
un-self-pitying anecdotes of open-heart surgery. We come to know how it probably
feels to suffer not one heart attack but two, how it feels to strain one's
''frail heart'' by unconsciously (that is, deliberately) abusing one's flabby
body.

A good deal is made, in the Florida scenes, of the American retired elderly.
Rabbit thinks, with typical Rabbit crudeness, ''You wonder if we haven't gone
overboard in catering to cripples.'' A former mistress of Rabbit's named Thelma
(see ''Rabbit Is Rich'') reappears in these pages as a lupus sufferer, soon to
die, not very gallantly described, when they kiss, as smelling faintly of urine.
There is an AIDS patient who exploits his disease as a way of eluding
professional responsibility, and there is a cocaine addict - Rabbit's own son,
Nelson - whose dependence on the drug is pushing him toward mental breakdown.

The engine that drives the plot in John Updike's work is nearly always domestic.
Men and women who might be called ordinary Americans of their time and place are
granted an almost incandescent allure by the mysteries they present to one
another: Janice Angstrom to Harry, in ''Rabbit Redux,'' as an unrepentant
adulteress; a young woman to Harry, as possibly his illegitimate daughter, in
''Rabbit Is Rich''; and now Nelson to Harry, as his so strangely behaving son,
whose involvement with drugs brings the family to the edge of financial and
personal ruin. Thus, though characters like Janice, Nelson and, from time to
time, Rabbit himself are not very sympathetic - and, indeed, are intended by
their resolutely unsentimental creator not to be - one is always curious to know
their immediate fates.

John Updike's choice of Rabbit Angstrom, in ''Rabbit, Run,'' was inspired, one
of those happy, instinctive accidents that so often shape a literary career. For
Rabbit, though a contemporary of the young writer - born, like him, in the early
1930's, and a product, so to speak, of the same world (the area around Reading,
Pa.) - was a ''beautiful brainless guy'' whose career (as a high school
basketball star in a provincial setting) peaked at age 18; in his own wife's
view, he was, before their early, hasty marriage, ''already drifting downhill.''
Needless to say, poor Rabbit is the very antithesis of the enormously promising
president of the class of 1950 at Shillington High School, the young man who
went to Harvard on a scholarship, moved away from his hometown forever and
became a world-renowned writer. This combination of cousinly propinquity and
temperamental diamagnetism has allowed John Updike a magisterial distance in
both dramatizing Rabbit's life and dissecting him in the process. One thinks of
Flaubert and his doomed fantasist Emma Bovary, for John Updike with his
precisian's prose and his intimately attentive yet cold eye is a master, like
Flaubert, of mesmerizing us with his narrative voice even as he might repel us
with the vanities of human desire his scalpel exposes.

Harry Angstrom, who tries to sate his sense of life's emptiness by devouring
junk food - ''the tang of poison that he likes'' - the very archetype of the
American macho male (whose fantasies dwell not, like Emma Bovary's, on romance,
but on sports), appears as Uncle Sam in a Fourth of July parade in ''Rabbit at
Rest,'' and the impersonation is a locally popular one. Rabbit, who knows little
of any culture but his own, and that a culture severely circumscribed by
television, is passionately convinced that ''all in all this is the happiest . .
. country the world has ever seen.'' As in ''Rabbit Redux'' he was solidly in
favor of the Vietnam War, so, as his life becomes increasingly marginal to the
United States of his time, in ironic balance to his wife's increasing
involvement, he is as unthinkingly patriotic as ever - ''a typical good-hearted
imperialist racist,'' as his wife's lover put it in the earlier book.

Rabbit is not often good-hearted, however, living as he does so much inside his
own skin. Surprised by his lover's concern for him, he thinks, funnily, of
''that strange way women have, of really caring about somebody beyond
themselves.'' From ''Rabbit, Run'' to ''Rabbit at Rest,'' Rabbit's wife, Janice,
is repeatedly referred to as ''that mutt'' and ''that poor dumb mutt,'' though
she seems to us easily Rabbit's intellectual equal. A frequent noun of Rabbit's
for women is unprintable in this newspaper; a scarcely more palatable one is
''bimbo.'' As a younger and less coarsened man, in the earlier novels, Rabbit
generates sympathy for his domestic problems, but even back then the reader is
stopped dead by his unapologetic racism (''Niggers, coolies, derelicts,
morons'').

In ''Rabbit at Rest,'' an extreme of sorts, even for Rabbit, is achieved when,
at Thelma's very funeral, he tells the dead woman's grieving husband that ''she
was a fantastic lay.'' Near the end of the novel, it is suggested that Rabbit's
misogyny was caused by his mother! (Of course. Perhaps women should refrain from
childbirth in order to prevent adversely influencing their sons?) It is a
measure of John Updike's prescience in creating Rabbit Angstrom 30 years ago
that, in the concluding pages of ''Rabbit, Run,'' Rabbit's ill-treated lover
Ruth should speak of him in disgust as ''Mr. Death.'' If Mr. Death is also, and
enthusiastically, Uncle Sam, then the Rabbit quartet constitutes a powerful
critique of America.

Of one aspect of America, in any case. For, behind the frenetic activity of the
novels, as behind stage busyness, the ''real'' background of Rabbit's fictional
Mt. Judge and Brewer, Pa., remains. One comes to think that this background is
the novel's soul, its human actors but puppets or shadows caught up in the
vanity of their lusts. So primary is homesickness as a motive for writing
fiction, so powerful the yearning to memorialize what we've lived, inhabited,
been hurt by and loved, that the impulse often goes unacknowledged. The being
that most illuminates the Rabbit quartet is not finally Harry Angstrom himself
but the world through which he moves in his slow downward slide, meticulously
recorded by one of our most gifted American realists.

Lengthy passages in ''Rabbit at Rest'' that take Rabbit back to his old
neighborhoods - ''hurting himself with the pieces of his old self that cling to
almost every corner'' - call up similar nostalgic passages in John Updike's
autobiographical novel ''The Centaur'' and his memoir, ''Self-Consciousness,''
as well as numerous short stories and poems tasked with memorializing such
moments of enchantment. This, not the fallen adult world, the demoralizing
morass of politics, sex and money, the ravaging of the land, is the true
America, however rapidly fading. The Rabbit novels, for all their grittiness,
constitute John Updike's surpassingly eloquent valentine to his country, as
viewed from the unique perspective of a corner of Pennsylvania.

After Rabbit's first heart attack, when he tells his wife of an extraordinary
sight he has seen on one of his drives through the city, pear trees in blossom,
Janice responds, ''You've seen [it before], it's just you see differently now.''
But John Updike has seen, from the first.

HEART LIKE A ZEPPELIN

Behind the wheel of his car, he gravitates to Mt. Judge, the town where he was
born and raised, on the opposite side of Brewer from Penn Park. In this
cumbersome sandstone church with its mismatched new wing, the Mt. Judge
Evangelical Lutheran, he was baptized and confirmed, in a shirt that chafed his
neck like it had been starched in lye, and here, further along Central, in front
of a candy store now a photocopying shop, he first felt himself in love, with
Margaret Schoelkopf in her pigtails and hightop shoes. His heart had felt numb
and swollen above the sidewalk squares like one of those zeppelins you used to
see in the sky, the squares of cement like city blocks far beneath his floating
childish heart. Every other house in this homely borough holds the ghost of
someone he once knew who now is gone.

From ''Rabbit at Rest.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: John Updike's Rabbit novels ''constitute the writer's
surpassingly eloquent valentine to his country.'' (Jerry Bauer)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              369 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 30, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Co-Authors Invent an Autobiographer

BYLINE: By JOSEPH A. CINCOTTI

SECTION: Section 12LI; Page 13, Column 1; Long Island Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1301 words


THE epigraph for ''Boone,'' a first novel by Brooks Hansen and Nick Davis, is an
old show-business maxim: ''Gospel singers should sing gospel.''

As the prologue ends nine pages later and the narrative begins, the reader is
assured that the book's young authors have no intention of following this
advice.

''Boone,'' the story of an enigmatic figure in the form of an oral biography
culled from interviews with those who knew, or thought they knew, the character
of the title, was written over the course of several years and a summer in a
reconstructed Sag Harbor barn at the summer home of Mr. Hansen's parents. It was
published in July by Summit Books to mixed reviews.

A Form of Oral Biography

The book ranges from California to New York, Europe and Long Island, as the
25-year-old authors create Eton Arthur Boone, an actor, artist, playwright, film
maker, icon and cult hero of the 60's - nearly everything, it would seem, except
a gospel singer.

''If your head's in the right place, then I think the book really does put on a
performance,'' Mr. Hansen said. ''The book,'' Mr. Davis acknowledged, ''requires
a leap of faith.''

Mr. Hansen and Mr. Davis, who have been best friends since
childhood,wereinterviewed in the house and barn in Sag Harbor. It was littered
with the paraphernalia of Mrs. Hansen's paintings, landscapes and seascapes. Mr.
Hansen and Mr. Davis spoke from the parlor, Mr. Hansen perched on a rattan sofa,
Mr. Davis slouched in an ancient canvas beach chair.

The sound of drills and saws echoed throughout the house as workmen toiled in
the barn. For the day, Mr. Hansen and Mr. Davis were banished from the rooms
where Boone came to life.

''Boone'' charts its hero's tragic boyhood in Southern California, where he is a
witness to his mother's death from cancer and his father's infidelity during her
illness; his reluctant debut on a provincial English stage and the increasingly
frightening ''exposures'' - impersonations of J. Edgar Hoover, Jack Kerouac,
Richard Burton, Janis Joplin, Sammy Davis Jr. and Hugh Hefner - performed in a
Greenwich Village night spot.

Boone's extreme life leads him eventually to an asylum in the verdant stretches
of Sagaponack, where he writes a first novel of his own.

Offstage, Boone's uncanny ability to know the dark side of others carries him
into one tormented love affair after another. Like many of the compelling
figures of his generation, Boone died young - in a motorcycle crash in New
Mexico in 1975 - at 27.

Twenty-three characters in the novel speak of Boone, but not content with this
attempt at literary ventriloquism, Mr. Hansen and Mr. Davis also set props
before the reader.

These include letters, transcripts of performances, reviews, excerpts from
Boone's posthumously published novel and one chapter presented as a fable. It is
folded into the novel in a way reminiscient of ''The Pension Grillsparser'' in
John Irving's ''The World According to Garp.''

''You write these books from experience,'' Mr. Hansen said. ''Not
self-consciously so, but when Nick and I got together to plotting out a man's
biography, we put a death by cancer in it and a death by accident in it because
two such things happened at once in our lives.

''Nick's mother was killed in an accident very nearly at the time that an aunt
of mine died from an extended bout with cancer. And not enough can be said about
that period of time being a pillar in our experience.''

How the Idea Was Born

The idea for ''Boone'' occurred to Mr. Hansen and Mr. Davis five years ago while
en route from Florida, where they gone to see the Mets train.

Work on the novel began as an improvisation with student actors at Harvard. Mr.
Hansen and Mr. Davis first cast them in the role of Boone's friends and lovers
and them interviewed them in character.

''This kept us from ever having to face a blank page,'' Mr. Hansen recalled.

They initially conceived Boone as some sort of performer-artist, and their
original models were Tchaikovsky, Oscar Wilde and Beethoven. But the specifics
of Boone's performances eluded them until they saw Sammy Davis Jr. being
interviewed on the Johnny Carson show.

Mr. Hansen and Mr. Davis began doing their own impressions of the late
performer, and suddenly the ''exposures'' of Eton Arthur Boone were born.

''After that, we never again disagreed about his character,'' Mr. Hansen said.

Mr. Hansen and Mr. Davis were born in New York City in 1965 a month to the hour
apart. Their mothers, who lived near each other in Greenwich Village, used to
push them around in the same stroller.

The co-authors grew up in New York and attended Harvard, where Mr. Hansen
founded a literary magazine and Mr. Davis started an improvisational acting
troupe. They graduated in 1987, and have since devoted their full attention to
''Boone.''

Mr. Davis is the son of Peter Davis, the film maker who created the Vietnam
documentary ''Hearts and Minds,'' and the grandson of Herman J. Mankiewicz, who
himself participated in a number of collaborations, among them ''Citizen Kane''
with Orson Welles.

Worked for a Publisher

In 1984, Mr. Davis had a summer job writing press releases for a publishing
house. Among his projects that summer was writing a release for Peter Manso's
''Mailer,'' an oral biography of Norman Mailer.

Mr. Hansen comes from a family of artists, and his father is a television
executive with the Arts and Entertainment channel.

''The problems that some people have with the book is that they are, for
whatever reason, misled about what it's about,'' Mr. Hansen said. ''An example
would be stupidly assuming it's satire.  ''It's not satire in the least, and the
fact that certain critics have said so, I don't understand what they're thinking
about. If you are going to ask of the book, 'Be a satire,' the book will fail
you.''

Mr. Davis points to one scene in the book in which Boone is impersonating Jack
Kerouac in jail.

''He sits down and talks to the crowd,'' he said, ''and then he says, 'Imagine
bars.' And if you as a reader go, ''Baahh!, I don't want to imagine bars,'' then
my heart goes out to you, and you're going to be very bored by the rest of this
book.''

''It's not a book which I think presumes to capture the essence of the 60's,''
Mr. Hansen said, ''It presumes to capture the essence of this character and the
characters who knew him.

''That was a time where it would be possible, it seemed to me, that a small
group of people, otherwise known as a cult, might get onto this particular
perspective.

''It's about a man and a really small cult of people who got onto him intensely.
It's more about the intenseness of the people who got onto him, rather that the
size of the culture.''

One Review Keeps Him Honest

Critical opinion of the book has been sharply divided. Mr. Davis carries in his
wallet a particularly scathing Los Angeles Times review.

''It keeps me honest,'' he said. ''You can work on a book for four years and
then you get a 'C' in Entertainment Weekly. And you can't even go to some
professor's office and argue about it.''

''If I had to do it all over again, I would seriously consider having the book
be by a single-name author from the Midwest who's in his 50's,'' Mr. Hansen
said.

He is aware that some reviewers may not be well disposed to a pair of
''twentysomething'' Harvard upstarts appropriating the 60's for themselves.

The two men are glad that their friendship has survived their collaboration -
both concede that they had their doubts - although the publication of ''Boone''
has set them off in different directions.

Mr. Hansen is working on a second novel - this time by himself - and Mr. Davis
has embarked on an acting career, performing in New York with You and What Army,
an improvisational group that he founded.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo; Brooks Hansen, foreground, and Nick Davis, co-authors of
''Boone,'' at the reconstructed barn where they wrote book (Michael Shavel for
The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              370 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 30, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

VIETNAM;
Mr. Nixon's Feelings

BYLINE: By BARRY GOLDWATER; Barry Goldwater is a Republican Senator from
Arizona.

SECTION: Section 4A; Page 2, Column 0; Op-Ed at 20 Supplement

LENGTH: 365 words


When Democrat caucuses in Congress threaten to cut off funds if a settlement is
not reached by a certain date, they are deliberately encouraging Hanoi's
representatives at the peace negotiations to hold off agreement on any kind of a
settlement until after that date. I can understand the frustration which is so
rampant in Congressional circles because of Hanoi's backing and filling on
provisions for arranging a cease-fire. I can also understand the unhappiness
caused by the renewed bombing of North Vietnam on orders of President Nixon. The
frustration on Capitol Hill cannot begin to equal the frustration in the White
House. And it does Mr. Nixon's critics no credit to run around suggesting that
President Nixon is gleefully bombing North Vietnam out of a spirit of hatred or
revenge.

It is the intensity of his feeling which has given Mr. Nixon the courage to go
ahead with the course of action he knew would bring down on him a new torrent of
abuse from many directions. And it was the intensity of his desire for an end to
the bloodshed that gave him the courage to act in a way he realized would enrage
the liberals and the doves and the demagogues on Capitol Hill.

It stands to reason that the President felt renewed bombing of North Vietnam was
not only the best but the only way to get the peace talks back on the road to
ultimate agreement.

I believe the President and Henry A. Kissinger recognized in the changing
demands of the Hanoi representatives a belief that they could go on arming for
the destruction of South Vietnam for as long as this task required and without
interference from American bombers. I believe the President and Mr. Kissinger
recognized in the attitude and the actions of the Hanoi negotiators a belief
that they could act militarily without interference in the belief that American
public opinion and Congressional sentiment would never sanction a resumption of
the bombing.

Had our negotiators permitted this Hanoi attitude to go unchallenged, the peace
negotiations would have dragged on until either we gave in on every Communist
demand or until the doves in Congress forced an American surrender on Communist
terms.

(Jan. 9, 1973)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Cartoon

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              371 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 30, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

VIETNAM;
Rekindled Interest In the Vietnam War

BYLINE: by STANLEY KARNOW; Stanley Karnow is author of ''Vietnam: A History.''

SECTION: Section 4A; Page 1, Column 5; Op-Ed at 20 Supplement

LENGTH: 324 words


A decade ago, as Communist tanks rolled into Saigon, the U.S. sustained its
first defeat in the longest war in its history. Public interest in the Vietnam
experience is now being rekindled. Vietnam appears to have instilled an
ambivalent attitude of pride and prudence. Humiliated by the setback to the
legend of America the invincible, Americans want the U.S. to regain its former
prestige as the world's pre-eminent power. Yet they are reluctant to foot the
bill to fulfill that dream. Perhaps intuitively, they feel that our foreign
policy should be based on a combination of principle and pragmatism. The
so-called Vietnam syndrome has not driven Americans toward isolationism.

They would intervene to save Western Europe, Japan or Israel in the event of
attack, since they deem the fate of these democratic allies to be intimately
linked to America's own security. Besides, they believe that American troops are
equipped to cope with such challenges. By contrast, the haunting recollection of
Vietnam has soured their taste for similar missions in areas like Central
America, where they envision American soldiers being harassed by guerrillas in
swamps and jungles in a hopeless effort to protect inept, corrupt and unpopular
regimes unable or unwilling to help themselves.

Nowhere is caution more apparent than among senior officers who fought in
Vietnam. They assert that they should not be committed to another conflict
unless it has unqualified approval at home, their objective is plainly
articulated and they are allowed to win. Even Secretary of Defense Caspar W.
Weinberger, despite his reputation as something of a hawk, has warned that the
U.S. can no longer play global policeman.

But 10 years after the fall of Saigon, the disastrous end of a war that most
Americans still see as a blunder, the public is unlikely to tolerate a return to
any policy that smells even faintly of ''another Vietnam.''

(April 15, 1985)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              372 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 30, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

VIETNAM;
Truth of Reputation?

BYLINE: By Arthur Schlesinger Jr.; Arthur Schlesinger Jr. served President John
F. Kennedy in the White House.

SECTION: Section 4A; Page 4, Column 1; Op-Ed at 20 Supplement

LENGTH: 313 words


In seeking to suppress the Vietnam documents [the Pentagon Papers], the
Government asserted that their continued publication in The New York Times would
''cause irreparable injury to the defense interests'' of the U.S. If this
assertion were true, the case against publication would have been strong indeed.
The protection of military security constitutes an entirely proper limitation on
the freedom of the press and on the ''people's right to know.''

To make its case, the Administration must not just assert but demonstrate that
''irreparable injury'' has been done to the national security. Such
demonstration is not achieved by showing that documents are stamped ''top
secret.'' If the stamp decided the issue, any fool or knave in Government
service could acquire immunity by classifying papers that display his stupidity
or venality.

The executive order defining top secret information is a good deal more precise.
It speaks of ''exceptionally grave damage to the nation,'' as when disclosure
might cause an armed attack against the country or its allies, the breaking of
diplomatic relations, or the compromise of military plans or intelligence
operations or scientific or technological developments vital to the national
defense. This is the standard the Nixon case against The Times must meet.

It is not easy to see how the documents thus far published have come close to
doing any of these things - and the unpublished documents are apparently even
more purely historical in their nature.

What the publication does jeopardize is not national security at all but rather
the reputation of individuals and the credibility of states, and it is these
apprehensions, one surmises, and especially the second, that the Nixon
Administration now seeks to exploit, perhaps as part of a larger campaign of
threat and calumny against the press.

(June 24, 1971)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Cartoon

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              373 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 30, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

COUNTERPOINT: VOICES OF THE NEW GENERATION;
How 'TV Babies' Learn

BYLINE: By ROBERT W. PITTMAN; Robert W. Pittman is creator of the MTV cable
network.

SECTION: Section 4A; Page 19, Column 1; Op-Ed at 20 Supplement

LENGTH: 563 words


Generations that grew up with TV communicate differently than previous
generations. Yet many have not caught on to this phenomenon. This is a problem
because we are losing the younger generation to a host of societal ills. Despite
all our efforts to reach it, we're talking the wrong language. What is this new
mode of communication?  In 1984, Ronald Reagan summed up his campaign with an
18-minute music video. In 1988, George Bush communicated an attitude, not
issues, through images - his grandchildren, Willie Horton, Boston Harbor.

Calvin Klein and Ralph Lauren did not need copywriters for their magazine
advertisements. There's no copy, just pictures.

In newspapers, from USA Today to The New York Times, graphs, charts and
larger-than-ever pictures tell the big story at a glance.

Today's movie scripts are some 25 percent shorter than those of the 1940's for
the same length movies.

These are all reflections of a new way of communicating that is most effective
with those who have grown up with TV. Call them baby-boomers, TV babies or the
post-Watergate generation. They have one thing in common that distinguishes them
from their parents: the way they receive and process information and form ideas.
These are the people who are now creating magazines, newspapers, books, movies,
fashion and art. Not to mention re-creating TV. In 1981, when developing MTV, we
identified this profound difference. The pre-TV adults are the ''one thing at a
time'' generation. They read a magazine article straight through; then they make
a phone call or watch TV.

The TV babies, by contrast, seem to be processing information from different
sources almost simultaneously. They can do homework, watch TV, talk on the phone
and listen to the radio all at the same time. It's as if information from each
source finds its way to a different cluster of thoughts. And at the end of the
evening, it all makes sense.

Because of TV, perhaps, TV babies seem to perceive visual messages better. They
can ''read'' a picture or understand body language at a glance.

At least part of the generation gap of the 60's was a communication gap. I am a
member of the first wave of this TV generation, and I remember receiving a
totally different message about the Vietnam War than my parents - from the same
TV newscasts! I watched the pictures. My parents, who grew up on radio, listened
to the commentary. The video message conflicted with the narrative one. And so,
when it came to an opinion about the war, I was in conflict with my parents.

The nonprofit sector and governmental organizations are too often failing to
reach the TV babies - or by now, the children of the TV babies - with critical
messages. When Nancy Reagan said, the old-fashioned way, ''Just say no to
drugs,'' many TV babies heard the words, but saw instead an image of the very
Establishment they were rebelling against by using drugs.

Maybe we could score some advances in education by incorporating the new
communication techniques into traditional classroom approaches. Likewise, we
need to get through on discrimination, crime, AIDS and the environment. Whether
we like this new multidimensional language or not, it is here. Only by learning
to conduct a dialogue that conforms to its grammar can we improve the chances of
effecting change in those whom we so desperately need to reach.

(Jan. 24, 1990)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              374 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 30, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

PERSONAL;
I Don't Want to Be in That Number When the 'Saints' Go Marching In

BYLINE: By ERICA HELLER; Erica Heller works for a Madison Avenue advertising
agency.

SECTION: Section 4A; Page 8, Column 1; Op-Ed at 20 Supplement

LENGTH: 652 words


As a former semi-flower child, fervent peace marcher and honorable hippie of the
60's, I find it mildly amusing, at best, to observe the various Presidential
hopefuls as they jockey for position. And as they each proceed to package
themselves and become dangerous parodies of one another, it is there that my
amusement ends.

These men often speak of wanting to tap ''the young vote.'' Anyone who can do
that I'll not only take my hat off to, I'll go to the moon for. Because I think
it will be that difficult.

I don't presume to act as a spokesman for my generation, only to sound the siren
of one 24-year-old woman's utter political disillusionment.

I was stung by the Gene McCarthy fever several years ago. He provided for me
(and for many others like me, I suppose) the perfect transition from adolescence
to pre-adulthood. From blase to concerned. We believed in him enough to cut
school and go lick envelopes at his midtown headquarters, to wake up at 4 A.M.
on a frosty February morning and pile all bleary-eyed onto buses to go to New
Hampshire and canvass for him.

And Gene McCarthy's ultimate defeat also provided many of us with our first real
taste of bitter disappointment.

The anti-Vietnam peace marches that I seemed constantly to attend in both New
York and Washington are all still very vivid memories for me. Whole classes at
my high school would make the midnight run to Washington to protest the
annihilation in Vietnam. And we'd return that night, exhausted, filthy, stinking
of tear gas and feeling ever so virtuous.

And wholly incapable of internalizing our irrelevancy to the entire 'Nam
situation. President Johnson finally did convince us, though. And of course
President Nixon reaffirmed it.

And now, with all that behind us we face an election. The candidates toss us the
bait and expect us to bite.

I don't envy anyone the task of trying to rouse us from the sweet political
apathy that has allowed all of us to forget how pointless it was to squander our
energy in the 60's. Pushovers we are not.  We are no longer children, and our
true personal priorities have, more often than not, emerged since then. We now
realize that the ugly business of the world will progress regardless of whether
we elect to become involved.

Genocide in one part of the world or another will prevail or else it simply
won't - we are fairly powerless to prevent it. Or else we just aren't willing to
risk again finding out that we might not be.

We are all into our mid-to-late 20's by now. Some have fled West to escape the
cosmopolitan rat race. Others have remained in New York to become extensions of
our parents and everything about them that we couldn't then understand and
abhorred.

Some of us have been scattered out into the city's publishing houses, some are
dawdling through graduate school, others are making their way up the Wall Street
ladder.

We sprint out to the Hamptons on muggy summer weekends, hang out in Soho lofts,
dwell in Silk Stocking district studios. We prowl the pavements in Meledandari
suits now. Women carry about and cling to their Louis Vuitton handbags as if
they were lifesavers. Perhaps they feel that they are.

These are the peace-marching flower children of yesteryear, the much vaunted
''young vote'' that every hungry Presidential hopeful would love so much to have
in his corner rooting for him.

And to each and every one of them, my message is this:

Having been burned so badly in the past, we are not likely to drift back to the
fire.

Our generation was one both publicly and privately trampled upon and then
ignored by Washington at a time in our lives when we needed desperately to feel
important, influential.

But time has passed. We're healed now - but still a bit bitter, and we've lulled
ourselves into the alluring quicksand of political apathy that is not likely to
be disturbed.

We tend our own gardens now.

(June 5, 1976)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              375 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 30, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

All the Views That Are Fit to Print

BYLINE: By ROBERT B. SEMPLE JR.

SECTION: Section 4A; Page 1, Column 1; Op-Ed at 20 Supplement

LENGTH: 823 words


On the morning of Sept. 21, 1970, readers of The New York Times who turned to
the page opposite the editorials were in for a shock. For as long as anyone
could remember, that page had carried the obituaries. Suddenly the obituaries
had migrated elsewhere, their hallowed ground usurped by W. W. Rostow, a
political scientist; Han Suyin, a Chinese novelist, and Gerald W. Johnson, a
Baltimore journalist. What on earth was going on?

What had happened was that The Times had given birth to a new baby called the
Op-Ed page - so named because it appeared opposite the editorial page and not
(as many still suppose) because it would offer views contrary to the paper's.
But it would do that, too. As an editorial explained, Op-Ed would provide a
forum for political, social and personal expression by writers with ''no
institutional connection with The Times'' - views that would ''very frequently
be completely divergent from our own.''

Nobody was sure whether the public would seize The Times's invitation. But an
early trickle of manuscripts soon became a flood - 20, 40, later 60 a day. It
was as if the Gray Lady had hit the dance floor. More than 350,000 manuscripts
have been submitted since that first morning; of these, 21,000 have been
published, in addition to articles by The Times's regular columnists. Each
incoming manuscript is read by several editors; even the articles solicited by
the editors are not guaranteed publication. And those chosen for publication
nearly always undergo editing.

Long odds - but not, obviously, a significant deterrent to anyone with something
to say. Nor has anyone been deterred by the fee, which, for a standard 750-word
article, has remained at an inflation-proof $150 for at least a decade. In 1985,
Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan appended a note to a piece in which he made many
points about the Reagan budget that budget director David A. Stockman would
later make in a best-selling book. ''Have stopped to think,'' Mr. Moynihan
wrote, ''that you got from me for $150 what they will get from him for
$2,500,000.00.''

How did the page begin - and why? During the 1960's, John B. Oakes, then
editorial page editor, argued that the paper needed to make room for outside
articles of medium length -longer than letters but shorter than magazine pieces
- that would provoke robust discussion.

He found a receptive audience in the publisher, Arthur Ochs Sulzberger, who had
powerful reasons for wanting a new forum - chiefly a gut feeling that The Times
would honor its traditions and better serve its readers by welcoming a variety
of views providing doctrinal counterpoints to the liberalism of the paper's
editorial columns and its columnists.

Despite widespread acceptance of the idea of Op-Ed - the paper's executive
editor, James Reston, was an eloquent advocate - a committee appointed to shape
the page promptly deadlocked over nettlesome bureaucratic questions. Why move
the obituaries? Should there be an advertisement to help defray the added costs?
And who would control the page, the editorial or news departments?

Ultimately, the publisher decreed that the obits would move (how else could Op
be Op?), that institutional ads or ads with an editorial message would be
sought, and that the page would have its own editor, who, while answerable to
the editorial page editor, would enjoy considerable freedom. The first editor,
who was appointed by Mr. Oakes, was Harrison E. Salisbury, whose capacity to
project surprise and variety on the page set a high standard for his successors:
Charlotte Curtis, this writer, Leslie H. Gelb and, starting next month, Mitchel
R. Levitas.

From the beginning, there was a conscious effort to leaven the relentless
discussion of geopolitics with offbeat and sometimes whimsical essays.
Inevitably, the page - along with its distinctive illustrations - has reflected
the major social, cultural and political debates of the day. Its founding, after
all, coincided with a remarkably turbulent period in American history: the civil
rights issue, the birth of the women's and environmental movements, Vietnam, the
rise of the counterculture.

The news continues to intrude: the debate over human rights in the 1970's and
80's; the Middle East (with us always, it seems); East-West relations (from the
cold war to a sudden thawing unanticipated by Op-Ed Sovietologists); America's
decline as a world economic power and Japan's growing challenge; the excesses of
Wall Street in the 80's, and, now, the crisis in the Persian Gulf.

This special supplement does not pretend to cover all the issues. Nor is it a
''hit parade,'' an offering of ''the best of Op-Ed.'' In most cases, the pieces
are excerpts and the headline and identification of the writer are the original
or close to it. The supplement seeks to give a sense of Op-Ed's mission for the
last 20 years and for the future - providing a page in The Times for the voices
of the times.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              376 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 30, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

RACE RELATIONS;
The Third World War

BYLINE: By Aleksandr I. Solzhenitsyn; Aleksandr I. Solzhenitsyn is a Nobel Prize
winner in literature.

SECTION: Section 4A; Page 12, Column 4; Op-Ed at 20 Supplement

LENGTH: 448 words


Very few have noticed, or have had the courage to admit, that World War III has
already happened. It ended this year - with the free world soundly defeated.

World War III began immediately after World War II. The seeds were planted as
that war ended, and it first saw the light of day at Yalta in 1945, as the
cowardly pens of Roosevelt and Churchill, anxious to celebrate their victory
with a litany of concessions, signed away Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, Moldavia,
Mongolia, condemned to death or to concentration camps millions of Soviet
citizens, created an ineffectual U.N. Assembly, and finally abandoned
Yugoslavia, Albania, Poland, Bulgaria, Romania, Czechoslovakia, Hungary and East
Germany.

World War III began differently from its two predecessors, not with an exchange
of notes breaking off relations or with massive air raids. It began
clandestinely; it insinuated itself into the world under cover of pseudonyms:
''democratic'' change approved by 100 percent of the population; cold war;
peaceful coexistence; normalization; realpolitik; detente, or trade agreements
that served only the aggressor. Trying to avoid World War III at any price, the
West permitted it, allowed it to devastate and enslave 20 countries, and to
change the face of the earth.

Under careful scrutiny, the last 30 years are clearly a long, though tortuous,
decline of the West - nothing but a plummeting downward, nothing but
enfeeblement and decadence. The powerful Western countries that emerged
victorious from the first two World Wars have been intent on courting weakness
during these 30 years of peace, squandering real or potential allies, ruining
their credibility, abandoning territory and populations to an implacable enemy:
immense, populous China, their most important ally during World War II, North
Korea, Cuba, North Vietnam, and now South Vietnam and Cambodia. Laos is about to
go. Thailand, South Korea and Israel are threatened. Portugal is leaping into
the same abyss. Finland and Austria await their fate with resignation, impotent
to defend themselves and clearly with no reason to expect assistance from
abroad.

The United Nations, a total failure, the worst democracy in the world, the
plaything of irresponsibility, has become a platform from which to ridicule the
West, a reflection of its brutal fall from power.

Two or three glorious decades of this kind of peaceful coexistence and the very
concept of the West will disappear from the face of the earth.

There is no longer any point in asking how to prevent World War III. We must
have the courage and lucidity to stop the fourth. Stop it we must; not fall to
our knees as it approaches.

(June 23, 1975)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              377 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 30, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

VIETNAM;
Kent State: May 4, 1970

BYLINE: By ARTHUR S. KRAUSE

SECTION: Section 4A; Page 4, Column 5; Op-Ed at 20 Supplement

LENGTH: 159 words


It was not until a CBS employee came up to us and insisted the police and Ohio
National Guard were lying about the dead Guardsmen that I sensed the future.
"The demonstration was over," he said, "when they suddenly opened fire and
killed the students." I knew the great whitewash had begun.

A few weeks later, I spoke to John Ehrlichman at the Key Biscayne White House
and he assured me I was mistaken. The conduct of the Ohio Guardsmen would be
fully investigated and, he said, there would be "no whitewash." I responded by
telling him I would only believe it when the President and his Justice
Department demonstrated the sincerity of his assurances.

It is almost two years now since Allison Sandra Scheuer, Bill Schroeder and Jeff
Miller were shot to death during a fusillade which violated Federal and state
laws. The Government has amply demonstrated its contempt for those laws when
enforcement would not be politically advantageous.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Cartoon

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              378 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 30, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

VIETNAM;
Who Profits? Not Us

BYLINE: By Oskar Morgenstern; Oskar Morgenstern is professor of economics at New
York University

SECTION: Section 4A; Page 4, Column 5; Op-ed at 20 Supplement

LENGTH: 277 words


Since January 1961, we have lost 44,000 dead, 288,000 wounded and many missing.
Yet there is no record of any Soviet or Chinese soldiers killed or wounded
except perhaps in accide4nts. We have lost more than 1,390 fixed-wing airplanes
and 1,800 helicopters. Form these planes, we ahve dropped more bomb tonnage than
rained on Nazi Germany - yet without decisive results.

Over the last five fiscal years, we have spent $104 billion on that war - more
than 12 percent of our national income in 1968. Day after day during the last
four fiscal years we have paid an average of $65 million for Vietnam, and this
rate is only slowly-decreasing.

What a drain on our resources with the complex consequences of stock market boom
and bust, uncontrolled inflation with its inherent danger of hyperinflation,
chronic balance3 of payment troubles, the highest interest rates in decades,
high unemployment, all accompanied by profound social and racial unrest, by
turmoil on the campuses, on the streets; by the alienation of large parts of
youth from flag and country. And the Communist powers? Can there be a more ideal
situation for them, totally devoid of risk?

So the profit of the war has accrued over years and continues to accrue to
precisely those two countries whose ideology and physical power the U.S. is
trying to stem in the preposterously inefficent manner of fighting their
satellites on their own terms.

Those who in this country have been pushing the war are achieving the exact
opposite of what, in good faith, they are striving for: a strong and solidly
prosperous U.S., the prevailing peaceful force in this troubled world.

Nov. 7, 1970


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Cartoon

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              379 of 379 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 30, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

VIETNAM;
Block That Vietnam Myth

BYLINE: By GEORGE W. BALL; George W. Ball was Under Secretary of State in the
Kennedy and Johnson Administrations.

SECTION: Section 4A; Page 4, Column 2; Op-Ed at 20 Supplement

LENGTH: 354 words


By the end of 1968, most of the top echelon of the Johnson Administration had
concluded that the war was unwinnable. When Lyndon B. Johnson declined to run
for a new term, he left the problem of extrication to his successor.

Unlike Mr. Johnson, Richard M. Nixon could have made a tactical settlement
without confessing error.

Mr. Nixon and Henry A. Kissinger remained bemused by the thought that by dealing
''brutal blows'' our bombers could force Hanoi to the breaking point. Thus, it
was not until 20 months after Mr. Nixon became President that Mr. Kissinger even
tentatively played the one bargaining card that had any meaning to Hanoi - the
hint of an offer to withdraw American troops unilaterally. But that was too
late; by then, Mr. Nixon had destroyed our bargaining leverage by announcing
major troop withdrawals and indicating that he planned a phased withdrawal of
all American forces. At that point, the North Vietnamese had effectively won
-and they knew it.

Such is the lamentable story of America's defeat. Rather than using our
bargaining power to end the war when we still had a vast army in the field, we
deployed heavy bombers to spread indiscriminate carnage while we brought home
our troops.

And once our forces had left Vietnam, defeat was effectively assured. So there
was no stab in the back. The public was sick of the war, and Congress registered
that repulsion by recognizing reality and halting the killing and further
profligate waste of resources.

No one but our soldiers, sailors and airmen who did the actual fighting emerged
free from blame. The Eisenhower Administration promised limited aid to the
Saigon Government; the Kennedy Administration provided military equipment and
greatly increased the number of military advisers; the Johnson Administration
turned our limited commitment into an all-out engagement, and the Nixon
Administration kept America in the war a further four years at a cost in lives
of 20,000 young Americans and several hundred thousand Vietnamese.

No doubt future historians will reject efforts to invent a Vietnam betrayal
legend.

(May 19, 1985)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Cartoon

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company
