
                               1 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 1, 1992, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Candidate's Record;
Perot, No Longer Unfamiliar or Unmarked, Has Yet to Live Down Criticism

BYLINE: By CATHERINE S. MANEGOLD

SECTION: Section A; Page 19; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1959 words


What a difference a campaign makes. When Ross Perot first leaped into
Presidential politics, he presented a tantalizing yet unfamiliar face unmarked
by the arrows of political combat.

Now that he's back, the wounds show.

Dropping from a strong showing in the polls to a shriveled 9 percent, Mr. Perot
abruptly pulled out of the race July 16. This week, poised to re-enter the fray,
he faces the same questions left hanging when he vanished from talk shows.

In the days before Mr. Perot's sudden withdrawal, criticism of him fell into
three basic categories: his supposed lack of sensitivity and autocratic style,
his business dealings and use of political connections, and his judgment. Most
of those criticisms and accusations have yet to be silenced.

Personality
A Man Who Likes Things His Way

Some of the most pointed criticisms raised in the press and in opinion polls in
July focused on doubts about Mr. Perot's character, particularly his attitudes
about race, religion, homosexuals and women.

Voters also expressed fear that the billionaire executive might prove too
autocratic if entrusted to lead the nation. Mr. Perot dismissed that notion as
"an election year fantasy carefully crafted by the Republicans." He particularly
lashed out at Vice President Dan Quayle's assertion that he was a "temperamental
tycoon" who lacked respect for the Constitution.

Several events during the campaign and reports of Mr. Perot's actions in his
computer empire, Electronic Data Systems, fueled those fears.

Just five days before Mr. Perot declared he would not run for President, he
departed from his usual round of speeches to enthusiastic supporters to address
the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People. While calling
for racial harmony and economic development, he managed to alienate a large part
of his audience. Citing his father's treatments of poor blacks in Texas, Mr.
Perot told the Nashville audience that his father used to tell him, "Son, these
are people, too, and they have to live."

That remark, coupled with Mr. Perot's references to blacks as "you people" and
"your people," distanced him from his audience and perhaps from many other black
voters. Critics pointed to his minority-employment record. In 1986, the last
year that E.D.S. was under Mr. Perot's control, only 1 percent of its managers
and supervisors were from minority groups.

Beards and Facial Hair

Jews may have thought they had reason to be uncomfortable as well. Records
brought forth early in the campaign showed that Mr. Perot's company dismissed a
computer programmer, Reginald Dallaire, in 1983 because he had grown a beard in
defiance of company policy prohibiting facial hair.

Mr. Dallaire, who refused to shave his beard because he had converted to Judaism
from Roman Catholicism after joining the company, was reinstated with back wages
after Federal District Judge John C. Coughenour ruled that he had been
discriminated against because of his religion. Mr. Dallaire later quit the
company.

A flap over Mr. Perot's attitudes toward homosexuals also troubled the last days
of his campaign. After stating in a May 29 interview with Barbara Walters on the
ABC News program "20/20" that he would not consider appointing homosexuals to
Cabinet-level posts and would not lift a ban against their serving in the
military, Mr. Perot came in for sustained criticism from gay-rights groups. He
reversed his position July 8, saying that he would not rule out such a Cabinet
appointment. Mr. Perot's campaign chairman, Thomas W. Luce 3d, then indicated
that a President Perot might relax restraints in the military as well.

That approach would be a departure for a company executive who has long
emphasized traditional life styles and a complementary uniform of white shirts,
dark suits and ties. Former employees say homosexuals were never warmly welcomed
into E.D.S. In a June 29 issue of Time magazine, a former Perot employee
described standing orders not to hire anyone with a "weak handshake" because the
individual might be homosexual.

Mr. Perot has been blunt about the sort of employees he does like. He told U.S.
News & World Report of his penchant for hiring Vietnam veterans who "could be on
the wild side." He then described a series of conversations with one man, Don
Drobny, whom he described as a talented 27-year-old who "loved to chase women."

Mr. Perot told the magazine's editors that he told Mr. Drobny: "You've got six
months to get a wife." Mr. Perot said he forgot about the conversation but that
Mr. Drobny returned five and a half months later with a fiancee.

Back in the spotlight this week, Mr. Perot angered female reporters with the
comment that negative articles and television reports they produce are simply a
result of their attempts to "prove their manhood."

Business Dealings
Money and Power Come in Handy

More complicated questions about the candidate focus not on his personality but
on his way of doing business. Though Mr. Perot has proved to be 1992's ultimate
outsider in many ways, his business record is that of a longtime insider.

Republicans and Democrats have called Mr. Perot's quixotic run for the
Presidency an attempt to buy the election. At a rally last May in Orlando, Fla.,
he told an adoring audience: "Just put it this way. I'm buying it for the
American people." He has spent more than $12 million of his own money.

But Mr. Perot's political track record shows that he also sometimes spends money
on others to get something for himself.

Since 1972, Mr. Perot and his business associates have helped to bankroll scores
of politicians. In 1974, Mr. Perot gave more than $90,000 to Congressional
candidates, making him the largest individual contributor in the United States
that year. Twelve recipients of Mr. Perot's largess later voted for a $15
million tax break specifically written for Mr. Perot's corporations and passed
in a late-night session of Congress.

Since 1980, according to reports by Knight-Ridder Newspapers, Mr. Perot and his
family have given $175,000 to candidates for Federal offices. Some went to
legislators who would later rule on the construction of one of the Perot
family's pet projects, the construction of a modern airport in Fort Worth on
land that lies in the center of a 17,000-acre tract owned by the Perots. Over
the last five years, Federal, state and city governments have invested nearly
$200 million in cash and tax breaks for that project.

The campaign for the airport began in 1987, when Mr. Perot and his son, Ross
Perot Jr., asked the Federal Aviation Administration to finance a $25 million
runway and control tower. The F.A.A. declined, saying the family should "compete
fairly."

The Perots persisted. Turning to Representative Jim Wright of Fort Worth, who
was Speaker of the House from 1987 to 1989, they convinced him that the project
was critical to Fort Worth's growth. Three weeks later, Mr. Wright pushed a bill
through Congress that dedicated money for the Alliance Airport.

Nothing about the project was illegal. Yet it did result in at least one clear
benefit to the Perot family. a Perot company executive who spoke on the
condition of anonymity said the value of tens of millions of dollars worth of
real estate around the airport doubled after the project won approval.

Mr. Perot's efforts on the prisoner-of-war issue have been criticized as well.
In 1987, working for the repatriation of American servicemen who he believed
were held in Southeast Asia, Mr. Perot unsuccessfully sought to persuade the
Reagan White House to begin limited economic relations with Vietnam.

Reagan Administration officials complained that he went to Vietnam for his own
business ends. They also contend he was prepared to grant concessions in
American foreign policy without first waiting for concrete signs that Vietnam
would be more forthcoming about missing Americans.

Judgment
Use of Detectives Raises Doubts

Mr. Perot's talent for making enemies, his tolerance for conspiracy theories and
his frequent use of detectives has raised questions about his judgment.

A Perot campaign official said yesterday that Mr. Perot hired private
investigators in the last two months to look into volunteers' use of money.

Some Government officials close to the prisoner-of-war issue said Mr. Perot
became obsessed with the notion that a Government conspiracy was blocking
efforts to free any prisoners left behind.

It was over the P.O.W. issue that Mr. Perot began a three-year feud with Richard
Armitage, the senior Pentagon official in charge of P.O.W. and M.I.A. affairs.
In 1986, Mr. Perot met with an undercover police officer who said he had
information about a conspiracy involving the Pentagon and the prisoner issue.
The undercover officer also raised questions about Mr. Armitage's relationship
with a Vietnamese-American restaurant owner.

Mr. Perot met with the undercover officer, James L. Badey, then encouraged
government investigations into the case. Mr. Armitage was never charged with
wrongdoing.

Mr. Perot's harsh dealings with officials behind the construction of the Vietnam
Memorial in Washington also won him enemies.

Though he gave generously to the project at the outset, once Mr. Perot turned
against the design (saying it would look like a "trench"), he tried to get the
committee to move in a more conventional direction. John Wheeler, the chairman
of the fund that built the memorial, refused.

Mr. Perot hired Roy Cohn, the New York lawyer, to do whatever he could to stop
construction. Mr. Cohn demanded the memorial fund's records and charged that the
project's backers had misused money.

An audit showed nothing wrong. And the memorial was finally built. "He pushed me
and pushed me to give up the wall," Mr. Wheeler said. "It was like being sliced
with a knife."

Mr. Perot's aggressiveness in that instance was not without precedent.

When a rival computer company won a lucrative state contract in the 1980's, Mr.
Perot hired a private detective to investigate the senior official in charge of
that concern. The detective, a former F.B.I. agent named Joseph T. Wells, said
he spent at least 18 months gathering information to use against the System
Development Corporation and a top executive, Edward Doyle.

Mr. Wells also tried to get the F.B.I. to begin a criminal investigation into
one of Mr. Doyle's top aides. Yet nothing was ever revealed to show that Mr.
Doyle or anyone else associated with the company had done anything improper.

Examples of Mr. Perot's reliance upon detectives kept cropping up as his
campaign progressed. Another highlighted case was that of his investigation into
a land deal engineered by the Pennzoil Company and its head, J. Hugh Liedke, a
close friend and former business partner of President Bush.

In that case, Mr. Perot hired a Washington law firm, Verner, Liipfert, Bernhard,
McPheron & Hand, to look into the sale of a 500,000-acre parcel of land in
northern New Mexico. The land had been offered to Mr. Perot for $24 million in
the early 1970's. It eventually was sold to Pennzoil. In 1986, Mr. Perot said,
Pennzoil came to him with an offer to sell the same land -- minus 100,000 acres
-- for twice the price. He said at the time he had learned that Pennzoil
received a $48 million tax credit for donating the extra 100,000 acres to the
Forest Service.

After reports surfaced that Mr. Perot had once investigated Mr. Bush's children,
the President's campaign chairman, Robert M. Teeter, said Mr. Perot "doesn't
have the judgment or temperament or respect for our laws to be President." Mr.
Perot, who denied the reports, retaliated by producing a letter in which
President Bush had praised him as a friend.

NAME: Ross Perot

LOAD-DATE: October 1, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Among the concerns over the record of Ross Perot is his role as
founder of the computer empire Electronic Data Systems and the hiring policies
he used to build it. He inspected equipment at his Dallas headquarters in 1973.
(Jarrold Cabluck)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                               2 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 1, 1992, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Republicans;
Bush, in New Jersey, Says Clinton Misleads on Family-Living Issues

BYLINE: By MICHAEL WINES,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 18; Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 433 words

DATELINE: NEWARK, Sept. 30


Seeking to maintain the offense in a week of pitched campaign warfare, President
Bush used Gov. Bill Clinton's record on children's issues today for a new attack
on his opponent's credibility.

Mr. Bush accused the Democratic Presidential nominee of misstating his record on
family matters, ranging from welfare reform to infant formula.

And in both Wisconsin and here in Newark, where Mr. Bush addressed several
hundred cheering union members this evening, he referred to what his strategists
say will become a campaign staple: Mr. Clinton's avoidance of the draft in the
Vietnam War.

"I do not 'loathe' the military," the President told workers gathered in a brick
hall near downtown Newark, referring to a 1969 letter that Mr. Clinton wrote
about his anguish over the draft. "When Governor Clinton wrote and said 'loathe
the military,' I said, 'That's a shame.' These people served their country with
distinction and honor. We ought to salute them, not loathe them."

Union Endorses Bush

The workers, members of Local 472 of the Heavy and General Construction Laborers
Union, erupted in cheers. Later, the 7,000-member union announced its
endorsement of Mr. Bush, who was making his fifth New Jersey appearance of the
campaign.

Aides say the Bush campaign is preparing television advertisements that center
on the draft issue, questioning the honesty of Mr. Clinton's account more than
his motivations when he briefly entered an R.O.T.C. program to escape a draft
induction notice.

In contrast to many campaign appearances in recent weeks, Mr. Bush, making his
first stop today in Fond du Lac, Wis., was met by a large and vigorous crowd
that overflowed the town square where the event was held.

The centerpiece of Mr. Bush's Wisconsin stop was the unveiling of a new
proposal, which the President called Project K.I.D.S., to increase Federal and
state efforts to collect delinquent child-support payments.

The program focuses on removing Federal and state benefits to parents who skip
payments, and on garnishing their wages. "The bottom line," Mr. Bush said, "is
that if you haven't done anything for your kids, don't expect anything from
Uncle Sam, from this day forward."

In fact, much of the program would require legislation.

Mr. Clinton also traveled to New Jersey today to attend two fund-raising events
and to speak at Drew University in Madison, whose president, former Gov. Thomas
H. Kean, sent his apologies for not appearing. Mr. Kean, a Republican, said in a
letter to Mr. Clinton that he was scheduled to appear with another candidate
today -- Mr. Bush.

LOAD-DATE: October 1, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                               3 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 1, 1992, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Senate Race;
New Hampshire Governor Finds Himself the Issue

BYLINE: By CLIFFORD KRAUSS,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 20; Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 855 words

DATELINE: MANCHESTER, N.H.


The discontent that chilled the Bush campaign in the New Hampshire primary has
not abated, forcing another scion of New England Republicanism into a fight he
didn't expect.

Gov. Judd Gregg, like his father before him, has won a string of easy election
victories, for four terms in the House of Representatives and two more terms in
the Statehouse. But now he is running for the Senate, at a time when his years
of public service are shrouded by a sinking New Hampshire real estate market and
a flurry of business failures that has cost 70,000 jobs in the last four years.

Local polls indicating that Mr. Gregg is running neck and neck with his
Democratic opponent, John Rauh, show that voters thus far are treating the
Senate race as a referendum on Mr. Gregg's performance as Governor. Mr. Rauh is
a little-known retired corporate executive whose calls for price controls on
health care and a 50 percent cut in the military budget have traditionally not
been winning issues in this state of Yankee innkeepers and shipyard workers
dependent on Pentagon largess.

No Democrat has won a senatorial election here since 1976, and few people here
doubt that Senator Warren Rudman would have won re-election easily had he
decided to run.

Voters Are Frustrated

"The issue is Judd Gregg," said Tom Rath, a senior Concord Republican
strategist. "As long as Rauh is not perceived as stunningly out of the
mainstream, he can win it."

Mr. Rauh's surge relies on the frustrations of voters like Buck Howe, a
47-year-old Merrimack businessman whose printing concern has been forced to let
go nine of its 12 employees. "The politicians are either in your body or in your
wallet," he grumbled after meeting Mr. Rauh at a Hollis flea market. "I'm so fed
up, Rauh looks pretty good."

The race is also a test for an electorate torn between anger and stoicism. Those
who view New Hampshire's recession as one more natural blip in the business
cycle are likely to vote for Mr. Gregg. Mr. Rauh's fortunes rest on the fear
expressed by a growing number of people that New Hampshire is suffering a
chronic downturn that will not bend unless government takes action.

No name is more identified with New Hampshire's steadfast commitment to low
taxes and small government than Judd Gregg's.

'Change' Is No Mantra

In a year when "change" has become a political mantra, Mr. Gregg steadfastly
boosts President Bush and defends his record as governor, noting, "New Hampshire
is doing better than our sister states."

"Since I've been in office," he said, "we're the slowest-growing state
government in the region.

Mr. Gregg's charges that Mr. Rauh represents values outside the New Hampshire
mainstream have been overshadowed recently by reports that the Governor avoided
service in Vietnam because his father applied pressure to keep him out of the
military. In response, Mr. Gregg said he deserved his deferments and ultimate
exclusion from the draft because he suffered acne, sleepwalking and injured
knees.

The Governor is a plodding campaigner, clearly uncomfortable with the retail
style of campaigning that still characterizes New Hampshire politics in the
television age. He dutifully shook hands up and down tables at a Manchester
Greek-American festival recently but made little more than perfunctory chit-chat
with voters. When confronted by a man who complained about mounting real estate
taxes, he rolled his eyes dismissively, told him residents in Massachusetts pay
more, and brusquely moved on.

Descendants of Poachers?

But Mr. Gregg reminds voters that he is the torch carrier of the anti-government
heritage that goes back to the days when outlaw poachers of the English kings'
forests settled here.

Watching Mr. Gregg mount a 16-year-old Sellefrancis horse at the inauguration of
a riding school for the disabled in Goffstown, Norm Chase, a 35-year-old
engineer, said he would vote for the Governor because he is against government
waste. "He's what New Hampshire tradition has been: conservatism," Mr. Chase
said.

Mr. Rauh is a more engaging campaigner, but he spends so much time talking to
each individual voter at campaign stops his aides fret that he is not shaking
enough hands. Having come to New Hampshire from Cincinnati only six years ago,
he still speaks with a Midwestern accent and may be vulnerable to the Republican
charge that he is a carpetbagger.

While taking some unconventionally liberal positions, he has tried to tailor his
campaign in a way that fits New Hampshire traditions. He tells voters he
strongly backs a line-item veto and a constitutional amendment to balance the
Federal budget, and a capital gains cut for long-term business investments.

And while he wants the Federal Government to invest in more public works, like a
high-speed rail between the New Hampshire coast and Boston, Mr. Gregg has
embraced the message of the anti-politician.

"The public does not trust the President, the Congress, the two parties -- and I
think they are right," he told a group of truckers at a recent forum. "Both
parties have fallen in love with this miserable game of politics."

NAME: Judd Gregg

LOAD-DATE: October 1, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Gov. Judd Gregg of New Hampshire has become an issue himself as
he campaigns for election to the United States Senate. The Republican candidate
marched recently with supporters in a parade in Candia. (Evan Richman for The
New York Times)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                               4 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 2, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Democrats;
Clinton Asserts Bush Is Too Eager To Befriend the World's Dictators

BYLINE: By THOMAS L. FRIEDMAN,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 1100 words

DATELINE: MILWAUKEE, Oct. 1


Gov. Bill Clinton, launching a new broadside against the Bush Administration's
foreign policy, charged today that President Bush was overly eager to befriend
"potentates and dictators" and said he would be more prepared than Mr. Bush to
use trade sanctions or even force to protect human rights abroad.

Mr. Clinton also stepped up his campaign's attack on Mr. Bush on Iraq, saying he
was "angered by the Administration's appeasement of Saddam Hussein" before the
gulf war last year and "disappointed by its callous disregard for democratic
principles after the war." [Excerpts, page A21.]

His comments echoed a more detailed attack on Tuesday by Senator Al Gore, his
Vice Presidential running mate, who charged that the Administration had sold
technology and extended loan guarantees to Iraq despite evidence that Mr.
Hussein was preparing for war and repressing Iraqi citizens.

Mr. Clinton's statements appeared to reflect a feeling in his campaign that Mr.
Bush could be challenged in an area generally thought to be a source of
political strength for him. They also laid out in more detail how Mr. Clinton's
foreign policy might differ from Mr. Bush's.

Mr. Clinton said that if elected he would, unlike Mr. Bush, be more ready to use
force in conjunction with the United Nations to get relief supplies to civilians
under siege in Bosnia and Herzegovina. He said that when he called for the use
of force in the Balkans last summer, the White House criticized him as
"reckless." But, he said, the Administration has since adopted a similar
position. And today, White House sources reported, President Bush said he would
try to bar Serbian combat flights over Bosnia.

Unlike Mr. Bush, Mr. Clinton also said that he would use trade sanctions to put
pressure on the Chinese to respect human rights, and that he would devote more
resources to aiding emerging democracies in Central and South America and in
Africa.

Going further, he used stinging language to argue that the President was clearly
uncomfortable advocating the principles of democracy that he said were an
American tradition.

"Mr. Bush's ambivalence about supporting democracy," Mr. Clinton said, "and his
eagerness to befriend potentates and dictators has shown itself time and again."
The President, he added, "simply does not seem at home in the mainstream
pro-democracy tradition in American foreign policy."

To support his initiatives, Mr. Clinton said he would "reorganize and redirect"
American foreign aid, to use it to better support not only democratic
development but also "the skills, values and institutions of free society."

He did not give many details, but he said he would establish a Democracy Corps
and reinvigorate the Peace Corps to help create democratic institutions in the
former Communist lands. He said he would also expand Radio Free Europe to bring
information to the despotisms that remain in Asia -- in China, Vietnam, Laos,
North Korea and Myanmar, formerly Burma.

Mr. Clinton has been criticized by Mr. Bush and the Republicans for his lack of
experience in foreign policy, but the Arkansas Governor's campaign seems to have
concluded that foreign affairs may actually be a fertile area for him to
criticize the President.

Speech to Ethnic Groups

The Governor's address here was before an audience representing 35 ethnic groups
in Wisconsin, brought together by the Institute of World Affairs at the
Milwaukee campus of the University of Wisconsin.

It was his fourth major foreign policy speech since the campaign began. The
underlying theme of all four speeches is that while Mr. Clinton is, like Mr.
Bush, an internationalist at heart, he is a different sort of internationalist
and would address world problems differently.

The speech was also his first full-scale attack on Mr. Bush's foreign policy as
being out of tune with American values. Nevertheless, Mr. Clinton's proposals
raised many questions. One was how he would pay for many of his programs, given
the isolationist mood in Congress.

Another was the workability of his human rights approach. Mr. Bush and many
China experts argue that trade sanctions against China would simply anger and
alienate the Chinese leadership and promote civil strife in the world's most
populous country.

China's Support of U.S. Noted

They say further that China has been willing to stand by the United States on
important initiatives at the United Nations, like the war against Iraq, and that
alienating Beijing would undercut efforts to stop it from exporting weapons to
other countries.

Mr. Clinton addressed some of these issues but also seemed to suggest that it
would be possible to change China.

"We do not want China to fall apart or descend into chaos," he said. "Rather, we
want to use our relationship and influence with the Chinese to work for a
peaceful transition to democracy and the spread of free markets."

The problem, in the eyes of many experts, is that the Chinese leadership is not
interested in a peaceful transition to democracy. In any case, Mr. Clinton
refrained from explaining exactly how he would work for that end without getting
embroiled in a conflict with Beijing or fomenting revolution.

Also, while Mr. Clinton acknowledged that "we know that ballot boxes alone do
not solve every world problem," he refrained from explaining exactly where he
would draw the line or how he would deal with situations -- like those Algeria
or Georgia, a former Soviet republic -- where democratic elections have brought
anti-democratic forces to power.

While the Bush team believes that the President's record on foreign policy is
one of his strongest cards, highlighting it reminds many voters of his
weaknesses in domestic policy, and therefore the President has been virtually
mum on the subject. This has left the field to Mr. Clinton.

The Arkansas Governor also tried to take the standard argument of Mr. Bush --
that he did not have much time for domestic policy because he was too busy
ending the cold war -- and portray it as a symbol of the President's general
weakness as a leader.

"In the face of opportunities and dangers, we must have a President who can
conduct both a domestic policy and a foreign policy," he said. "Franklin
Roosevelt fought the Great Depression and the rise of fascism at the same time.
Harry Truman carried out the Fair Deal at home at the same time he moved to
contain Communist aggression in Europe and Korea. They would have laughed at the
idea of a conducting foreign affairs in their first term, and then switching to
domestic affairs in their second."


LOAD-DATE: October 2, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Gov. Bill Clinton speaking yesterday on foreign policy issues at
an event sponsored by the University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee. (Monica Almeida/The
New York Times) (pg. A21)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                               5 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 2, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Hard Times Change Many Minds

BYLINE: By SARA RIMER,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section D; Page 1; Column 3; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1413 words

DATELINE: YPSILANTI, Mich., Oct. 1


Union officials at General Motors' Willow Run assembly plant here have long
complained about growing political apathy among the rank and file. But not this
year. Their plant has been scheduled for closing, and the workers blame George
Bush (along with the chairman of G.M., whose selection they don't get to vote
on).

Bill Clinton wasn't the union local's first choice for President (Senator Tom
Harkin of Iowa was) or even its second (Edmund G. Brown Jr. from California
was). But workers have been registering to vote in record numbers just so they
can back the Democrat in November.

One new voter, 35-year-old Fred Mosley, said he would have supported President
Bush a year ago. "I believed in Bush," said Mr. Mosley, who installs the rear
trim on cars. "He's strong, he's military; I was in the military."

John Wayne or 'a Wimp'?

Then, last spring, the auto worker believed in Ross Perot. "I was hurting over
the plant closing," he said. "Perot comes out, talking all this great stuff, and
I was like, 'Yeah, yeah, that's what we want.' I was looking for somebody --
John Wayne, another John F. Kennedy."

Now, Mr. Mosley said, Mr. Perot was "a wimp" for getting out of the Presidential
race in July and is still a wimp. "He's just making a last-ditch attempt to save
Bush," Mr. Mosley said, dismissing Mr. Perot's declaration today that he is
indeed a candidate for President.

While Governor Clinton of Arkansas isn't John Wayne or John Kennedy, Mr. Mosley
added, he does have one overriding plus: "He's not Bush."

Indeed, the Bush backlash among auto workers here, as well as at other plants,
seems to be behind what is thought to be the first voter registration drive
inside the Willow Run plant that anyone can remember.

So far, local union officials estimate that more than 300 new voters have been
signed up in the last six months, including 70 in just two days last week.

"I've never seen such anger or enthusiasm, and it's not so much for Clinton as
it is against Bush," said Douglas A. Fraser, the former president of the United
Automobile Workers and now a professor of labor relations at Wayne State
University in Detroit. "No matter how much he says the economy is getting
better, he can't convince them. They know it isn't true."

Back in Michigan last week, President Bush, who carried the state in the last
election, was casting himself as the champion of the auto workers, in contrast
to Governor Clinton whose fuel economy standards, the President contended, would
cost the state 40,000 jobs.

With Michigan considered to be one of the pivotal industrial states this year,
both candidates are chasing blue-collar voters like Mr. Mosley.

At 5:30 A.M. on Wednesday, one longtime auto worker, Tony Ochab, was at the gate
of the Willow Run plant with 2,400 Clinton-Gore leaflets as the first of 2,400
workers were pulling into the parking lot.

"I've never been involved with politics before," he said. "I want to make sure
George hits the unemployment line before I do. I might hit it in April. He can
hit it in November."

Willow Run will shut down sometime in 1993. It has about 4,000 hourly workers,
although half are already on layoff. Mr. Ochab has been plotting his revenge
since Feb. 24, when General Motors announced that the Chevrolet Caprice and
other large cars built at Willow Run would be produced instead in Arlington,
Tex. The company has declined to specify why Arlington was chosen.

Without the facts, many workers are convinced that the President from Texas had
something to do with it. The President has said that he was not involved.

Arlington aside, people in this town, 30 miles west of Detroit, where there are
four auto plants in a five-mile radius, say Mr. Bush has stolen their American
dreams. On Friday, Laraine Drew, who has raised three children by working on the
assembly line, was at the union hall, registering to vote.

"When I was 21, I voted for Kennedy," she said. She has not been to the polls
since.

Now, she is part of a dwindling group of die-hard Ross Perot supporters here.
"He's a businessman," said Ms. Drew, who works for a company that lost a record
$4.5 billion last year. "That's what we need."

Willow Run, one of 21 General Motors plants that will close by 1995, is only the
latest disaster in a state with more than 9 percent unemployment. And U.A.W.
leaders say the sentiments voiced by the Willow Run workers are being echoed
loudly at plants everywhere.

At the Labor Day parade in Detroit, where Senator Al Gore of Tennessee was a
keynote speaker, the marchers were estimated at more than 150,000.  In contrast,
only about 30,000 marched in the 1988 parade.

Mr. Fraser said the size of this year's crowd only confirmed the change of
sentiment among auto workers. Union officials estimate that as many as 30
percent of auto workers voted for Mr. Bush last time.

'They're Coming Home'

"The most disturbing thing about it, and I wish it weren't true, is that when
people become affluent, their values change," Mr. Fraser said. "They don't think
they should be paying taxes to support people who are less well off. Reagan made
greed respectable, and it caught on with some of our people. Now, with the
economy the way it is, it's turned around, and they're coming home."

Not surprisingly, Michigan's Republican Governor, John Engler, who is the
President's state campaign chairman, takes another view. "They should vote for
George Bush because we've got an American economy with five straight quarters of
growth," he said. "Not robust growth the way it needs to be, but clearly headed
in the right direction."

Five straight quarters of growth means nothing to many people here. They may be
America's highest-paid industrial workers, but even if their jobs were not
threatened, the auto workers say, they would still be worried about house
payments and college tuition for their children.

Disappearing Overtime

"Ten years ago, we were working 10-hour days, six days a week," said Ted
Copeland, a 36-year-old assembler, Vietnam veteran and former Navy reservist who
left last year to fight in the Persian Gulf war. "I was making a fantastic
amount of overtime -- earning $42,000, $43,000 a year."

Now, with overtime a part of the past at the doomed auto plant, the figure is
closer to $30,000.

General Motors has said that most Willow Run workers, with an average of 20
years seniority, will be transferred to other plants. But Mr. Copeland, with two
young sons and only 12 years on the line, is preparing for the worst. He has
taken a second job, installing energy-saving devices for an engineering firm.
The twice-monthly family dinners at the Red Lobster restaurant are over. He has
sold off the truck he bought last year and his prized 1929 Model A Ford.

And, for the first time in 12 years, he is backing the Democrat. "O.K., fine,
the man went to Oxford," he said. "But I feel he's gotten a whole lot of
exposure to what's going on in this country -- unemployment, homelessness,
welfare, drug abuse, the whole spiel."

And, he added, "Clinton's a very personable guy." One thing that impressed Mr.
Copeland: "I heard him talking about his 1966 Mustang."

Driving a Political Statement

The kinds of car a person drives is a political statement here, where the bumper
stickers say "Buy American." Bob Harlow, the president of the Willow Run local
of the U.A.W., said any politician foolish enough to pull up at the union hall
in a foreign model would probably not get an endorsement.

One auto worker, Dave Roberts, has been driving his Chevrolet Lumina between
Arlington and Ypsilanti since last spring, 18 hours each way.  His wife,
Jacqueline, a salaried worker at Willow Run, was transferred to Texas. Mr.
Roberts, with 22 years' seniority, hopes that by spring he will be transferred,
too.

Just back from Arlington last week, Mr. Roberts said his road trips provided a
chance to do some politicking. "Gas stations, restaurants, any store I stop in,
I try to bring it up in some way," he said. "Like I'll say, 'Well, I hope it's
Clinton we're all voting for.' "

Mr. Roberts noted that he had a "little confrontation" with another customer at
a gas station in Hope, Ark., Governor Clinton's hometown:

"He said, 'We don't like him down here.' I said, 'Well, all I can see is the
economy in a bad state. We need a change.' "

Mr. Roberts added, "This lady who was there came over and said, 'I think it's
time for a change, too.' "

LOAD-DATE: October 2, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

SERIES: Closing Willow Run -- Third article of a series: Taking the Anger to the
Polls

GRAPHIC: Photos: Laraine Drew registering to vote at the union hall in
Ypsilanti, Mich. She said she had not voted in about three decades but was now
supporting Ross Perot. "He's a businessman. That's what we need." (pg. D1); Fred
Mosley said he would have supported President Bush a year ago. Then, in the
spring, the auto worker favored Ross Perot. "Perot comes out, talking all this
great stuff, and I was like, 'Yeah, yeah, that's what we want.' " But Mr. Mosley
has become disillusioned with Mr. Perot and says Gov. Bill Clinton has an
overriding plus: "He's not Bush." (pg. D4) (Peter Yates for The New York Times)

TYPE: Series

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                               6 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 2, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Congressional Roundup;
Senate Sustains China-Trade Veto

BYLINE: Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 14; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 268 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 1


The Senate today sustained President Bush's veto of legislation intended to curb
favorable trading status for China in 1993.

While 59 Senators voted to override the veto, 40 voted to sustain. That was
eight votes short of the two-thirds majority. Fifty-one Democrats and eight
Republicans voted to override. Five Democrats and 35 Republicans voted to
sustain Mr. Bush.

The House had voted 345 to 74 on Wednesday to override the veto. It was the
fourth time the House had voted to override a veto involving the nation's
relationship with China, and the fourth time the Senate had followed with a vote
to sustain.

This bill would have forced the President to deny most-favored-nation duty
status to imports from state-owned Chinese industries unless he found that China
had made improvements in human rights; had taken steps to halt exports of
products produced with prison labor; had curbed the export of missile, nuclear
and biological and chemical weapons technology and had helped account for
American prisoners of war missing in Korea and Vietnam.

The bill was attacked in floor debates as likely to injure only American
workers, since other countries would replace the United States as a Chinese
trade partner. Senator Max Baucus, Democrat of Montana, said that trade was
liberalizing China internally.

Senator George J. Mitchell of Maine, the majority leader and chief advocate of
the bill, said the Bush Administration was making no progress in changing
Chinese policies, because China's leaders "are immune to international criticism
because they have a friend at the White House."

LOAD-DATE: October 2, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                               7 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 2, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN - Man in the News: James Bond Stockdale;
Eager to Face the Test

BYLINE: By DAVID E. ROSENBAUM

SECTION: Section A; Page 19; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 646 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 1


James Bond Stockdale has been researching a book about Epictetus, the Greek
Stoic philosopher and teacher, and Mr. Stockdale said today that before going to
Dallas to be anointed as Ross Perot's running mate, he "looked for the apt
Epictetus quote that would give me power in this clutch."

This was what he settled on: "A life not put to the test is not worth living."

Mr. Stockdale, who is 68 years old and listed in Who's Who as a Republican and
an Episcopalian, is a political novice. But his life has certainly been put to
the test.

A Navy combat pilot who led the first United States bombing raid on North
Vietnam in 1964, Mr. Stockdale was shot down the next year and parachuted from
his A-4 jet into a crowd of North Vietnamese who beat him severely.

7 1/2 Years as a Prisoner

He spent the next seven and a half years in a prisoner-of-war camp, much of the
time in leg-irons and solitary confinement.

When he was finally released, Mr. Stockdale was awarded the Medal of Honor for
withstanding torture and withholding from his captors information that he feared
would jeopardize his fellow prisoners.

"We were always scared," Mr. Stockdale told an interviewer from The Associated
Press several years ago. "I would recite to myself liturgies of pep talk and
memorized stuff on the way to interrogation because I knew I had a performance.

"I had to demonstrate commitment. I could not give the idea that I was willing
to, as they say, meet them halfway. You've got to look him in the eyes and tell
them to go to hell."

In 1979, Mr. Stockdale retired from the Navy with the rank of Vice Admiral to
become President of The Citadel, the military college in South Carolina. He had
been at the Citadel for less than a year when he resigned because alumni and the
board of the school resisted his efforts to liberalize the curriculum and
admissions policies and to control hazing.

Too many people in the United States, he wrote afterward, compromise and
accommodate in order to accomplish tasks. "I do not advocate a P.O.W. name, rank
and serial number stance at every board of directors meeting here at home. "But
neither do I advocate suppressing moral sensibility in the interest of
cooperation -- or tenure."

In 1984 he accused his former military superiors of fabricating the incident
that pulled the United States into the Vietnam War. As a Navy pilot in 1964, he
said, he had not seen the North Vietnamese attack the destroyer U.S.S. Maddox in
the Gulf of Tonkin.

Commissioned in 1946

James Stockdale was born Dec. 23, 1923, in Abingdon, Ill., the son of a potter.
After graduation from the Naval Academy he was commissioned as an ensign in
1946, then spent most of his career in the Navy in aviation. He was a test
pilot, a squadron commander of supersonic fighters and an air wing commander.

After his release from the prisoner of war camp, he spent several years as
president of the Naval War College in Newport, R.I.

Mr. Stockdale moved to California after he left the Citadel to be a senior
research fellow at the Hoover Institution, the conservative research center at
Stanford University, and he has worked there ever since.

Mr. Stockdale's wife, Sybil, met Mr. Perot in the late 1960's when they worked
together to call attention to the plight of American prisoners of war in
Vietnam. He said today that he and Mr. Perot had been friends "ever since I got
off the plane from Hanoi in 1973."

The Stockdales, who have been married 45 years, have four sons and five
grandchildren. Together, they wrote a book, "In Love and War," which was turned
into a television movie by NBC in 1987.

When he headed the Naval War College he used to teach about the Book of Job.
"You have to be a man," he would tell his students, "as Job was asked to be a
man by his Lord, and stand up like a man when you are faced with undeserved
hardship."

NAME: James Bond Stockdale

LOAD-DATE: October 2, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                               8 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 2, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Where the Drug Culture Rules

BYLINE: By MARY B. W. TABOR

SECTION: Section B; Page 1; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 2069 words


When a citywide blackout and ensuing riots left much of Bushwick in ruins in
1977, one area that survived was a block of small businesses on Knickerbocker
Avenues and three-story wood and brick houses nearby.

That survival, however, sealed its doom.

Today, even as parts of this north Brooklyn neighborhood finally begin to
rebuild, the block left to age on Knickerbocker Avenue is flourishing in an
altogether different way, as one of the busiest -- and most brazen -- drug
bazaars in New York City.

For the last three years, special police units have mounted repeated assaults on
the Knickerbocker Avenue drug trade, but to little lasting effect. Day and
night, heroin and crack are sold by teen-agers who pace the teeming sidewalks
shouting brand names like "Jungle Fever," "Dr. D." and "Lamborghini." The police
call it "the Well" -- wry tribute to its unending supply of drugs and drug
arrests.

The survival of the Well is partly a matter of the block's peculiar history:
Spared by the riots but deprived of prosperity and social services, it became a
drug-selling center first for the Mafia and then for Dominican and Puerto Rican
drug organizations from around New York City. But beyond that, law-enforcement
officials and drug-policy experts say, the Well's persistence is a stark
illustration of the failure of traditional efforts to curtail the narcotics
trade.

"Troutman and Knickerbocker represents a city, state and national failure to
develop a drug strategy that will work in places like Bushwick," says David C.
Condliffe, who resigned this week as director of the Mayor's Office of Drug
Abuse Policy, saying he was frustrated by a lack of money to prevent and treat
addiction. "We clearly have not developed a geographic targeting plan at an
intense enough level. And our failures are costing us small fortunes in tax
dollars and people's lives."

The local precinct, the 83d, has poured in extra officers. The city's signature
drug-fighting weapon of recent years, the Tactical Narcotics Team, has been sent
into the Well several times and returned this week for a three-day operation.

But none of this has done much good -- evidence, the police and the experts say,
of the limits of law enforcement. While thousands of dealers and buyers have
been arrested in the Well, an overburdened court system and constraints on the
prosecution of minors mean that many end up back on the streets in a matter of
days. When the dealers are chased off one street, they simply move to the next
one. Indeed, amid such criticism of its long-term effectiveness, T.N.T. has seen
its staffing cut in half since its inception in 1989.

"We can't do this alone," said Inspector Robert Baumert, commanding officer of
the Brooklyn North Narcotics District. "We are trying to attack from the supply
side. We need more people working at it from the demand side. It has to be a
total war. It's like Vietnam. If there's not total support, you lose."

Bushwick residents talk about neglect by business and city and state officials,
high unemployment, poverty and the drive of new immigrants to make money to pad
welfare checks or to send back home. The city complains that the stock of mostly
privately owned housing has proved difficult to monitor for drug activity. And
perhaps most important, both the police and social service workers say they can
do little until a majority of residents no longer see the drug trade as a way of
life.

"This is not just a group of people selling drugs on the side," said Rex L.
Curry, associate director of the Pratt Institute Center for Community and
Environmental Development in Brooklyn. "It's a culture that has learned to make
its living this way over the last 10 years. Kids have grown up on this -- it's a
culture that has been created basically by the lack of resources and lack of
economic alternatives in the area."

Refuge
Independence Proves Undoing

"Bushwick" is Dutch for "refuge." And like Bushwick itself, once a small city
with its own minor league baseball team, the block was once a stable
working-class area of three- and four-story homes and little Italian
restaurants. Residents, first German immigrants, then later Italians and Jews,
went to work in the nearby knitting factories and breweries.

But in the years since World War II, when much of the white population began
moving to the suburbs, much of Bushwick fell victim to real-estate speculators,
who began blockbusting in the 1940's and continued profiteering through the
mid-1980's, when the city auctioned hundreds of lots without restrictions.

By the 1970's, the block was already known as a mob-controlled area with an
active drug market. On the night of the blackout, July 13, 1977, as rioters
stormed through Bushwick, store owners stood guard outside their doors on
Knickerbocker, protecting the block from plunder but preserving it as a heroin
market.

Knickerbocker, a main commercial thoroughfare, had come under the control of the
Bonanno crime family. In 1977, at a time when New York City's other
organized-crime families had banned drug dealing, the Bonannos, under the
direction of Carmine Galante, began planning a huge heroin smuggling operation,
hoping to corner the lucrative traffic for all America.

It was in the heart of the Well, on the rear patio of the Joe and Mary
Italian-American Restaurant at 205 Knickerbocker Avenue, that Mr. Galante was
murdered on July 12, 1979. He was found sprawled face up on the ground, his
lighted cigar clenched between his teeth.

In the years that followed, Joe and Mary's was converted into a Chinese take-out
restaurant, and the drug trade was largely taken over by newcomers to the
neighborhood.

According to drug investigators, after the Galante murder, Jamaicans and
Colombians based in other parts of New York, became the principal suppliers of
cocaine and heroin. And buyers, including teen-agers, doctors, lawyers,
truckers, city workers, addicts and at least one police officer, from
Connecticut to Long Island, continued to come.

Not that all of this neighborhood is suffering. Another block down
Knickerbocker, on George Street, the New York Housing Partnership, a nonprofit
group, has built two-family houses with small front yards and driveways. Several
churches and social service agencies and charities -- such as the Ridgewood
Bushwick Senior Citizens Council and the New York Community Trust -- reach the
streets around the Well, too.

But for those trying to fight the drug problems on the block, social and
economic history is playing against them.

Virtually all of the houses and storefront properties in the Well were, and are,
privately owned. While home ownership usually stabilizes a neighborhood, in the
Well it has also made it difficult to investigate or deter drug activities. And
because Bushwick had avoided government programs through the first half of the
century, largely an effort to ward off poor or minority newcomers, few social
service organizations have deep roots. Fewer still have wanted to take on the
problems of the Well.

"Bed-Stuy had the Kennedys fighting for it," said Nadine Whitted, district
manager of Community Board 4, referring to the Bedford-Stuyvesant Restoration
Corporation, a community development program sponsored by the Kennedys. "We
don't have anything like that."

Entrepreneurs
Endless Supply Of Willing Dealers

With the disappearance of factories, many residents have been forced to create
work for themselves. For some that has meant bodegas and restaurants and novelty
shops. For others, it has meant drugs.

Though the police have made several attempts to drive them out, the drug dealers
have merely shifted from street to street, like peas pushed around a plate.

Once concentrated on Starr Street, the trade was displaced after the highly
publicized shooting in August 1989 of Maria Hernandez, a woman who had fought
drug dealers in the neighborhood. Instead of leaving the neighborhood, the
dealers simply moved two blocks north to Jefferson.

When a group called the Jefferson Street Task Force began renovating the
abandoned city buildings on the street where prostitutes and dealers found
refuge, the dealers moved a block south to Troutman. For the last year, the
police have focused their patrols on Troutman, even closing the street to
traffic for part of each day.  The trade has now moved around the corner to
Knickerbocker.

"The activity here is incredible," said one drug investigator assigned to the
area. "Every park, every street corner, any abandoned building -- they are just
looking to set up shop."

A few doors down Starr Street from the building in which Mrs. Hernandez was shot
to death a 27-year-old woman sat on her stoop with her 6-year-old daughter,
taking in the brisk fall air and reflecting on her neighborhood. "When Maria
died, we thought it would get better, but after that was done with, everyone
came, did their stories and left. The cops came, but it all died out."

Trying to revive police efforts last February, Capt. Edward Fernandez, the
commanding officer of the precinct, began "Operation Clean Streets," aimed at
the Well and the 10 surrounding blocks.

With 14 new officers, he mounted a strategy just short of a state of siege
hoping to make life as miserable as possible for the dealers.

He expanded patrols and assigned an anti-crime unit and a Special Narcotics
Enforcement Unit to the area. He enlisted help from helicopter patrols, mounted
units, emergency services units, the sheriff's office and the Brooklyn North
narcotics units, including a Tactical Narcotics Team. A special assistant
district attorney was assigned to help seek stiff penalties for arrests marked
with a yellow cover sheet -- the sign that the act had occurred in the Clean
Streets area.

Residents, reluctant to assist the police publicly, quietly cooperated by
painting their addresses on their roofs so patrolling helicopters could orient
themselves at night.

Though law-enforcement officials say they do not know exactly who controls the
drugs in the Well, they have aimed at several groups that they say do most of
their business there. One, a Puerto Rican group with 25 or more members,
operates on Jefferson Street and is thought to be behind at least 15
drug-related murders in the area, said one investigator. The drug group, now
under investigation, is believed to be getting its drug supply from the Bronx.

Both the police and residents say the efforts have not been without value.
Between February and August, the precinct logged 626 felony arrests (sellers),
303 misdemeanors (buyers) and issued 7,160 summonses for other minor violations
intended to deter the dealers. T.N.T., which occupied the area from May to
August, made 733 additional arrests, many by undercover agents who bought from
dealers with marked money. Last night they completed a three-day operation in
the area in which they arrested about 150 people.

But for all their efforts, both residents and the police say, nothing much has
changed. For each drug dealer who is arrested, they say, there seems to be
another to take his place.

'Always a Replacement'

"The problem we see in Bushwick is that there is always a replacement for these
dealers," said Capt. Kevin Hickey, commanding officer of Brooklyn North's T.N.T.
unit. "You could hit Knickerbocker and Troutman six times a day and you'd think
you'd get the message out, but you don't."

Dennis Herring, a telephone technician who serves as chairman of the 83d
Precinct community council, was equally perplexed. "This police captain has sent
in everything but a tugboat," he said, "but it still hasn't gotten that much
better. It works while the police are there, but these people have the attitude
that once the police are gone, the dealers can come back."

Angela M. Battaglia, housing director of the Ridgewood Bushwick Senior Citizen's
Center, who has helped organize the Jefferson Street Task Force, speaks with
deep dismay about what has happened over the last two decades to a block that,
as a child, she could see from the top of her tenement on Knickerbocker Avenue.

"A lot has been done for Bushwick to uplift these neighborhoods," she said, "but
with the exception of the local police, the city has not made a sufficient
commitment. It's not that they have ignored the whole area, they've just ignored
this block and the problem there."

LOAD-DATE: October 2, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

SERIES: 'The Well': One Block in Brooklyn -- Second of two articles.

GRAPHIC: Photos: In addition to 626 felony arrests (sellers) and 303
misdemeanors (buyers) in "the Well" in the Bushwick section of Brooklyn, between
May and August, the local police precinct has issued 7,160 summonses for other
minor violations. This suspect on Irving Avenue was arrested in a
chain-snatching incident.; Once concentrated on Starr Street, above, the
Bushwick drug trade was displaced after the highly publicized shooting in August
1989 of Maria Hernandez, a woman who had fought drug dealers in the
neighborhood. Instead of leaving the neighborhood, the dealers simply moved two
blocks north to Jefferson. (pg. B1); People who live in the vicinity of "the
Well" in Bushwick, Brooklyn, must try to live normal lives amid a backdrop of
crime and violence. This bridesmaid got into her car after a wedding on Wilson
Street, a block from Knickerbocker Avenue, the center of the drug trade. (pg.
B2) (Photographs by Monica Almeida/The New York Times)

Chart: "BY THE NUMBERS: A Neighborhood Of Despair"

Median Household Income

In 1989

The neighborhood: $10,859
New York State: $32,965

The Poor

Families below poverty level.

1970: 21.8%
1990: 53.6%

(Source: Census Bureau) (pg. B2)

Map of Brooklyn showing location of "The Well". (pg. B2)

TYPE: Series

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                               9 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 2, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN;
'Honored to Accept': Excerpts From Perot's News Conference

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Page 20; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 2839 words

DATELINE: DALLAS, Oct. 1


Following is Ross Perot's opening statement at a news conference today on his
decision to campaign for President and excerpts from his exchange with
reporters, as transcribed by News Transcripts Inc., a private transcription
service:

Good afternoon. The volunteers in all 50 states have asked me to run as a
candidate for President of the United States. Jim Stockdale, our
Vice-Presidential candidate, and I are honored to accept their request. Few
people in this country have been able to live the American dream to the extent
that I have. No person ever had a finer father, mother or sister than I. No man
has ever been blessed with a better wife, Margot, or five more outstanding
children plus six grandchildren -- too good to be true.

I have been extremely fortunate during my business career. So I have lived the
American dream. And certainly if anyone in this country should be obligated to
serve our country and its people I should be.

The volunteers know that this is a critical time in our nation's history.
Neither political party has effectively addressed the issues that concern the
American people. They have asked me to run this campaign on the issues and to
assure that the problems the American people are concerned with will be dealt
with after this election is over.

I know I hurt many of the volunteers who worked so hard through the spring and
summer when I stepped aside in July. I thought it was the right thing to do. I
thought that both political parties would address the problems that face the
nation. We gave them a chance. They didn't do it. But the volunteers on their
own forged ahead and put me on the ballot in the final 26 states after July 16.

The day we were on the ballot in all 50 states the volunteers requested that I
come back in because the political parties had not responded to their concerns.

'Government in Gridlock'

My decision in July hurt you. I apologize. I thought I was doing the right
thing. I made a mistake. I take full responsibility for it. There's only one
issue now, starting today, and that is what's good for our country.

Looking back won't solve any of our problems. Looking forward, working together,
we can fix anything. The American people are concerned about a Government in
gridlock. Our people are good. The American people are good. But they have a
Government that is a mess.

The American people are concerned about this Government they pay for that
doesn't produce results. Everybody in Washington makes excuses. Nobody takes
responsibility, even when they have direct responsibility. The American people
have figured that out. They want that changed.

The American people are really concerned about a Government where people go to
Washington to cash in and not to serve. They want the Government changed so that
people go as servants of the people back home, and do not use Government service
as a stepping stone to financial success.

The people know that it is wrong to spend our children's money. Nothing could be
more wrong. We know that we cannot constantly pass on a $4 trillion debt to our
children. The people want this problem squarely dealt with. They want our
financial house put back in order.

The people are concerned that our Government is still organized to fight the
cold war. They want it reorganized to rebuild America as the highest priority.
In order to do that, the highest priority of all is to rebuild the job base and
the industrial base. We've got to put out people back to work. We've got to stop
the loss of entire industries that go to other countries.

We must make the words "made in the U.S.A." once again the world's standard for
excellence.

'I Go as Your Servant'

Not only is Government a mess, politics is also a mess. The way political
campaigns are run is a mess. The people want a new political climate where the
system does not attract ego-driven, power-hungry people.

We will create an environment that attracts the best people in the country to
come to serve, and to go back home, and go to work. Together we can solve these
problems and make the political process responsible and relevant to selecting
the best people in the country.

These are the issues we'll talk about in the coming weeks. I will not spend one
minute answering questions that are not directly relevant to the issues that
concern the American people.

And now to the American people, I don't belong to anybody but you. You the
people own me. If you elect me I go as your servant. I will work night and day
to see that the priorities that you have established are accomplished.

To the many young people -- and it's a disproportionate number of very young
people who have called me, written me and some have even driven across country
to Dallas to visit with me at their own expense, expressing concern about what
kind of country they will live in as adults, wondering whether or not they will
even have a job when they get out of school. Now this is unthinkable, that you'd
have a college degree and not be able to get a job in America.

When I think of all the sacrifices my parents and all the generations who came
before them made in the earlier times for us so that we could live the American
dream, certainly we all dedicate ourselves to seeing that you, the young people
in our country, will have the American dream passed on to you.

Even the very young ones write me. This little girl, a beautiful little girl,
Adrian Cagiano. I'll leave this picture for you. Here is -- here are a few
excerpts from her letter:

"My name is Adrian Cagiano. I am 9 years old, almost 10. I wish you would really
run for President and I wish I could vote. I think everyone should get to say
how they would like to see things done. I just don't think a small group of
people should decide all these things for a whole bunch of people." This is
signed Adrian, Rural Route 2, Augusta, Kan.

Now when you're hot and you're tired, and you're worn out some day, take a look
at this little girl and her sisters, and you'll say whatever it takes we've got
to do it, we've got to pass on the American dream to them.

To the retired people who made it through the Depression, fought and won World
War II -- now how's that for a double hit? Grow up in the Depression and then as
a bonus get to fight and win World War II. Worked and sacrificed most of their
lives. I know you share my commitment to make sure that we pass the American
dream on to our children and grandchildren.

One of my most poignant memories is the day Mort Myerson became the president of
Electronic Data Systems. His 95-year-old grandfather was there. His grandfather
had had to flee Russia many years ago because he happened to be a Jew. He lived
in an attic in Brooklyn for 18 months working as a tailor as a young man, so he
could get together enough money to buy a train ticket to Fort Worth, Tex. He
reared a fine young son and that son became Mort Myerson's father. He was there
when Mort became president of E.D.S. At the end of the meeting Mr. Myerson came
forward with tears in his eyes and hugged Mort and said, "Son, through you I
have fulfilled all of the dreams I had as a young man when I came to America."

Sharing the Sacrifice

Now, that's what this is all about -- fair-shared sacrifice will be necessary to
solve these problems. The last time we all sacrificed together was World War II.
Everybody participated in the sacrifice. We won. We can win again if each one in
this country will carry his part of the burden.

To the huge number of people in the armed forces, the largest single group of
people who have written me and urged me to run these past few months are our
military forces and people who are veterans. You've written, you've called and
you've volunteered your time urging me to run. I do this for you primarily
because you fought and won the hot wars and the 45-year-long cold war for us.
And in many cases, nobody ever even said thank you. This is my tiny little way
of saying thank you.

Certainly you deserve a country for yourselves and your children that fulfills
the ideals that you fought for on the battlefield. Some of you gave your lives.
I do this for the widows and the children. Many of you bear the permanent scars
of the war. I do it for you.

I received a Purple Heart through the mail yesterday and a letter. Some short
excerpts:

"Dear Ross: I was awarded this Purple Heart for wounds received during a Vietnam
ambush in 1968. Over the years, its value to me has grown significantly, and
like my family, it is priceless. I would be honored if you would accept the loan
of my Purple Heart to keep with you throughout the campaign. I believe that it
can serve as a compelling reminder that the hard battle ahead can and must be
won.

"Let it also remind you of the army of ordinary citizens that has mustered to
your call and looks to you to stop the hemorrhaging of the American spirit, to
unite once and for all our diverse citizenry under a single American banner, and
to restore honesty, integrity and responsibility to our Government. Like you, I
firmly believe that if we stand united, we will win. Good luck, Ross. Dennis
Garvin, Wilmington, Del."

Dennis, thank you. I'll keep it with me during the campaign. I understand it's
on loan. I'll get it back to you. Never forget, to everybody listening today, I
can't do this job without your continued support. One person is nothing in a
task this large. If millions of you will come together, we can do anything.
There's nothing we can't do. It's up to you; it's up to all of us. I promise you
I'll give it everything I have, but the final results are in your hands, because
you own this country and you are the voters.

'Committed to Serving You'

I look forward to squarely presenting these issues day after day to the American
people. I would like to thank the American people. By choosing me as your
candidate, you have given me the highest honor I could ever receive.

In closing, let me say this. I love this country. I love the American people. I
love the principles on which this country was founded and I don't like to see
those principles violated, and there are millions of folks out there just like
me that are sick and tired of it.

I am totally committed to serving you, God bless you all, thank you for this
honor, and now I would like to introduce Jim Stockdale, our Vice-Presidential
candidate, and his wife, Sibyl. Jim Stockdale is a hero's hero. He's a recipient
of the medal of honor. In addition to that he is a scholar. He is a retired
admiral. He suffered as a prisoner of war during Vietnam as few people have.

He provided leadership that caused our Government to award him the medal of
honor. In order to receive it his fellow prisoners have to recommend him for it,
the ultimate compliment. He is a man of steel. He has been hammered on the forge
of brutality and was able to reach outside himself to provide strength to
others.

I can't tell you how many P.O.W.'s told me when they came home that they would
not be alive if it had not been for Jim Stockdale. He gave them the courage to
go forward and to live. Now that's leadership, that's the kind of person that
built our country. We're very fortunate to have a man of his quality to serve
us.

And now let me tell you a little bit about Sibyl. She is one of the great women
in our country. When the men were dying from brutality and neglect, Sibyl
Stockdale and a handful of dedicated wives and mothers were out there trying to
get someone to do something so that their husbands could survive this very long
war.

She finally broke through. She got our Government to change its policies from
not saying anything about it to one of embarrassing the North Vietnamese into
changing the treatment so that more men would survive that ordeal.

There are few women during the period of my life of 62 years who have shown more
strength, more courage, more commitment and more dedication, who have been more
brutally tested than Mrs. Stockdale, and as a combination, it's two pieces of
steel.

QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

Q.  You're not going to tell us what your campaign plans are. Will you tell us
where you're going to appear and when?

A.  We're not going to reveal our strategy. We will just have it unfold day
after day without any -- here's the one thing you can bet on: It's going to be
serious; it's going to focus on the issues. . . .

Q.  Why should America put its trust in an economic plan crafted largely by a
Carter Administration official?

A.  No. 1, it was not crafted largely by that person. That person participated
on the team, made an important contribution. That person is a very bright, wise,
able person. I had absolute control over that plan, was deeply involved in it
myself, and a very talented team made up of a number of people participated.

Q.  Your opponents say the gas tax and the increased taxes on Social Security
benefits and the income tax [inaudible] falls too heavily on the middle class,
and the rich don't participate as much as the middle class does. How are you
going to respond to that?

A.  Well, you'd expect your opponents to distort and twist and present, and I
wouldn't dignify that answer -- I wouldn't dignify that answer with comment. I
know exactly who that comes from. I know where exactly where it comes from. He
said it so many times ----

                                    .  .  .

Q.  Two months ago you said you were quitting the race because you didn't want
to be a spoiler and you didn't want to be disruptive. Now you say you're back to
win this thing.

A.  Yes.

Q.  Isn't your strategy to disrupt George Bush's vote in a number of key states,
including this one, Texas?

A.  Absolutely not. Absolutely not. That's press myth No. 615. . . .

He has called me every name in the book. All I've ever said, Fine man, fine
family. The only thing I've ever criticized is his mistakes in office. That's
it. We're talking about performance here and not personality. See? I'm
everything from a monster to crazy, though, coming from them, right?

                                    .  .  .

Q.  Did you know your campaign has hired people to investigate some of your
volunteers? What's your [inaudible]?

A.  No. 1, your question is, "Did I know that?" No.

No. 2, let's look, because I now have checked to find out what was going on.
Number -- here is what happened. People, we had 50 states, offices all over 50
states, manned by self-selected volunteers. Some of them would call Dallas and
say, Charley is stealing money. In order to comply with the Federal Election
Commission rules, we had to check it out. So we would check. In most cases it
was just false signals.

Then we would have a situation come up, say, gee, we've got a fellow out here in
accounting in a secure area that your accounting coordinator that had done three
terms in jail. Well, we would have to check that out. Ninety percent of the
contact with that firm, most of the effort with that firm was just providing
security people in offices that needed security. We would rent security people
by the hour from them.

Now, let's stop and think about this for a minute. I would urge someone to say,
"Well, how many people do you have in dirty tricks or opposition research?"
Don't have any -- never had any. Isn't it fascinating that everybody goes
bonkers on the front page of their paper the day I am to make this acceptance on
a non-issue and ignores both parties who are in absolutely overdrive and
overload trying to destroy one another personally?

Step 2, really now, if there's any balance and fairness in what you do, give the
same attention to their investigative capability that you have created out of
thin air about our nonexistent investigative capability.  Find out how many
full-time investigators they have checking everything is breathing.

And I think you'll conclude there's a lot of paranoia, at least in one place.

So I realize it's a tough game, and I realize nobody has to -- there are no
Marquis of Queensberry rules, and I don't care. But I find it silly to the point
of ridiculous that if you write a nonstory just because it gives you something
hot that you don't take the time to say, "What about these other two guys?"
Listen, we are not even in the game when it comes to investigation, in terms of
what they're doing. And we don't -- all we try to do, if somebody says
somebody's stealing, we check it out. We're required to, under the Federal
Election Commission, not to let people steal money.

Now, if that upsets you, I'm sorry, folks, that's it.

                                    .  .  .

Q.  You had several quotes about how they use investigators, "they investigate
everything breathing." Do you have chapter and verse about their use of
investigators to either investigate you or the American people?

A.  I don't feed the press.

Q.  Well, you made the accusation.

A.  Everybody else does. I don't give you a feed every morning about something
nasty about -- did anybody here ever get a nasty feed from me? I rest my case.


LOAD-DATE: October 2, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Ross Perot announcing a renewed run for the Presidency at a news
conference in Dallas. He was accompanied by his wife, Margot. (Associated Press)

TYPE: Text

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              10 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 2, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Review/Film;
The Giving And Taking Of Credit

BYLINE: By VINCENT CANBY

SECTION: Section C; Page 20; Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 739 words


"Hero" is a big, expensive-looking, quite harmless Hollywood comedy that is
finally far more enjoyable than it has any right to be, largely because of
Dustin Hoffman, Andy Garcia and Geena Davis, but most of all because of Ms.
Davis, though not for the expected reasons.

There's nothing wrong with her performance as a beautiful, high-powered
television news personality. She's good. Yet what really counts is her angularly
comic presence. She's as cheering and surprising as the sight of a very tall
lollipop careering around on Rollerblades. It's Ms. Davis who pulls together the
various elements of a screenplay whose complicated mechanics keep slowing down
what should be the fun.

"Hero," directed by Stephen Frears from an original screenplay by David Webb
Peoples, seems to have begun with a high-profile story concept, that is, with
the sort of plot that can be told in a single sentence. Then something happened,
possibly during a large number of story conferences.

At the beginning, "Hero" is exclusively about Bernie Laplante (Mr. Hoffman), a
tireless but none-too-successful con artist who often looks and sounds like
Ratso Rizzo, 20-odd years after "Midnight Cowboy." Bernie has served in Vietnam,
been in and out of one marriage, and fathered a son. When first seen in "Hero,"
he's in court, where he's being found guilty of selling stolen property. He's
also stealing money from the purse of his public defender.

The high-profile concept that apparently prompted the film takes a long time to
appear. Bernie is driving across town one night during a thunderstorm when he
chances upon a just-crashed commercial airliner. Against his better judgment, he
goes into the flaming wreckage to save the passengers, including Gale Gayley
(Ms. Davis). By the time the police and firefighters arrive, Bernie's job is
done. He leaves without identifying himself.

"Hero" is also about John Bubber (Andy Garcia), a down-and-out Vietnam veteran,
who takes credit for Bernie's heroism when Gale starts a television campaign to
find "the angel of Flight 104." John is not much better than Bernie at heart,
but the lure of the $1 million reward is too much for him. The paradox: by
pretending to be a hero, John actually becomes one. Shaved, shined and dressed
in a new wardrobe, John not only looks like a hero, but he also behaves like
one.

He's humble. He's handsome. He makes people feel good about themselves. As in
old Frank Capra movies, a flawed common man is recognized as the populist savior
for whom the world has been waiting these thousands of years. Poor John almost
goes to pieces guarding his terrible truth. He can't even tell the gorgeous
Gale, who falls in love with him.

Mr. Hoffman is terrific when he doesn't have to move the creaky story forward.
The performance is big and complex, but it's at a remove from the rest of the
film. Mr. Garcia's John Bubber is funny and intense, a very reasonable facsimile
of a Capra character. Ms. Davis has something of the gutsy spirit of what would
be the Jean Arthur role.

Neither Mr. Frears ("The Grifters," "Dangerous Liaisons," "My Beautiful
Laundrette") nor Mr. Peoples, who wrote the screenplay for "Unforgiven," appears
to have a natural bent for this sort of comedy. They let every scene and every
gag run on too long. Nothing is condensed. There's even too great a profusion of
legitimately comic supporting characters who, by getting on and off fast, often
seem funnier than the stars. Joan Cusack is super as Mr. Hoffman's harried
ex-wife, and her real-life sister, Susie Cusack, is a joy as Mr. Hoffman's
earnest if inexperienced public defender.

"Hero" has its moments of high good humor, but they are so spread out, and the
pacing is so laborious, that watching the film too often seems like work.

"Hero," which has been rated PG-13 (Parents strongly cautioned), has vulgar
language and sexual situations.

Hero

Directed by Stephen Frears; screenplay by David Webb Peoples, based on a story
by Laura Ziskin and Alvin Sargent, and Mr. Peoples; director of photography,
Oliver Stapleton; edited by Mick Audsley; music by George Fenton; production
designer, Dennis Gassner; produced by Ms. Ziskin; released by Columbia Pictures.
Running time: 112 minutes. This film is rated PG-13.

Bernie Laplante . . . Dustin Hoffman
Gale Gayley . . . Geena Davis
John Bubber . . . Andy Garcia
Evelyn . . . Joan Cusack
Donna O'Day . . . Susie Cusack

LOAD-DATE: October 2, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Andy Garcia, left, and Dustin Hoffman in "Hero." (Murray
Close/Columbia Pictures)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              11 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 2, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

The Uses of Ross Perot

SECTION: Section A; Page 30; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 500 words


He's through with the teasing but not the trifling. At the "request" of what's
left of his once-impressive volunteer army, Ross Perot has resumed his
Presidential race. His chances of winning are much less than when he quit in
July. His only dim practical hope is to confuse and destabilize the contest. But
there is one important way in which Mr. Perot's quixotic candidacy can serve
constructive purposes.

His economic program, published after his withdrawal, contains many bold and
sensible ideas. If he's now willing to carry these ideas to the public and
defend them in detail, he will sharpen the debate and do much to educate the
country. But that will require a candor and courage he has so far failed to
display.

Mr. Perot's announcement sounded all the standard chords of piety -- honesty,
military valor, selfless service, competitiveness, fiscal responsibility. He
produced a Purple Heart from a wounded Vietnam veteran and a touching letter
from a child. It was part Sinclair Lewis, part Lee Iacocca, effective except for
one creepy line: "I will not," he said, "spend one minute answering questions
that are not directly relevant to the issues that concern the American people."

There he goes again: the old imperious Ross Perot. Taken at face value, that
sentence would seem to rule out all questions about his arrogance, his
occasionally cavalier attitude toward the Constitution, about his penchant for
espionage and intimidation. Questions, in sum, about character and style wholly
relevant to a candidate's fitness for office.

The good news is that Mr. Perot wants people to ask him about the economy -- how
he would eliminate the crushing $4 trillion deficit, rebuild "the job base and
the industrial base" and "make the words 'Made in the U.S.A. once again the
world's standard for excellence." It will be interesting to see whether he's
ready to fully share his answers.

Earlier, Mr. Perot bristled when anyone asked what his positions were. Then
after he quit he published a program for deficit reduction and economic revival
more detailed than that of Mr. Bush or Mr. Clinton.

It contains a lot of pain -- higher taxes on many Americans, sharply higher
gasoline taxes, limits on mortgage interest deductions, new taxes on wealthier
recipients of sacred entitlement programs. It's not perfect but it warrants
serious debate. The trouble is, the program remains within the covers of Ross
Perot's book; the candidate himself has shown little appetite for articulating
it.

There was a brief hint yesterday that he might now do so. Does he really mean to
push up the cost of gasoline for "the average American"? Yes. Gasoline in the
U.S. is far too cheap, he said, and a tax could help rebuild crumbling
infrastructure.

It was probably the first time in the campaign that Ross Perot has carved
beneath the surface of generality. Even if he has no chance to win the election,
he could salvage a reputation now marked by caprice by doing more of the same.


LOAD-DATE: October 2, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              12 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 2, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

If I. F. Stone Heard Presidential Posturing

SECTION: Section A; Page 30; Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 517 words


To the Editor:

Any unprejudiced reader of I. F. Stone's books and articles would know that if
the K.G.B. had him on the payroll to peddle the Soviet line, the K.G.B. was
taken to the cleaners and should sue his estate for failure to perform
contracted services.

Your editorials (Aug. 13, Sept. 26) refuting the charge against Stone border on
wasting newsprint, but put me in a nostalgic mood that sent me to the pile of
old issues of Stone's Weekly (later Bi-Weekly) I put in the attic when the
magazine closed in 1971.

I came across (to cite only a few examples) admiring quotations from Polish
dissidents (April 20, 1970) and condemnations of Castro for his Stalinist
persecution of the revolutionary poet Heberto Padilla (May 17, 1971).

Stone did not get it right every time (in the issue of Feb. 22, 1971, he saw
President Nixon sliding to nuclear war with China), but he was on target in his
criticisms of the war in Vietnam, the bogus claims the Pentagon made for
antimissile systems, the perversion of psychiatry by his putative employers in
the Soviet Union, the need for Israel to negotiate with the Palestinians, the
centuries-long persistence of ethnic and religious hatred, the futility of
Weathermen terrorism, and many other international and domestic issues.

What moves me to write, however, is Stone's record in light of something
happening right now: George Bush's fantastic history of Communism's fall. Mr.
Bush will not even concede the Democratic Party its generally enthusiastic
support of the cold war and dubious military adventures.

It is striking, therefore, to read what Stone, no mere liberal but an
unmistakable left-winger, wrote about the Soviet invasion of Czechoslovakia and
its likely consequences: "A new terror is slowly settling down, and a new hatred
of the Russians and the Communists will accompany it. The hopes of democracy
under Communism have been destroyed; the youth of the bloc will now begin to
turn more openly against Communism as inevitably linked with the one-party
State" (Sept. 9, 1968).

Stone's moral fervor and intelligence were a national treasure, his
indefatigable search for the truth a paradigm for responsible citizens.
Following his example, we might look up George Bush's Memorial Day speech at
Yale last year, a defense on pragmatic grounds of conciliatory trade concessions
to the Communists in Beijing after the slaughter at Tiananmen Square, a position
reaffirmed last week with his veto of Congressional curbs on trade with China.

How could that speech have issued from that famous pair of lips that at the
Republican National Convention served up a self-portrait of the implacable
anti-Communist? The answer is that "whatever it takes to get re-elected"
includes the falsification of his own record of tepid and inconsistent devotion
to freedom.

I. F. Stone, who saw the inherent weakness of regimes like the one in China,
would see the President's posturing as an insult to victims of tyranny. So
should we.

VICTOR BERS
New Haven, Sept. 26, 1992
The writer is professor of classics, Yale University.

LOAD-DATE: October 2, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              13 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 3, 1992, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

7 Receive Life Terms in Racketeering Case

SECTION: Section 1; Page 26; Column 6; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 265 words


Seven members of a gang called the Green Dragons were sentenced to life in
prison yesterday, after the brother of one of the gang's murder victims told the
judge that the loss "just tears my heart and soul into thousands and thousands
of pieces."

Prosecutors said the Green Dragons, a street gang of Asian youths operating in
Queens, extorted tribute from dozens of restaurant owners in the Asian-American
community, primarily in Elmhurst. The defendants were convicted of racketeering
charges that included the murders of seven people who were extortion targets,
rival gang members or witnesses against the gang.

Before sentencing the men in Federal District Court in Brooklyn, Judge Reena
Raggi permitted the brother of a murder victim to address the court.

Tearfully, Steven Mach recalled the slaying of his 22-year-old brother, Tommy,
and the brother's girlfriend, Tina Sham, who were kidnapped from a Queens
restaurant in 1990, taken to a deserted area of Long Island and shot to death
because Ms. Sham had testified against the gang.

Mr. Mach told Judge Raggi that "the brutal, senseless, cold-blooded murder" had
caused his family unbearable pain.

Seeking some leniency, the defense lawyers described their clients as alienated
immigrants from Taiwan, Vietnam, Cambodia and Hong Kong. They ranged in age from
19 to 25.

But Judge Raggi stressed "the truly disturbing crimes" and noted that during the
trial, the defendants had threatened witnesses and laughed at victims' families.
She added, "They were actually enjoying listening to accounts of their
escapades."

LOAD-DATE: October 3, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              14 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 4, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

DANCE VIEW;
Political Dogma Fades. Social Awareness Remains.

BYLINE: By Jack Anderson

SECTION: Section 2; Page 8; Column 1; Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 924 words


Consider these signs of the times. Dance Theater Workshop's current season at
the Bessie Schonberg Theater, which runs through Dec. 21, features, among other
choreographic attractions, a commentary on technology by David Hurwith, musings
on Puerto Rican identity by Merian Soto and Pepon Osorio, and theatrical
sketches about impoverished black women by Janine Williams.

Among the dancers and performance artists appearing this autumn at Performance
Space 122 are Scott Heron and Tim Miller, both of whom will stage works on gay
themes. A 15-week series of productions by lesbian choreographers and
performance artists gets under way on Oct. 22 at the Pyramid Club in the East
Village. And this fall's first dance program at the Judson Memorial Church, on
Sept. 21, included a duet created by Sean Curran and Kathy Wildberger honoring
two choreographers who died of AIDS.

Racism. Feminism. Gay rights. AIDS. Poverty. The environment.

By tackling such issues, dancers refute the occasionally voiced contention that
theirs is an escapist art. In fact, American choreographers have been social
critics at least since the Depression. Dancers championing civil rights and
decrying the Vietnam War mounted the theatrical barricades in the 60's.

Choreographic urgency is admirable, but passion needs to be tempered with
caution. Dancers should avoid confusing mere vehemence with communicating
something clearly. The worst political artworks present such oversimplified
images of good and evil that, even though they are inspired by real problems,
they appear to exist in a fantasy world of slogans.

Today, it may be difficult for dancers to toe any rigid party line. Events in
Russia and Eastern Europe have seriously weakened the appeal of Communism. Yet
this dance watcher has discerned no choreographic leap into the conservative
camp. Quite the contrary: continuing right-wing attacks on the National
Endowment for the Arts have made the dance community even more suspicious of
conservatism.

The fading of dogmatic leftist ideologies, and the way dancers are avoiding
those of the right, may encourage choreographers to be socially aware without
being doctrinaire, and to develop new ideas about form and content. For
instance, abstract dances need not be regarded simply as ingenious interplays of
shapes in space. Soviet estheticians who habitually interpreted abstract dance
in this fashion pronounced the choreography guilty of empty formalism. Thus, as
a result of adverse criticism, Fyodor Lopukhov's "Dance Symphony," a plotless
work celebrating the wonder of the universe, was dropped from the Kirov Ballet's
repertory shortly after its premiere in 1923, and it is only recently that
Russian companies have been allowed to stage abstract ballets by George
Balanchine.  Such esthetic insensitivity is deplorable.

Still, it must be admitted that, in the name of abstraction, some Western
choreographers have done little more than spin pretty steps to pretty music. The
finest abstractions, however, are rich in significance. Works like Balanchine's
magisterial "Concerto Barocco" or the lyrical creations of Merce Cunningham,
Erick Hawkins and Paul Taylor deserve to be treasured as visions of social
harmony, and Alwin Nikolais's multimedia spectacles can be interpreted as
studies of the intricate ways in which people respond to their environment.

Some dances can assume a multitude of political shadings. Take Mr. Taylor's
"Company B," which the Paul Taylor Dance Company will present during its
engagement at the City Center, which opens on Oct. 27. A work that had its
premiere last year, "Company B" abounds with bubbly dancing to chipper recorded
songs of the 1940's by the Andrews Sisters. But it's not just a lark. From time
to time, men at the back of the stage dart as if dodging bullets and fall as if
wounded. Mr. Taylor is offering a panoramic view of morale-boosting on the home
front and the grim realities of the battlefield.

"Company B" is specifically set during World War II. Yet it cannot be classified
as a period piece. Strife in the streets of Sarajevo, Los Angeles and other
cities has turned "Company B" into a poignant reminder that, in too many places
in the world today, people are trying to preserve their capacity for hope while
bullets whiz about them.

"Masekela Langage," which Alvin Ailey choreographed in 1969 and which will be
part of the repertory of the Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater at the City
Center in December, has gained its own fresh relevance. The work shows people
lounging in a bar. Suddenly, they are shaken from their lethargy when a wounded
man stumbles in and dies. Because the dancers are black and the music is by the
South African trumpeter Hugh Masekela, the wounded stranger is surely intended
to represent a victim of apartheid.

Racial violence still blights South Africa. Yet the age of apartheid may be
ending, and last month Dance Theater of Harlem embarked on a South African tour
-- something no American black company would have done in 1969.

The times are changing. Nevertheless, "Masekela Langage" remains a powerful
statement. Its stranger is the incarnation of all the world's wounded people --
the politically persecuted, the racially oppressed, the battered, the homeless
-- who may stumble into our lives and force us to notice them.

The outside world bursts in upon "Masekela Langage." So, too, the outside world
-- in all its complexity and contrariness and its possibilities for despair and
glory -- keeps bursting into dances.

LOAD-DATE: October 4, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Patrick Corbin and members of the Paul Taylor Dance Company in
"Company B" -- Grim realities of the battlefield intrude. (Jack Mitchell/Paul
Taylor Dance Company)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              15 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 4, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Conversations/Yasushi Akashi;
A Japanese Envoy's Impossible Job: Keeping the Peace in Cambodia

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHENON

SECTION: Section 4; Page 7; Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1164 words

DATELINE: PHNOM PENH, Cambodia


YASUSHI AKASHI has been given the most difficult and important assignment in a
long, distinguished career. And for reasons that in the end may have little to
do with his performance here, the 61-year-old Japanese diplomat could well fail.

As Special Representative of the United Nations Secretary General for Cambodia,
Mr. Akashi must oversee the largest, most expensive peacekeeping mission in the
history of the United Nations. But his assignment, to create conditions for a
lasting peace in Cambodia, may have been impossible from the start.

"I have a strong sense that this country, which has had so much war, is sick and
tired of the fighting," said Mr. Akashi, whose nearly $2 billion operation has
brought more than 17,000 blue-bereted peacekeeping troops and civilian police to
this shattered nation. "But after 20 years of war, the mutual distrust here is
very deep."

Mr. Akashi was dispatched by the United Nations to act as a mediator between the
Cambodian Government and the rebel groups that sought its overthrow in the
12-year civil war, but he has been accused of partisanship and worse by the most
powerful rebel group, the Khmer Rouge, the Maoist-inspired guerrillas
responsible for the deaths of more than a million Cambodians in the 1970's.

In acknowledgment of the might of the Khmer Rouge, the United Nations allowed
the rebels to join in the peace negotiations and to sign last year's peace
accord.

Mr. Akashi says that if the Khmer Rouge gained any international legitimacy in
the peace process, that is now at risk because the guerrilla group refuses to
disarm. The Khmer Rouge has demanded that new conditions be met before it lays
down its arms.

"I think they are in great danger of squandering it," warned Mr. Akashi, whose
sparsely decorated office here was reportedly used by the Khmer Rouge to receive
foreign guests when it controlled the central government in the 1970's.

Still, Mr. Akashi says, "if it is for the cause of peace, I will deal with the
devil," and he insists he is hopeful that the Khmer Rouge will be convinced to
rejoin the peace process, possibly through the intervention of China and
Thailand. The two nations were longtime patrons of the Khmer Rouge.

That Mr. Akashi is Japanese helps explain why he was asked to take the Cambodia
assignment.

Japan Sends Troops

Japan has donated hundreds of millions of dollars to the peace plan and has
become its largest financial contributor. In a bid to reassert itself in Asia as
something more than an economic powerhouse, Japan will be sending as many as
2,000 peacekeeping troops to Cambodia over the next year, the first deployment
of Japanese soldiers abroad since World War II, and a decision made after a
wrenching national debate over the role of the Japanese armed forces. The troops
began arriving two weeks ago.

Mr. Akashi, who traveled to Tokyo last spring to lobby the Japanese Parliament
for its support of the Cambodian plan, had been critical of Japan's
hypercautious foreign policy -- its traditional unwillingness to act unless it
was guaranteed "100 percent success."

"I believe Japan can contribute more to international peace than it has in the
past," said Mr. Akashi. "Cambodia is a unique opportunity for Japan to show its
unique contribution and leadership in the world." Mr. Akashi has spent most of
his career in Manhattan at the United Nations -- most recently as Under
Secretary for Disarmament -- and after so long in the United States, his style
can seem decidedly un-Japanese. It is certainly not the style of his
counterparts in the Japanese Foreign Ministry, for whom bluntness and
confrontation have never been considered a route to career success. Mr. Akashi
has made unusually direct attacks on the Khmer Rouge.

"I'm outspoken with everybody," he said. "Yes, perhaps too much. I do believe
that transparency is the basis for mutual confidence."

He bristles when he suspects that a visitor might be challenging his nationalist
credentials. "I'm very international, I'm very comfortable in the international
environment, but I'm still very Japanese," Mr. Akashi said in his accented but
fluent English. "If I want, I can seem very inscrutable."

With Japan now fully involved in the peace mission, Mr. Akashi can turn his
attention to the Khmer Rouge, which almost every week comes up with some new
demand that it insists must be met before it will disarm. It recently demanded
that Cambodia's borders with Vietnam be redrawn.

Mr. Akashi has angered the Khmer Rouge by suggesting, among other warnings, that
he may go forward with internationally supervised elections next spring with or
without Khmer Rouge participation, and that peacekeeping troops might attempt to
enter Khmer Rouge territory with or without their approval. "We are entitled to
get into their territory at a suitable time in the near future," Mr. Akashi
said.

Pushed to Resign

The Khmer Rouge has sent out unsubtle hints that Mr. Akashi should go. In a
broadcast on Khmer Rouge radio last month, the guerrillas did not call for Mr.
Akashi's resignation directly but quoted "compatriots" overseas who believed
that Mr. Akashi lacked "common sense, courage, farsightedness and political
will."

If the Khmer Rouge does not rejoin the peace effort, Mr. Akashi may have to turn
peacekeeping into peace enforcement -- authorizing soldiers to use armed force
against the Khmer Rouge.

Despite Mr. Akashi's harsh words about the Khmer Rouge, a number of his aides
say he has been too slow to back up his threats with action. And they say the
time may soon come when Khmer Rouge rebels should be forced to live up to terms
of the peace accords, much as a United Nations-sponsored military operation
forced the Iraqi Army out of Kuwait.

Last summer, a French general on assignment to the United Nations in Cambodia
was quoted as suggesting that he would accept the deaths of up to 200 soldiers,
including himself, to end the Khmer Rouge threat once and for all.

Mr. Akashi said he was startled by the general's remarks. A military plan that
cost 200 lives would be "a failure, a bankruptcy, of a peacekeeping operation,"
he said.

"It's premature to consider military enforcement," Mr. Akashi said. "That would
change the rules of the game so completely. Some of the countries that have
contributed might try to remove their troops. It is not a decision that should
be made lightly."

Yet diplomats say that it may be the last chance to make the peace plan work, if
only to convince the Khmer Rouge that their brinkmanship cannot go on.

"If the situation continues despite new steps of pressure, then we may come to a
point where that dire possibility has to be envisioned," said Mr. Akashi, who
seems to dread the possibility that he will finish his assignment in Cambodia
more as a military commander than as a peacemaker. "I do not see that for the
foreseeable future. We still have cards to play with. Short of fighting, we can
do lots of things."

LOAD-DATE: October 4, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Yasushi Akashi, center, visiting United Nations peacekeeping
troops in Kompong Thom, Cambodia. (David Portnoy for The New York Times)

TYPE: Interview

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              16 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 4, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Democrats;
Clinton to Endorse Free Trade Accord

BYLINE: By GWEN IFILL,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 28; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 772 words

DATELINE: ST. LOUIS, Oct. 3


Gov. Bill Clinton, who has been walking a tightrope on the issue of free trade
for weeks, hopes to lay the issue to rest this weekend with the help of his
supporters in the organized labor movement and Congress.

He will announce his support for the North American Free Trade Agreement,
campaign officials said, but will also try to mollify opponents of the measure
by pushing for legislative guarantees that call for worker training and
environmental protections.

Advisers to Mr. Clinton said he had long sought a way to declare his support for
the measure but wanted to devise a way to "fill in the gaps" that he felt still
existed in it. The announcement could come as soon as Sunday.

"Ultimately he just wanted to be for it," one campaign official said. "And this
was a way of doing it."

'Not Worried About the Politics'

Mr. Clinton campaigned here today with Representative Richard A. Gephardt, the
Missouri Democrat who is the House majority leader and who has opposed the trade
agreement, saying it would cost American jobs.

The Democratic Presidential nominee today would not confirm his intention to
support the agreement, in part because he had planned to notify major supporters
of his campaign in advance. But he said he has always supported negotiating with
Mexico on expanded trade.

"I'm not worried about the politics of it," he said. "I'm going to say this is
about the economic future of America. I'm going to do what I think is best for
the average Americans and their economic future.

"This is not a decision you can make politically. It's too complicated. You
can't calculate what the fallout's going to be. You just have to do what you
think is right, and that's what I'm going to do here."

Mr. Gephardt has suggested that a border tax or other measures be adopted to
build further protections for American companies that have to compete with
companies in Mexico, where environmental standards are less rigid. It is not
clear what exceptions Mr. Clinton would require in exchange for his support, but
Mr. Gephardt said today that he trusts Mr. Clinton to make the agreement a
workable one.

"We all support a treaty with Mexico," Mr. Gephardt said. "I have supported it
for a long time. The question is: 'Is it going to be done right? Are you going
to take care of the collateral problems?' I have great faith in Bill Clinton to
do that. I have no faith in George Bush doing that right."

The issue of free trade has been a constant undercurrent as Mr. Clinton took his
campaign through the industrial Midwest this weekend. And President Bush has
already begun criticizing him on the trade issue, asserting that the Arkansas
Governor was trying to have it both ways by advocating free trade while assuring
labor groups that he would not do anything to hurt them.

Mr. Clinton said today that Mr. Bush was in no position to accuse him of
switching positions on issues. The Bush campaign has begun broadcasting a
commercial that focuses on the varying explanations Mr. Clinton has offered on
how he avoided the draft during the Vietnam War.

"The American people know he's a big flip-flopper," Mr. Clinton said of Mr.
Bush. "From 'read my lips' to being against the civil rights law to being for
it.

He added, "If I put on a flip-flop ad against him, it would be both more
accurate and far more powerful, because it's about things that affect real
people's lives."

'Campaign for Future'

Today was the first anniversary of Mr. Clinton's announcement that he would seek
the Presidency. At a rally here that attracted thousands of Clinton supporters,
Mr. Clinton reminisced about his year on the campaign trail.

"This is not just a campaign for the Presidency," he said. "It is a campaign for
the future, for the forgotten hard-working middle class of America who deserve a
government that fights for them for a change."

Earlier in the day, Mr. Clinton toured a farmers' market and went out of his way
to pose with a merchant who identified himself as a war veteran who said he was
supporting Mr. Clinton.

Addressing an enthusiastic crowd outdoors afterward, Mr. Clinton suggested that
they express their support by going inside to buy the President's least favorite
vegetable.

"Go in there and buy some broccoli," he said, as the crowd laughed. "I like
broccoli."

Mr. Clinton also belittled the President for saying that the upcoming debates
would help Mr. Clinton because he attended Oxford University in England as a
Rhodes Scholar.

"I never studied debate at Oxford," he said. "Mr. Bush went to Greenwich Country
Day School and to Yale. I think he can take care of himself."

LOAD-DATE: October 4, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Gov. Bill Clinton arriving at National Airport in Washington
after a day of campaigning in St. Louis. (Associated Press)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              17 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 4, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Years Later, Questions Remain About Bush's Role in the Iran-Contra Affair

BYLINE: By DAVID JOHNSTON,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 34; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1962 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 3


George Bush has always contended that as Vice President he was excluded from
decision-making in the Iran-contra affair. But a re-examination of his comments
in light of new revelations shows gaps, inconsistencies and conflicts between
what he has said and the mounting body of evidence in the scandal.

Mr. Bush once said he wanted the truth to come out, but he has never provided a
detailed account of how much he knew and what he did. Instead he has often
dodged questioners on the subject, insisting, as he did in an interview last
week, that he has already "leveled with the American people."

That approach has not put the issue to rest. Opinion surveys over the years,
including polls conducted in the last two weeks, indicate that a majority of
Americans think Mr. Bush is hiding something, even though he has dealt with the
issue in a book, several major speeches and political debates and has been asked
about it in scores of encounters with reporters.

Weakened Issue Revives

Mr. Bush says he knew about the arms sales to Iran, but did not realize they
involved a swap for Americans held hostage in Lebanon. He says he supported the
weapons deal, but privately expressed reservations about it. He says he was one
of President Ronald Reagan's closest advisers, but never knew that two
influential Cabinet members, Secretary of State George P. Shultz and Defense
Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger, opposed the weapon deals. He insists that the
only subject he has refused to discuss is the private advice he gave Mr. Reagan.

Over the years, the issue of Mr. Bush's role in the affair seemed to lose its
potency as Mr. Reagan retired, the cause of the Nicaraguan contras faded and the
American hostages gained freedom. But in recent weeks Mr. Bush's actions and his
truthfulness in the affair have snapped back into focus as a potential
vulnerability in the Presidential campaign.

With Republicans hammering at Gov. Bill Clinton's shifting answers to questions
about his avoiding the draft during the Vietnam War, Democrats pounced back
using the Iran-contra affair to show how Mr. Bush may have a credibility problem
of his own.

Still, Mr. Bush's allies point out that as Vice President he had no operational
responsibility for the affair nor, realistically, could he openly disagree with
Mr. Reagan.

A Changing Image

But the view of Mr. Bush as a loyal understudy who acted primarily as Mr.
Reagan's representative to foreign dignataries' funerals has undergone revision
in recent years. Mr. Bush was at Mr. Reagan's daily security briefings and
attended important meetings on Iran. As a former Director of Central
Intelligence, he understood the risks of covert operations. He was an
experienced observer of the Middle East. And as the head of a counterterrorism
group at the White House, Mr. Bush was well positioned to offer advice on the
Iran-contra affair.

The records compiled by a Presidential review board, a Congressional inquiry and
a five-year criminal investigation suggest that Mr. Bush may have known more
about the affair than he has admitted. But none of the inquiries examined his
role in detail nor did they find him accountable for Mr. Reagan's Iran-contra
policies. And none concluded that Mr. Bush knew about the diversion of profits
from Iran arms sales to the Nicaraguan rebels.

Even if it turns out that Mr. Bush had been deceptive about his knowledge and
actions, there is no indication that he engaged in any wrongdoing.

Israeli Documents Are Shown

The existing body of evidence about Mr. Bush's role continues to grow. On Friday
evening, the ABC News program "Nightline" described two Israeli Government
documents, long known to exist but never before made public, that discuss Mr.
Bush's meeting in July 1986 with Amiram Nir, the Israeli counterrorism expert
who functioned as Oliver L. North's counterpart in the arms deals.

One document is a chronology of the role in the affair played by Israeli
officials, who operated as intermediaries between the United States and Iran.
The second document contains Mr. Nir's commentary on his private half-hour
meeting with Mr. Bush to discuss the arms deals on July 29, 1986, in Jersualem,
a meeting that has been previously known through notes taken by Craig L. Fuller,
Mr. Bush's chief of staff.

Over all, the document as described by ABC seems to confirm Mr. Fuller's account
of a wide-ranging and detailed discussion of the Iran initiative. That alone is
embarrassing for Mr. Bush, because before Mr. Fuller's notes surfaced, Mr. Bush
had told a Presidential review board that his meeting with Mr. Nir had centered
on counterrorism without focusing on the arms deals.

Since the Nir memorandum surfaced, Mr. Bush has insisted the briefing left him
still unclear about the arms-for-hostages nature of the Iran operation. In a
January 1988 interview with CBS News, Mr. Bush said, "I was told what they were
doing, and not what we were doing, and that's a big difference."

A review of Mr. Bush's statements about the affair in light of the public record
raise questions about his account of several significant elements. The following
are some of the main contradictions:


Mr. Bush said he wanted the truth but never provided a complete account of his
own actions, and as President he has allowed subordinates to hinder the efforts
of prosecutors trying to get to the bottom of the affair.


In December 1986, when Vice President Bush was a prospective Presidential
candidate, he delivered a speech about the scandal one week after the news
conference in which Attorney General Edwin Meese 3d disclosed the diversion of
arms-sale profits to the contras.

"Clearly, mistakes were made," Mr Bush said. "Let the chips fall where they may.
We want the truth. The President wants it. I want it. And the American people
have a right to it."

But Mr. Bush never offered a full public account of his thoughts, actions and
knowledge. In his 1987 book "Looking Forward," he wrote his longest commentary
on the affair but avoided specifics and said he felt he was excluded from
crucial meetings.

Later, he answered questions from a Presidential review board and from
prosecutors in the criminal inquiry into the affair. But his responses have
never been made public. "I sensed we were sending arms," Mr. Bush said in Iowa
in early 1988. "And I sensed that we were trying to get hostages out, but not
arms for hostages."

After Mr. Bush's election, his Administration adopted policies that people
closely following the investigation said were more restrictive than the rules
applied during the Reagan years to limit release of classified information in
the criminal investigation of the affair.

The measure of the Bush Administration's willingness to intrude in the criminal
investigation was illustrated in the case of Joseph F. Fernandez, a former
Central Intelligence Agency station chief in Costa Rica. In April 1989,
prosecutors accused Mr. Fernandez of lying to investigators about his
involvement in Mr. North's secret arms pipeline to the contras.

Later, Attorney General Dick Thornburgh, acting on the recommendation of William
H. Webster, then Director of Central Intelligence, refused to allow the
disclosure of several facts about C.I.A. operations in Central America. Mr.
Thornburgh said the disclosure would damage national security, even though
Lawrence E. Walsh, the special prosecutor in the Iran-contra case, said the
information had become widely known through news reports.

In a letter in October 1989, Mr. Walsh sought a meeting with Mr. Bush in an
effort to persuade the President to release the information. But C. Boyden Gray,
the President's legal counsel, wrote to the prosecutor, however, that such a
meeting "would not be appropriate."


Mr. Bush says he felt excluded from crucial meetings and had only a hazy grasp
of the Iran arms sales as an arms-for-hostages exchange, but records show he
attended meetings in which the affair was discussed.


Memorandums and other documents from the period make it clear that Mr. Bush
often attended Mr. Reagan's daily national security briefings and other
high-level meetings where Iran-contra policies were discussed. When the Vice
President missed an important session, John M. Poindexter, the national security
adviser, filled him in.

Internal White House memorandums show that Mr. Bush was at a White House meeting
on Jan. 6, 1986, when Mr. Poindexter advised the President of a plan to sell
4,000 TOW anti-tank missiles to Iran. Mr. Bush also attended a meeting 11 days
later when Mr. Reagan signed a legal order authorizing the transfer of weapons
to Iran in exchange for hostages.

Last week, Howard R. Teicher, a former national security aide in the Reagan
White House, said he told Mr. Bush in three briefings in 1986 that arms were
traded for hostages. Mr. Teicher said Mr. Bush was actively engaged in these
discussions.

White House officials would not discuss Mr. Teicher's assertions.


Mr. Bush has said he expressed reservations about the affair, but the record
shows that he enthusiastically supported the Iran arms sales and there is no
evidence of his misgivings.


In the weeks immediately after Attorney General Meese's disclosure of arms-sale
money having been diverted to the contras, Mr. Bush adopted a confessional tone,
saying he had supported the Iran initiative.

But within weeks he carefully distanced himself from the policy. His support for
it, he said, had not prevented him from voicing "reservations" about some
aspects of it.

No document has ever been made public noting Mr. Bush's misgivings.

On Feb. 1, 1986, after Mr. North, a National Security Council aide, agreed to
sell Iran 4,000 missiles as authorized by Mr. Reagan a month earlier, Mr.
Poindexter wrote a computer memorandum in which he described the positions of
major Administration officials toward the arms sales.

Mr. Poindexter said that Secretary of State Shultz and Defense Secretary
Weinberger opposed the deals and that he, Mr. Meese, William J. Casey, the
Director of Central Intelligence, and Donald T. Regan, the chief of staff, were
"fully on board this risky operation."

"But most importantly," the memorandum said. "President and VP are solid in
taking the position that we have to try."


Mr. Bush said he would have taken a more aggressive role in trying to stop the
initiative, but did not because he was unaware of the opposition of Mr. Shultz
and Mr. Weinberger.


In his book, Mr. Bush wrote, "As it turned out, George Shultz and Cap Weinberger
had serious doubts, too. If I'd known that and asked the President to call a
meeting of the N.S.C. (National Security Council), he might have seen the
project in a different light, as a gamble doomed to fail."

On Jan. 7, 1986, Mr. Bush attended a White House meeting in which Mr. Shultz and
Mr. Weinberger vigorously opposed the arms deals. A year later, Mr. Shultz told
the Presidential review board that after the meeting he knew that Mr. Reagan,
Mr. Bush and other senior advisers "all had one opinion and I had a different
one, and Cap shared it."

Last month, prosecutors in the perjury case against Mr. Weinberger disclosed
that they had found another striking hint that Mr. Bush knew of the Shultz and
Weinberger objections.

The prosecutors quoted notes of a telephone conversation in August 1987 between
Mr. Shultz and Mr. Weinberger. The notes, taken by a Shultz aide, indicate that
Mr. Weinberger was angry over Mr. Bush's assertion, in a Washington Post
interview, that he was ignorant of their opposition.

The notes quoted Mr. Weinberger as saying that Mr. Bush's comments were
"terrible." Then, the notes said, the two men discussed their recollection that
Mr. Bush had actually favored the arms sales.

LOAD-DATE: October 4, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Former Secretary of State George P. Shultz said he and Caspar W.
Weinberger disagreed with Ronald Reagan and George Bush over selling arms to
Iran. (The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              18 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 4, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Republicans;
Bush, in Florida, Steps Up Personal Attack on Clinton

BYLINE: By ANDREW ROSENTHAL,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 26; Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 759 words

DATELINE: FORT LAUDERDALE, Fla., Oct. 3


President Bush delivered his harshest personal attack yet on Gov. Bill Clinton
today, reminding voters of Mr. Clinton's experimentation with marijuana 20 years
ago, accusing him of plotting huge cuts in Medicare and calling him a weak-kneed
waffler.

"This guy couldn't remember in detail that he didn't inhale 20 years ago, and he
can't remember what came out of his mouth 20 minutes ago," Mr. Bush said,
describing a condition he called "Clintonesia" -- "weak knees, sweaty palms and
an incredible desire to say anything on all sides of any issue, depending on who
you're trying to please."

Mr. Bush, whose comments reflected his advisers' conviction that attacking the
Democratic nominee is the only avenue left to them, also abandoned the
Republicans' carefully crafted position that the core of the draft issue is not
whether Mr. Clinton served, but whether he has told the truth about it.

"By the way," Mr. Bush shouted at an airport rally here, "I do believe that
serving in uniform is a good criterion for being Commander in Chief of the armed
forces."

Promises to the Elderly

Struggling to save 33 electoral votes that are usually assumed to be in the
Republicans' safe column, Mr. Bush started the day by doing what all politicians
do when they get into trouble in Florida: He went to a retirement home and said
that he would protect Social Security and Medicare, and that the other guy would
not.

In a speech to supporters at On Top of the World in Clearwater, built 24 years
ago as the first retirement condominium community on Florida's Gulf Coast, Mr.
Bush said Mr. Clinton was trying to scare the elderly away from the Republican
ticket by accusing Mr. Bush of planning to cut their retirement and medical
benefits.

"Governor Clinton's a very ambitious politician," Mr. Bush told the audience,
which had awaited his morning appearance while listening to a four-piece combo
play vintage favorites. "That's fine. But in his first try on the national
scene, he's using the oldest trick in the book: trying to scare America's
seniors."

Mr. Bush then tried to draw the elderly away from the Democratic ticket by
accusing Mr. Clinton of planning to cut their retirement and medical benefits.

He said Mr. Clinton would slash Medicare and Social Security by $218 billion --
a suggestion that Bush campaign officials later had to acknowledge Mr. Clinton
has not made -- and he told his listeners that the Democrat would tax their
grandchildren out of a college education.

He used his time in Florida, where polls show he is running even with Mr.
Clinton, to hand out his latest measure of Federal largess, announcing that the
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration would base its fleet of planes
at MacDill Air Force Base, which has been threatened with closing.

Clinton Accused of Disloyalty

Flying to Florida on Friday night after collecting the endorsement of the Boston
Patrolmen's Association, a weary-looking Mr. Bush made a return visit to
Homestead to check on repairs to damage caused by Hurricane Andrew. He produced
Gerald McRaney, of the television program "Major Dad," to please his crowds. He
mentioned Barbara Bush, who is more popular than Mr. Bush himself, at every
turn.

And he did not pull any punches in his assault on the Democratic nominee,
sending Col. Bud Day, a Vietnam veteran who won the Medal of Honor, and Mr.
McRaney, whose only military experience was the Reserve Officer Training Corps
in college during the Vietnam years, onto the stage before him to accuse Mr.
Clinton of having been disloyal to his country by avoiding the Vietnam draft.

The President talked about everything but Ross Perot, the source of much of the
campaign's concern about Florida's electoral votes. Bush aides said Mr. Perot's
re-entry into the Presidential race hampers their efforts to hold on to a state
that is indispensable now that Mr. Bush has largely conceded California.

But the President still seemed determined to focus on Mr. Clinton, hoping Mr.
Perot will erode the Democrat's lead nationally.

At Homestead, Mr. Bush toured a tent city set up by Federal disaster relief
workers and, using his son, Jeb, as a translator, spoke with the family of Luis
Andarcio and Maria Caballero-Andarcio.

At one point, their 13-year-old daughter, Jackie, reached up to put a white
rosary around Mr. Bush's neck. "Here's the only present I got for you," she
said. Mr. Bush stooped slightly. "Oh, that's sweet," he said. And he handed the
girl a brass key chain with the Presidential seal in return.

LOAD-DATE: October 4, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: President Bush delivered a personal attack on Gov. Bill Clinton
during a visit yesterday to Homestead, Fla., to meet with hurricane victims.
(Andrea Mohin/The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              19 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 4, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Vincent Hallinan Is Dead at 95; An Innovative Lawyer With Flair

BYLINE: By BRUCE LAMBERT

SECTION: Section 1; Page 48; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 714 words


Vincent W. Hallinan, a lawyer who invented a new defense trial strategy,
reformed San Francisco's corrupt jury system, defended the union leader Harry
Bridges and ran for President from jail, died on Friday at his home in San
Francisco. He was 95 years old.

The cause of death was not specified. His family said he had been in failing
health.

Mr. Hallinan, whose 70-year career continued until this year, was renowned in
legal circles for meticulous preparation, innovative strategy and a flair in
presentation. He often represented unpopular causes and notorious criminal
defendants. He once sued the Roman Catholic Church for fraud, demanding that it
prove the existence of heaven and hell.

Sometimes he displayed such superior medical knowledge that doctors testifying
as expert witnesses looked like fools. He concluded withering cross-examinations
by saying: "That's all. You can crawl down off the witness stand now." He
referred to one prosecutor as the greatest incompetent "since Caligula made a
consul of his horse."

Reputation as Fighter

When such legal tactics did not succeed in the courtroom, he literally resorted
to sparring with opposing lawyers in the adjacent corridors. By his count he had
23 such fights.

Judges frequently ruled him out of bounds. When one asked if Mr. Hallinan meant
to show contempt for the court, he said, "No, Your Honor, I'm trying to conceal
it."

Mr. Hallinan's contribution to trial strategy was to transform the traditionally
short and subdued opening statement to the jury into a passionate and detailed
outline of his entire defense. Rather than wait until the summation, after the
prosecution's damage was done, he preferred the pre-emptive strike.

He also had a lasting effect with his one-man crusade against a corrupt local
court system that led to juries filled with employees of insurance companies and
others unsympathetic to negligence suits. Even when he overcame the odds and won
cases, they were appealed to a trio of judges who invariably overturned the
awards.

Although the legal establishment at first denied his accusations and shunned him
as an outcast, he persisted, and as a result, the system eventually changed.

Mr. Hallinan's most celebrated case was the defense of Mr. Bridges, the leader
of a longshoremen's union, in a 1950 trial on charges that he had lied in
denying being a Communist. He was convicted, but that was overturned by the
United States Supreme Court.

Jailed for Contempt

Mr. Hallinan did not fare as well. The judge sentenced him to six months in jail
for contempt. While he was jailed in 1952, the Progressive Party nominated him
for President, and he received 140,000 votes.

But soon he was indicted for income tax evasion. Although a juror said the the
prosecution was in retaliation for the Bridges defense, Mr. Hallinan was
convicted and jailed for 18 months. In prison he was true to form, becoming
chairman of the inmates' council and forcing integration of the dining hall.

In the tumultuous 1960's, Mr. Hallinan boasted that his entire family had been
jailed for social protests. He opposed not only the Vietnam War but also the
Korean War.

Mr. Hallinan was born in San Francisco to a large, poor family. After their
house was destroyed in the great earthquake of 1906, the family lived for a time
without gas, electricity or water.

While studying at Ignatius College, he worked in a law office and passed the bar
examination in 1919, two years before graduating from law school. He interrupted
his education to serve in the Navy at the end of World War I.

Mr. Hallinan was an amateur boxer before his courthouse bouts and continued to
box into his 60's. He was also football captain as a student and a
semi-professional player. He was noted in "Ripley's Believe It or Not!" for
playing rugby with the San Francisco Bats at the age of 73.

His law practice and real estate investments made him a multi-millionaire.

He was married for 60 years to the former Vivian Moore, who wrote about the
family in a book, "My Wild Irish Rogues" (Doubleday, 1952). His other survivors
include five sons, Terence, an elected supervisor of San Francisco, Patrick of
Kentfield, Calif., and Matthew, Conn and Daniel, all of Berkeley, Calif., and 17
grandchildren.

NAME: Vincent W. Hallinan

LOAD-DATE: October 4, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Vincent W. Hallinan (Associated Press, 1975)

TYPE: Biography; Obituary (Obit)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              20 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 4, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: James B. Stockdale;
Scholar Follows Perot Into Heat of Campaign

BYLINE: By JANE GROSS,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 24; Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 913 words

DATELINE: STANFORD, Calif., Oct. 2


In the commons at the Hoover Institution here, where the scholars gather each
afternoon for coffee and camaraderie, there is widespread agreement that their
colleague, James B. Stockdale, is a man of valor and decency who could be
unfairly demeaned by the political process that he asked no part of.

Until Ross Perot tapped him as a Vice-Presidential running mate, Mr. Stockdale,
a retired Navy combat pilot and the nation's highest-ranking prisoner of war in
Vietnam, was studying Greek Stoic philosophy at this think tank on the Stanford
University campus and sharing with the other research fellows the lessons of
seven and a half years in captivity.

Now, as favor to the man who had championed the cause of prisoners of war and
aided his wife in her bid for his release, Mr. Stockdale, 68 years old and
hobbled by leg injuries inflicted in captivity, is about to become a politician
and the other scholars here are worried.

Would he debate, they wondered? Would he hit the campaign trail? Would he be
questioned about policy matters, which until this week meant nothing to him,
like health care or welfare reform? And would he be judged harshly for his
replies?

'A Babe in the Woods'

Mr. Stockdale, for his part, seemed stunned, although not daunted, by the
uncharted ground ahead. "Campaign? What do you mean by campaign?" he asked,
dubiously, at the end of a long conversation dominated by his eloquent, and
often witty, account of captivity. "I don't see why I have to make a fool of
myself."

John H. Bunzel, a senior research fellow who specializes in American politics at
the conservative-oriented institution, was the first of many colleagues at Mr.
Stockdale's office door today offering help preparing for the televised
confrontation with the two other Vice-Presidential contenders.

Like all of his colleagues, not men inclined toward easy or sentimental praise,
Mr. Bunzel spoke glowingly of Mr. Stockdale, praising his "extraordinary moral
and physical courage." But he added: "How do you take a man like this and put
him in the middle of a debate? He's a babe in the woods."

Mr. Bunzel said he had never talked to Mr. Stockdale about "the environment, the
homeless, the gender gap" or any such policy matters. "We talk ideas, we talk
books," Mr. Bunzel said. "We talk about concepts like obligation and virtue, the
relationship of man to providence and man to the state."

Martin Anderson, another senior fellow and a former adviser to President Ronald
Reagan, noted that Mr. Stockdale would avoid most of the minefields of politics
because Mr. Perot showed no inclination to run a conventional campaign. "I would
be very surprised if they got a fleet of 727's and tried to hit a half-dozen
states a day," Mr. Anderson said.

Rather Be Reading Philosophy

Stacked in Mr. Stockdale's office were books by all three Presidential
candidates. He had read Mr. Perot's 117-page book, "United We Stand" (Hyperion
Press, 1992), 10 times, Mr. Stockdale said, and he was prepared to study the
others, although disinclined. "I'm not ridiculing it; I'll get to it," he said.
"But I doubt very much that's the real challenge of being Vice President."

Mr. Stockdale looked longingly toward another stack of books, the ear-marked
volumes of Epictetus, the Greek Stoic philosopher, whom he discovered as a
student at Stanford in the early 1960's, turned to for intellectual solace while
a prisoner and is now the subject of a book being written by Mr. Stockdale.

Would he rather be reading those, the retired vice rear admiral was asked?
"You've got my number," he replied.

Mr. Stockdale's lack of interest in the gears of government was apparent in
those early days as a Stanford student. The Navy was paying his way, in the
expectation that he would one day hold a policy position at the Pentagon, and he
was supposed to be studying international relations. But he found it dull, he
said.

Thoughts on Captivity

"I couldn't get excited about how people organized themselves," he said. And he
kept asking questions that his professors mocked as "philosophical." So he
decided to cross the campus and audit classes in the philosophy department,
where he became a protege of the late Philip Rhinelander, a professor emeritus
of philosophy.

Despite the peculiarities of his resume, Mr. Stockdale displays a certainty,
forged during four years of solitary confinement and two years in leg irons,
that he would be up to the task of the Vice Presidency.

He recalls with great vividness the thoughts that went through his mind as he
parachuted toward enemy territory after his A-4 jet was shot down in 1965: As
wing commander, he would be the highest-ranking prisoner in North Vietnam, and
thus responsible for the survival and comportment of all the others.

"I knew I was at the edge of the most important task of my life," Mr. Stockdale
said, massaging the leg that juts rigid before him, broken by a gang of local
roughnecks who set upon him when the parachute landed. "I knew my whole life
depended on not letting myself down."

In prison, Mr. Stockdale said, he assumed his place at the top of the chain of
command. "I ran a civilization, which had its own rules, its own laws," he said.
"I've been in spots where I've been told people would follow me into hell, not
that I'd take them there. I didn't ask to get into prison, I didn't plan on it,
but I became good at it. I found my niche. My niche is leadership in times of
trouble."

NAME: James B. Stockdale

LOAD-DATE: October 4, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Until Ross Perot named him as his Vice-Presidential running
mate, James B. Stockdale was studying Greek Stoic philosophy at the Hoover
Institution at Stanford University. He and his wife, Sybil, listened to Mr.
Perot talk with reporters on Thursday in Dallas. (Edward Keating/The New York
Times)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              21 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 4, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

On Sunday;
Black Officer: Typical of City, Not of Force

BYLINE: By MICHAEL WINERIP

SECTION: Section 1; Page 37; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 837 words


Baron Marquis took the No. 2 subway to Church Street in East Flatbush, Brooklyn,
then strolled home on Friday. The sidewalks were full of teachers, secretaries,
laborers returning from work. Every few stoops, someone waved. He's well known
in this black neighborhood, has owned a limestone on the street 20 years. He
said hi to his Aunt Bessie, went up to change his suit and put away his gun.

Detective Marquis is a typical New Yorker, black in a city that is 56 percent
minority, (25 percent black; 24 percent Hispanic; 7 percent Asian). He likes his
city, was born in Bedford-Stuyvesant, educated in Harlem, dates a woman from the
Upper West Side and voted for Mayor David N. Dinkins. When he's sick, he goes to
Kings County Hospital Center. "There are cops who say, 'If I'm shot, don't take
me to Kings County.' I don't feel that way." New York's his life. "There's a
chemistry in this city. I've been in the suburbs. The silence gets disturbing."

Detective Marquis is not a typical New York police officer. He is black on a
force that's 74 percent white. He lives in the most populous borough, but only
14 percent of the force does; 42 percent live out in suburbs, another 12 percent
on mainly white, suburban Staten Island. He's been a human relations
instructors. "White cops are often alien to the city," he says. "There's often a
contempt for the city and its people."

Detective Marquis, 40 years old, works in plainclothes. He is a twice-decorated,
10-year police veteran (and a Vietnam vet). Yet when he walks into a station
house, he feels anxiety. "As a black man, I think of myself as a symbolic
assailant. There's a harshness you feel." The detective wears a suit, yet feels
that white officers see a second-class citizen. "There's been a saying among
black officers -- even with the shield, you're just another nigger."

When the Patrolmen's Benevolent Association announced a rally against the Mayor
at City Hall, Detective Marquis didn't consider attending. "Of course not."
Detective Marquis is not a blind supporter of the Mayor. He feels Mr. Dinkins
should have shown more compassion to the officer who killed a man in Washington
Heights last summer, setting off several nights of violence. He thinks a
civilian review board should include police representatives. But he says, "The
P.B.A. does not speak for the minority population." There are 3,000 black city
cops. Not one is on the P.B.A. executive board. "They don't reach out," he says.
On the other hand, the P.B.A. would do almost anything for one of its own,
including endorsing Mario Biaggi -- a former policeman and ex-convict -- for
Congress. "We're not even supposed to associate with convicted felons,"
Detective Marquis says.

In a few hours at the City Hall rally 10,000 white officers showed a stunned
city how out of step with the New York of 1992 they are. Phil Caruso, union
president, told the protesters: "Forces of evil are all around. They are trying
to surround us. They are trying to defeat us." Mr. Caruso's New York sounds like
Batman's Gotham City. Detective Marquis read the reports of police officers
making racial slurs and carrying "Dump the Washroom Attendant" signs. The
detective's mother was a maid. She called him "Baron" so he'd have a name people
respected. He is one of nine kids and everything he has, he got by himself. The
detective was "outraged" and "embarrassed" by the rally, but not surprised.
Three months earlier he and two others in the department's human relations unit
met with City Hall officials about expanding that training program. Bias is
pervasive, he says, but rarely so blatant. In 10 years he's never heard a white
officer say the "N-word." But he hears blacks referred to as "those people" all
the time. Platitudes now taught in the two-day sensitivity program have little
impact, he says.  City Hall did not respond.

Detective Marquis continues to work from within to try to make the force
representative of the city. He is now a recruiter and has spent recent Sundays
at Harlem churches. In the military, recruiting is prestigious duty. On the
police force it is not. He believes if police captains' evaluations were based
in part on how well they recruit minorities, they'd do better. During the last
recruitment drive in 1990, each precinct was given 2,000 applications. The
100th, in Far Rockaway, a heavily minority area, did not return one minority
application, he says.

Often it's what good cops don't do that makes them good. One of Detective
Marquis's commendations was for arresting a murderer-drug dealer. He chased the
man down a hallway, the guy ducked behind a curtain, Detective Marquis almost
fired into the curtain, but didn't. He wrestled the murderer down, grabbed the
man's gun, then noticed a child behind the curtain too. "If I fired, I could've
killed the kid. It haunts me." Though scared, he believes he didn't shoot
because of maturity (he was 32); his war experience; luck, and, as a black man
in a black tenement, he was a little less alien.

LOAD-DATE: October 4, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              22 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 4, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

At Least: Slow the Slaughter

SECTION: Section 4; Page 16; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 565 words


Late and grudging, the Bush Administration now declares it will join in an
effort to stop Serbian warplanes from bombing unarmed Muslims in Bosnia. An
effective ban on such flights from Serbia may clear the air space. It will not
clear America's conscience.

Vicious cluster bombs are not the only reason that Muslims are dying by the
thousands. Serb terrorists are still driving Muslims from their homes, now from
the suburbs of Sarajevo. Serbian artillery still pounds hospitals, homes,
schools -- all in the despicable name of "ethnic cleansing." And as winter
nears, hundreds of thousands of Bosnians face death by siege, by starvation, by
winter winds. To repeat, without exaggeration, that's hundreds of thousands.

The war in Bosnia is not a fair fight and it is not war. It is slaughter. Yet
American officials, despairing of a way to end the war, continue to dither. They
remain oddly unwilling to acknowledge that even if collective military
intervention cannot readily compel a cease-fire, it can at least slow the
slaughter.

To knock out the Serbs' artillery and tanks can slow the slaughter. To break up
the hidden concentration camps can slow the slaughter. To create safe havens for
people dragged shoeless from their homes can slow the slaughter. And at the very
least, Washington can persuade the United Nations to lift its embargo on Bosnia,
permitting Bosnians to arm and defend themselves.

Leaders in Belgrade bear most of the responsibility for the butchery in Bosnia.
They promised to stop, and then broke their pledge. The argument now concerns
how to bring them to justice. French, British and Canadian troops now bolster
the U.N. force in Bosnia. But the U.S. military continues to oppose limited
intervention for limited goals. Gen. Colin Powell, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs
of Staff, made that clear in an interview with The New York Times last week: "As
soon as they tell me it is limited, it means they do not care whether you
achieve a result or not."

That traditional military view of all-or-nothing warfare antedates Vietnam and
was reinforced in Lebanon, where, in General Powell's words, "a bunch of Marines
were put in as a symbol" without knowing what their mission was. "Two hundred
and forty-one of them died as a result." But missions are seldom as well defined
as generals would like. Why, for instance, is a no-fly zone in Iraq any clearer
than a no-fly zone in Bosnia?

The Air Force remains as reluctant to fly to help beleaguered Bosnia as it was
to run the Berlin airlift. The Army does not like such static operations as
protecting safe havens for refugees, nor commando raids, like those needed to
close down concentration camps. The Navy has better things to do than blockade.

In short, what Bosnia holds out to the military is the prospect of dangerous,
undesirable duty. But when Americans spend more than $280 billion a year for
defense, surely they ought to be getting more for their money than no-can-do. It
is the prerogative of civilian leaders confronting this historic nightmare to
ask the the military for a range of options more sophisticated than off or on,
stay out completely or go in all the way to total victory.

With that in hand, President Bush could tell General Powell what President
Lincoln once told General McClellan: "If you don't want to use the Army, I
should like to borrow it for a while."



LOAD-DATE: October 4, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              23 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 4, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Public & Private;
I Am Oz

BYLINE: By ANNA QUINDLEN

SECTION: Section 4; Page 17; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 739 words


I found it intriguing that Ross Perot described women reporters who prepare
rigorously for interviews and ask difficult questions -- what we in the trade
call "doing our jobs" -- as "trying to prove their manhood."

I'm intrigued because his manhood is precisely what Mr. Perot has refused to
reveal to the American people.

I don't mean the sort of manhood that some might find reflected in his
collection of military memorabilia or his hobby of sicking investigators on
folks who have annoyed him.

Nor am I talking about what we saw last week: a man who left the Presidential
race because, he said, he had no wish to be disruptive, who found himself weary
of life outside the spotlight and so re-entered the fray. A man who surely knows
that the chance of victory is nil and the opportunity to disrupt still
considerable.

In fact, maybe "manhood" is not what I'm looking for at all.

Personhood comes closer. Humanity. Who you are.

Mr. Perot likes to say those issues have no place in this race. "We're talking
about performance here and not personality," he said when he announced for
President, as though the two were mutually exclusive.  He's helped in this by a
country tired of the cult of personality, the photo op, the Christmas-card
portrait.

Mr. Perot took widespread disillusionment with bloated government and inflated
image and turned it into an either/or scenario. Either you can be the C.E.O. of
the U.S.A. or you can be an official portrait. Not both.

That's just wrong. In certain European nations they have split the roles; they
have a prime minister to do the country's business and a king or queen to be the
figurehead on the Ship of State. But in America one person must attempt to do
both. Personality is a key to character, and character the bedrock of
leadership.

Like the displaced carny working the whiz-bangs and gizmos of Oz the Great and
Powerful, who bleats from his hiding place "Pay no attention to the man behind
that curtain!" Mr. Perot wants to keep who he is separate from his political
ambitions. It is obvious why this is so. When the curtain to the Perot character
is pulled aside, you find a man who stands in front of a room full of
African-Americans and calls them "you people."

You find a man who hired legal pit bull Roy Cohn to sandbag the Vietnam Memorial
project because he hated the design. You find a man whose company dismissed an
employee for wearing a beard in violation of a corporate ban on facial hair. You
find a man who has a penchant for private investigators and vendettas, who is
alleged to have undertaken a disinformation campaign against his own daughter's
boyfriend.

You find a man who suggests that women reporters who do their jobs the way they
are meant to be done are somehow suspect. Talking with Barbara Walters on Friday
night, Mr. Perot said that the manhood crack had been distorted. "It has nothing
to do with the problems facing the country," he added.

And he's right. It has nothing to do with the deficit or jobs or the national
debt; it's a blip on the screen compared with those things. All it shows is a
little bit about how Ross Perot deals with being challenged, and a little bit
about how he stereotypes women.  Those little bits add up. By the end of an
election, we've amassed enough of them, like people putting together a jigsaw
puzzle, to tell whether we can respect a candidate or not.

Our deep disenchantment is the result not only of the economy, the bureaucracy
or the insularity of the Beltway boys. Although we say we've given up on heroes,
I bet there are more than a few of us who still yearn for the kind of President
we can envision on the front of a nickel or the side of a mountain. Giants. Or,
at the very least, good guys.

Mr. Perot is neither, with that grim grin, its friendliness belied by the hard
points of his eyes. His candidacy will be rejected because he has become just
what he decried, a politician who perpetrated a con job on the people for the
sake of his own high opinion of himself -- and then tried to do it again.

But his failure will represent something bigger than that as well, a tacit
understanding that while personality cannot rule the race for the White House,
it should play some part. Mr. Perot wants to keep personality out of the
campaign for his own sake, not for ours. In the shadow of his big talk and big
bankroll, his character, when revealed, seems small.

LOAD-DATE: October 4, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              24 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 4, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

The 1992 CAMPAIGN -- Issues: Foreign Policy - Looking Abroad: Clinton
and Foreign Policy/A special report.;
Clinton's Foreign-Policy Agenda Reaches Across Broad Spectrum

BYLINE: By THOMAS L. FRIEDMAN,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1; Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 3100 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 3


Under the pressure of a Presidential campaign, Gov. Bill Clinton has been trying
to outline his own unique foreign policy, while at the same time fending off
criticism from the Bush White House that he is a closet dove masquerading as a
hawk and that his experience in world affairs is limited to breakfast at the
International House of Pancakes.

Although foreign policy has not been a big issue in this first campaign after
the cold war, Mr. Clinton has laid out his internationalist vision in four
speeches over the last year, knowing that he cannot pass the Commander in Chief
test without appearing credible in this area.

The Clinton foreign policy is hard to summarize in a single phrase, but it is a
blend of idealism and pragmatism, internationalism and protectionism, use of
force and reliance on multinational institutions. Mr. Clinton's critics say it
is all of these things, because he wants to be all things to all men and has not
really made up his mind. He and his aides contend that after the cold war alot
of the old divisions in foreign policy, which particularly plagued the
Democratic Party, can be bridged and that this is what "Clintonism" is all
about.

Indeed, Mr. Clinton's team of foreign policy advisers is an ideological peacock
made up of every wing of the Democratic Party. It is dominated by old hands from
the faction of the Carter Administration most averse to using force abroad, but
there is also a heavy representation of members of Congress like Senator Sam
Nunn of Georgia and Representative Les Aspin of Wisconsin who are associated
with the more conservative wing of the party, as well as neo-conservative Reagan
Democrats and a new generation of foreign-policy thinkers who might be called
"Clintonites."

In fact, Mr. Clinton has embraced so many advisers that he relies on no single
elder statesman and no single adviser stands out as first among equals. The
question of whom he might appoint as Secretary of State or national security
adviser is a mystery, even to his closest aides. Mr. Clinton rebuffed repeated
requests to be interviewed for this article.

At the core of Mr. Clinton's thinking is the contention that with the cold war
over, American foreign policy needs a whole new focus. For him, that begins with
revitalizing the American economy. Without doing that, he argues, the next
President will have no chips with which to play abroad and will have no mandate
from the American people for engagement abroad, because the public will be
obsessed with domestic affairs.

"In this new era our first foreign priority and our domestic priority are one
and the same: reviving our economy," he said in a recent speech in Los Angeles.
"This has been the Administration's most glaring foreign policy failure. An
anemic, debt-laden economy undermines our diplomacy, makes it harder for us to
secure favorable trade agreements and compromises our ability to finance
essential military actions.

"I will elevate economics in foreign policy, create an Economic Security
Council, similar to the National Security Council, and change the State
Department's culture so that economics is no longer a poor cousin to old-school
diplomacy."

Though he emphasizes the importance of economics in his foreign policy, Mr.
Clinton up to now has avoided coming out either for or against the North
American Free Trade Agreement with Canada and Mexico, for fear of alienating
union voters. Aides say he has finally decided to support the trade accord, but
wants to couple any endorsement with a proposal for legislation that will
retrain American workers who lose jobs.

Some Call It Waffling

"Waffling is too kind to describe his position" on the agreement, said Peter
Rodman, a former member of the Bush National Security Council.

Mr. Clinton has argued that he will also diverge from the Bush Administration in
two other fundamental areas. One is the question of values, where he says he
would assign a much greater weight than Mr. Bush to promoting democracy abroad,
rather than settling for stability based on authoritarian governments that
repress human rights. In that vein, for instance, he has said he would support
the use of selective trade sanctions against China to get that country to ease
its repression of human rights.

As Mr. Clinton put it in a speech in Milwaukee this week, "I believe our nation
has a higher purpose than to coddle dictators and stand aside from the global
movement toward democracy." Mr. Bush's aides counter that the President helped
to foster the rise of democratic governments from Nicaragua to Poland, and that
extrapolating from his less-than-successful China case is wildly unfair.

Mr. Clinton also declared, long before the Bush Administration was ready to
consider military action, that the United States should be prepared to join with
a multinational coalition to "shoot its way into" the Sarajevo airport to make
it safe for a relief airlift if necessary. He said the United States should
"take the lead in seeking U.N. Security Council authorization for air strikes
against those who are attacking the relief effort." Bigger Saving on Arms

The second area where he says he would differ from the Bush Administration is
military strategy. Mr. Clinton has proposed a five-year plan that would
reorganize American forces in a way that he contends would save $60 billion more
than the Bush plan would through 1997. He would shift money away from the
full-scale, space-based "Star Wars" program and focus on a more limited,
ground-based anti-missile plan. And he would reduce the forces on the old Soviet
front in Europe to 100,000 troops from 150,000, emphasizing instead smaller,
more mobile forces to meet regional threats elsewhere.

But would Mr. Clinton, once in office, act on these stated views?

"It is impossible to predict," said Michael R. Beschloss, a historian of
American foreign policy. "With any political leader, and especially a President,
what they do in foreign policy is made up of two things: one is past experience
and general philosophy, and the other is the pressure of events. In the case of
Clinton, the past experience is severely limited. As far as the press of events,
with the cold war now over, our ability to predict the foreign policy challenges
of the next President are as unpredictable as at any time in 50 years."

As a man who has spent his entire career in state government in Arkansas, Mr.
Clinton has no foreign policy record to run on or be judged against. Therefore,
critics say, he has had the luxury of defining himself purely through a series
of speeches. None of his ideas have had to meet the test of the real world.

For instance, while Mr. Clinton has supported the use of force to bring aid to
Bosnia under United Nations supervision, what would he do if the United Nations
or the allies were not ready to cooperate? Would he go it alone? What if
American troops got shot at or bogged down in Sarajevo?

Mr. Clinton now says he supported the use of force against Iraq in the Persian
Gulf war. But in the weeks before Congress was scheduled to vote on a use of
force resolution in January 1991, a group of hawkish Democrats approached Mr.
Clinton about signing a full-page ad that would run in various newspapers around
the country urging Congress to back the President. Mr. Clinton told them that he
would consider it and get back to them. He never did.

Later, after the vote, Mr. Clinton said: "I guess I would have voted with the
majority if it was a close vote. But I agree with the arguments the minority
made." The statement does not seem to indicate with any certainty how he would
have acted in the Oval Office.

"Some of the things that he is saying are the right things, but let's look at
the record," Mr. Rodman said. "The gulf war was the biggest national security
issue in a decade and he totally muffed it. What it tells you is that there is a
lot of the standard liberal weakness underneath all the posturing about being in
the center of his party."

His Instincts


 Background Clues To Future Policies

In some ways, the better question to ask is not what is in Mr. Clinton's
speeches, but what sort of long-held instincts would he bring to the foreign
policy task if elected?

By his own admission, Mr. Clinton is not a man who has thought as long and hard
about the nation's imperial role, as he had about the challenges of welfare or
health care reform. And his insecurity shows up in his speeches by the way he
repeatedly invokes the names of others to make a point, as if his own word is
not good enough. His speeches are laced with: "As Admiral William Crowe says" or
"As Senator Sam Nunn says" or " As Senator Al Gore says."

Mr. Clinton's personal attitudes on foreign policy seem to be a combination of
instinctive and acquired tastes. If World War II was the defining moment in the
formation of George Bush's instincts on foreign policy, going through the
Vietnam War while a student at Oxford University in England, was the parallel
defining moment for Bill Clinton.

He rubbed shoulders at Oxford with students from all over the world and traveled
extensively around Europe during vacations, and when he returned home from
Oxford, he served as George McGovern's campaign director in Texas in 1972.
These experiences, say friends, seem to have shaped him into what might best be
called a sober internationalist.

As one old friend from the Oxford days put it: "His world view is shaped by
Vietnam. Underneath the internationalism is a lot of caution. You don't want to
get involved in foreign problems unless there is a direct American interest, or
unless there is such a horror, like Nazi Germany, going on that it could easily
begin to affect the rest of the world."

But Mr. Clinton is no starry-eyed moralist either, says Samuel Berger, his old
Yale Law School classmate and now a foreign-policy adviser. He knows the history
of the world is not the history of arms control. He grew up in the deep South,
where it was never fashionable to see America as the source of all evil in the
world. And, according to Mr. Berger, he never bought into the isolationist,
Come-Home-America, shun-the-use-of-force ethos that came to symbolize
McGovernism in subsequent years.

Opposition to Vietnam War

"What brought us to the McGovern campaign was opposition to the Vietnam War --
period," Mr. Berger said.

Mr. Clinton's instinctive internationalist outlook seems to have been reinforced
by his political experiences, in two ways. First, as a governor of a small state
heavily dependent on foreign trade in both agriculture and manufactured
products, he learned on the job that what happens inside nations is often much
more important than what happens between nations. His foreign policy travels as
Governor consisted of three trade missions to Japan, Taiwan and other East Asian
nations, two to Western Europe and one to the Soviet Union.

Second, Mr. Clinton had the unpleasant experience of watching every Democratic
Presidential candidate in his adult life, save for Mr. Carter, be defeated in
national elections in large part because they were perceived to be unwilling to
use force to confront the Soviets in various regions around the globe and
because they were too willing to cut the military budget.

With his eye on the Presidency, Mr. Clinton, one aide said, calculated that to
"pass the Commander in Chief threshold test" he had to make clear that he viewed
the use of force as a normal part of foreign policy. As such, he gravitated to
the more muscular foreign policy articulated by the Democratic Leadership
Council, the group of moderate Democrats who banded together in 1985 to move
their party back from the left to the center in all fields.

Which brings to mind another of Mr. Clinton's instincts that seem relevant to
foreign policy: He is a skilled political animal, which can be an asset and a
liability in a statesman. It could be a liability in that Mr. Clinton has
repeatedly demonstrated a tendency to try to be all things to all people, and to
avoid clear-cut decisions that could alienate constituencies. Such waffling in
foreign policy can be deadly, literally.

But as Franklin Roosevelt, another untested state governor who became a
consummate player of the game of nations demonstrated, political skills are the
greatest asset any President can bring to the job of foreign policy, which is
primarily a matter of politics, deal making, consensus building and getting
opposing factions all to buy into a single decision.

Will Marshall, one of the founders of the Democratic Leadership Council and a
Clinton speech writer, asserts that the next President will have to spend more
time than any in 50 years justifying foreign policy, fighting off isolationist
instincts and persuading Congress to spend money on foreign endeavors, "and that
is something for which Mr. Clinton will be very well suited."

His Advisers


 Former Opponents Narrow Differences

At a recent briefing at the National Press Club in Washington, a team of foreign
policy advisers to the Clinton campaign answered questions from foreign
reporters when a Panamanian journalist asked: "What would be the Carter --
excuse me, the Clinton Administration policy?"

Mr. Berger, who was moderating the panel, quickly responded to the reporter's
slip, saying, "A very important correction!"

But also a very revealing slip, for many of the advisers to the Clinton
campaign, both formal and informal, seem to be veterans of the dovish, Cyrus
Vance wing of the Carter Administration, who have been out of office for 12
years. Mr. Berger, Anthony Lake, who headed the State Department Policy Planning
staff for Mr. Carter, and Warren Christopher, who was Deputy Secretary of State
for Mr. Carter, are among the most prominent.

Another important group, though, are the new generation of Democratic
foreign-policy thinkers like Mr. Marshall and Michael Mandelbaum, a professor of
foreign affairs at Johns Hopkins University, as well as members of the Senate
and the House, who found that as Democrats the only way to get foreign-policy
experience in the last decade was by getting elected to Congress.

Many Sources of Advice

Mr. Clinton consults regularly with Representative Aspin, who is chairman of the
House Armed Services Committee and supported the use of force against Iraq, as
well as two other Democratic hawks, Representative Dave McCurdy of Oklahoma, who
heads the House Intelligence Committee, and Representative Stephen J. Solarz of
Brooklyn. But he draws equally heavily on Senator Nunn, the chairman of the
Senate Armed Services Committee, who opposed the use of force and Representative
Lee Hamilton of Indiana, who is slated to be the next chairman of the House
Foreign Affairs Committee.

A fourth group, though is emerging: neo-conservative Reagan Democrats, a hawkish
faction that split off from the party's liberal majority after Vietnam and
remained split on issues from Nicaragua to detente with Moscow. This hawkish
group, who were at odds with the Carterites and frozen out of that
Administration, includes the likes of Richard Schifter, former Assistant
Secretary of State for Human Rights in the Bush Administration, Josh Muravchik
of the American Enterprise Institute, and Penn Kemble, a senior associate at
Freedom House, a human-rights group.

On July 21, Representative McCurdy organized a lunch between the Reagan
Democrats and the Carterites to bury the hatchet once and for all. "It was an
opportunity for people to begin to build bridges," Mr. McCurdy said. "People
just reintroduced themselves."

Producing Accommodations

Since then the neo-conservatives have been consulted on Mr. Clinton's
foreign-policy speeches. The philosophical basis of the reconciliation, one of
the neo-conservative advisers said, was that with the end of the cold war, the
Carterites are now much more willing to contemplate the use of force, because
there is no longer the risk that it will lead to a global confrontation, and the
neo-conservatives are much more willing to pursue a human rights and
pro-democracy agenda abroad, because they no longer fear it will destabilize
allies needed to confront the Soviet Union.

"There is an agreement," said Mr. Lake, Mr. Clinton's longest-serving foreign
affairs adviser. "American foreign policy now has to be based on being prepared
to meet the likely military threats of the 90's, not fighting the wars of the
1970's; on promoting Democracy in practical ways, and on rebuilding our domestic
economy to remain engaged abroad. If you sat in on some of our debates on Bosnia
you would not have been able to determine who were once perceived as hawks and
who were once perceived as doves."

But for how long? All of these different advisers can coexist around Mr. Clinton
not only because philosophical differences have eased, but also because in the
absence of any serious foreign-policy debate, Mr. Clinton has not really had to
choose between them, or between their nuances of difference that remain just
beneath the surface.

A Clinton List?

The names most often mentioned for Mr. Clinton's Secretary of State have been
Mr. Christopher and Mr. Hamilton, and more recently Senator Nunn and Senator
Bill Bradley of New Jersey. But those close to the candidate insist that this
list is a media invention. Mr. Berger said: "There is no list. I have never
heard Clinton talk about it. Does he have some ideas? Possibly. Has he thought
through fully who exactly he would want in these positions? I doubt it."

Some Democrats, and even Clinton advisers, fear that because he is insecure
about his foreign-policy expertise, and because he intends to focus primarily on
domestic affairs, Mr. Clinton will choose safe establishment types to run his
State Department and National Security Council.

"My main concern about the Clinton foreign policy, is that while he is rightly
confident about his abilities in domestic affairs, he seems less confident about
foreign policy," said Michael J. Sandel, a political theorist at Harvard
University. "There is a risk, therefore, that he will embrace the conventional
wisdom in foreign policy of the old Democratic Party establishment."

This would be a mistake, Mr. Sandel said, because America's role in the world at
the end of the cold war is badly in need of imaginative redefinition, and that
is not usually the forte of the foreign-policy or diplomatic establishments.

LOAD-DATE: October 31, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Several groups are advising Gov. Bill Clinton on foreign
policy. One includes Representative Les Aspin of Wisconsin, top left (Michael
Geissinger), and Senator Sam Nunn of Georgia, top right (The New York Times).
Another includes Will Marshall, bottom left, a founder of the Democratic
Leadership Council (The New York Times). A third includes neo-conservative
Reagan Democrats like Richard Schifter, former Assistant Secretary of State for
Human Rights. (Agence France-Presse) (pg. 28)

TYPE: Special Report

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              25 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 4, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Doors Open Wider as Buddhist Center Grows

BYLINE: By ANDI RIERDEN

SECTION: Section 13CN; Page 1; Column 1; Connecticut Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1533 words


THE state's only Buddhist center is inside a 19th-century farmhouse that rests
on a grassy knoll in Bloomfield. On a quiet Sunday morning the hydrangeas near
the back foyer were in bloom and children played near a picnic table under an
oak tree. Several pairs of shoes bordered the back-porch doorway leading to the
kitchen.

Inside, women with broad smiles prepared platters of mung bean noodles with
black mushrooms, stir-fried eggplant and tofu marinated in a tomato base,
steamed spring rolls with mint, and a custard of coconut milk and corn. The
cooks placed plates of the food along with vases of gladioluses and zinnias at
the base of two altars for the Buddha. The rest they spread around a long table
in the dining room.

Resettled After Fall of Saigon

The 15 or so Vietnamese attending the service included a 91-year-old woman
dressed in a traditional silk smock and an 8-year-old boy with a high-low
haircut. At 11 o'clock, they drifted into the front room and sat or kneeled on
pillows in front of the main altar. The sound of a somber gong opened the
service and was followed by a moment of meditation, then an hour of chanting in
Vietnamese. Following the ceremony, Trang Le, a business professor from Saigon
who came to Connecticut in 1979, led a discussion on the Heart Sutra, a 200-word
parable that contains the nucleus of Buddhist thought.

The Buddhists have made the farmhouse the center of their community since 1982,
when a Hartford developer rented them the property for $1 a year. Yet ever since
they arrived in Connecticut -- through a network of refugee resettlement
programs that were created following the fall of Saigon in 1975 -- they have
dreamed of building their own temple.

Five years ago they bought 17 acres in Ellington and have raised an additional
$165,000 through donations and fund raising. Within a few months they plan to
break ground and begin construction of the Buddhist Cultural Center of New
England, which will include a temple, library, meeting house, meditation room
and living quarters for a monk or visitors.

"We've always had to maintain a low profile because we never had the room to
expand our community," said Hoai Vu, the director of the Bloomfield center and
president of the Connecticut Buddhist Association, which has a membership of 200
families, including 12 Americans. "But when the new temple is in place we want
to open our doors to greet everyone."

Binh Nguyen, the center's designer, said the project will cost about $400,000 to
complete. A mechanical engineer and member of the association, he said that a
Vietnamese architect from New York had drawn up the original plan but that the
association had decided it would be too costly to build. Mr. Nguyen's plan calls
for modest Colonial-style buildings with slightly curved eaves. The money they
have raised so far will enable them to put in a road and parking lot, and build
the meeting house, Mr. Vu said.

Until the late 70's, few of the Vietnamese Buddhists living in Connecticut had
ever met. Most had lost everything to the war and few were fluent in English.
Through a network set up by state social service agencies, they made contact and
began worshiping in one another's homes. After hearing that the Vietnamese were
looking for a temple, David T. Chase, a Hartford developer, offered his Simsbury
Road property to them for $1 a year. But members in the affluent neighborhood
asked the town planning and zoning commission to deny a permit to the community
citing concerns that the Buddhist center's presence would reduce property values
and increase traffic. The commission granted the permit but placed strict
limitations on parking and occupancy.

Once they moved in, the Buddhists painted the house, tidied the landscape and
made friends in the neighborhood. One neighbor now mows their lawn and others
bring flowers and fruit for the Buddha. "We knew that the neighborhood would
accept us once they understood us," said Le Chi Toai, the founder of the
Buddhist association, who opened the first Vientamese grocery store in Hartford
in 1976. "So we never really worried," she said.

Today the community includes engineers, computer experts, college professors,
videostore owners and restaurateurs. Liem Hoang, whose family owns The Happy Wok
restaurant in Guilford, served as a lieutenant colonel for the South Vietnamese
Air Force before fleeing Saigon in 1975. He lost many friends in the war, he
said, and his brother spent eight years in a Communist concentration camp. This
month he will return to Vietnam for the first time since 1975, to visit his
brother whom he has not seen since 1954. That year Mr. Hoang's family left their
home in North Vietnam after the French lost to Ho Chi Minh and his forces at
Dien Bien Phu. His brother stayed behind near a village outside Hanoi, he said.

Standing in an upstairs library with Mr. Vu, the association's president, Mr.
Hoang recalled that he was overjoyed when he first arrived in Connecticut to
learn that his old high school acquaintance from Saigon, Mr. Vu, had also
resettled here. Mr. Vu had been a medical student in Vietnam before he was
drafted into the South Vietnamese Air Force in the early 70's. After arriving in
the United States with his wife and children, he received a master's degree from
Syracuse University and is now a senior analyst for Aetna Insurance.

"Liem and I used to play mah-jongg together when we were in the air force," Mr.
Vu said. Mr. Hoang added, "And now we are best friends."

Moral Striving and Meditation

The association estimates that there are about 3,000 to 4,000 Vietnamese living
in Connecticut, many with ties to Buddhism. The religion and philosophy evolved
from the teachings of Gotama Buddha, who lived in northern India in the 6th
century B.C. One of its central doctrines is that suffering is inherent in life
but that one can be liberated from it by moral striving, meditation and wisdom.

Buddhism is divided into several schools, each with its own set of scriptures.
Most Vietnamese practice Mahayana Buddhism, a form that emphasizes compassion
and service to others. Zen Buddhism is also a sect of the Mahayana school.

Like many Vietnamese, Mr. Hoang said, their families have practiced Buddhism for
generations. But as a result of the Chinese domination of Vietnam beginning in
the 15th century, the philosophies of Confucianism and Taoism are also well
entrenched in the Vietnamese character.

"Buddhism is a spiritual base, whereas Confucianism provides rules to improve
one's life physically and morally," he said. "But when you retire you give your
life to the tao, you go inward, get closer to nature and find peace of mind."

Invitation for Exiled Leader

During the Vietnam War, Buddhist monks received worldwide attention after
several burned themselves to death in protest of the fighting. One of the most
famous monks of that era, Thich Nhat Hanh, was nominated for a Nobel Peace Prize
for his work in rebuilding villages and relocating refugees. Exiled from Vietnam
following the war, he now leads retreats in the United States and Europe and has
written extensively on issues of peace and nonviolence. The Connecticut
Buddhists, many of whom know Mr. Nhat Hanh, say they will ask him to dedicate
their new center and lead services and retreats when he is in New England. The
association recently invited a Vietnamese Buddhist nun from Boston to lead
meditation sessions once a month and to conduct separate services in English and
Vietnamese.

Deborah Conklin became a member of the Connecticut Buddhist Association in 1987.
Attracted to the Buddhists' emphasis on meditation, she regularly joins other
Vietnamese and Americans for Thursday evening sessions and has attended retreats
at Plum Village, a small community of Buddhists in Bordeaux, France, run by Mr.
Nhat Hanh. One of the beauties of Buddhism, said Ms. Conklin, who was raised an
Episcopalian, is its adaptability. Because of the diversity of cultures in the
United States, she explained, American Buddhism, though still in the early
stages, typically blends Buddhist practices from China, Korea, Japan, Tibet and
Southeast Asia.

Teaching Contentment

Ms. Conklin, who was recently laid off from her job in telemarketing, , added
that practicing Buddhism is an effective way to calm the mind and cope with
strong emotions. "It helps you accept that life is change and that so much of
suffering comes from our attitudes," she said. "It teaches you to be satisfied
with what you have and who you are."

To be a Buddhist, Mr. Hoang said, is to be always mindful of every aspect of a
situation and to know that life is both dreadful and wonderful. He used his
experience in Vietnam to illustrate: "We were a little country caught between
two superpowers. The war forced us to kill and hate our own people. It
undermined our culture and our morality."

For a time, he continued, he felt anger and hatred toward those who caused the
destruction of his country. But as his Buddhist spirit deepened, he said he has
come to understand and to have compassion even for those who were once his
enemies. "Now," he said, "I just love everybody."

LOAD-DATE: October 4, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Hai Nguyen worshiping at the altar of Connecticut's only
Buddhist center, housed at a 19th-ccentury farmhouse in Bloomfield. A Vietnamese
woman attending a service. (pg. 1); Hoai Vu, center, president of the
Connecticut Buddhist Association, touring the site in Ellington that will house
a new cultural complex. He walked with Lelap Le, left, and Toai Le.  (pg. 14)
(Photographs by Steve Miller for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              26 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 4, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Pounding the Pundits

BYLINE: By Adam Platt;  Adam Platt is the co-author of " 'I've Seen the Best of
It,' " the memoirs of Joseph W. Alsop.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 11; Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 902 words



SOUND AND FURY
The Washington Punditocracy
and the Collapse of American Politics.
By Eric Alterman.
352 pp. New York:
HarperCollins Publishers. $23.

'TODAY they own dinner coats," a sour H. L. Mencken wrote in 1927, "and some of
them even own plug hats." His barb was directed at journalists, who Mencken
thought had grown too rich as a professional class, too fatheaded. In 1988 David
Broder, a political columnist for The Washington Post, identified a new beast: a
"hybrid creature, an androgynous binding of politician and journalist called The
Washington Insider." Shuffling between television studio and word processor,
these types fill the air with fatuous import and opinion. Sometimes, as Patrick
J. Buchanan has demonstrated, they even run for President.

Eric Alterman, a freelance journalist, has made a reputation in Washington
tracking the rise of what he calls "the punditocracy." In "Sound and Fury" he
declares that this small claque of political columnists and television
commentators is the closest thing the capital has to a permanent aristocracy. He
may be right. Exposure, in this world, counts for more than content. John
Sununu, the former White House chief of staff, eagerly filled Mr. Buchanan's
chair on CNN's political chat show "Crossfire" when Mr. Buchanan went off to
campaign. William Safire, the New York Times columnist, was asked if he would
enjoy a stint as Secretary of State. "Why step down?" Mr. Alterman quotes him as
saying.

Journalism has less to do with this new equation, Mr. Alterman insists, than
theatrics, ideology and easy money. Panelists on shows like "Crossfire" and "The
McLaughlin Group" earn huge extracurricular speaking fees. Few have done time in
a city room, and many belong to what Mr. Alterman calls "the New Right." During
the Reagan years, in his view, conservatives like Mr. Buchanan, George Will and
Robert Novak hijacked public debate. Beating their drums on behalf of what the
author calls "disastrous Reaganite innovations" (Star Wars, supply-side
economics), they helped "de-legitimize liberal solutions." Honest democratic
discourse died in the process.

Mr. Alterman means this as an objective critique, but of course it isn't. Like
his mentor, I. F. Stone, Mr. Alterman has an outsize capacity for moral outrage.
He charges modern pundits with nothing less than "the slow degradation of the
economic, social and political foundation for the sustenance of the American
Dream." Mr. Alterman's book is filled with angry mouthfuls like this. There is
an awful lot of gratuitous slanging, as he thrashes around for the appropriate
sound bite. Mr. Buchanan is "a kind of white man's Louis Farrakhan"; the
punditocracy as a whole is "a convent run by sex criminals."

Mr. Alterman traces this sorry situation back to 1896, the year Adolph S. Ochs
began marketing The New York Times as a paper of impersonal, objective record.
Old-style journalism, in which opinion was delivered with the news, went out the
window. In time, megapundits like Walter Lippmann and Joseph Alsop filled the
void. Mr. Alterman attributes vast power to Lippmann. "The Government," he
writes, "depended upon him to explain its role, to the citizenry and to itself."
Lippmann and Alsop were men of the establishment center, Mr. Alterman continues,
and they used their influence to forge consensus, not obliterate it. Their high
point was the propagation of the bipartisan foreign policy that followed World
War II.

After Lippmann retired in the mid-1960's, madness struck. The center dissolved
over Vietnam, and Watergate left the news media riding high. Establishment
liberals exhausted themselves, Mr. Alterman says, while dirty corporate dollars
gave Republicans the means to churn out pundits and ideas. Talented "ideologues"
like Mr. Safire and Mr. Will began telling Washington what to do, and Ronald
Reagan listened. While the President focused on Soviet expansion, military
gizmos and "the Nicaragua fetish," the United States slid into decline. "It was
still 'morning' in the punditocracy," writes Mr. Alterman, "and all opposing
arguments sank from public debate without a trace."

This analysis is flatly ideological, and arguably wrong. No less significant,
however, is Mr. Alterman's attitude. Again and again he displays the most basic
kind of insider arrogance. He seems to believe the course of the free world is
decided by loudmouthed men in television studios. He has interviewed no
Government officials or politicians as far as I can tell. For the most part his
sources are the pundits themselves. Much of the book is given over to gossip
about John McLaughlin and the cronies on his show, and to the endless rhetorical
spitball fights at institutions like The New Republic. Some of this is
diverting; most of it is stale.

Television has changed the standards of our public debate. Voices are louder and
more strident; attention spans are shorter. Liberal pundits, as Mr. Alterman
says, are often more moderate than their conservative counterparts. But life
goes on. The country is more conservative now than 20 years ago. That will
probably change, and the left will find its voice again. Then Mr. Alterman won't
have to write books. He can become a pundit and rave away.
ILS>Photo: From left: Walter Lippmann in 1961 (CBS), Joseph Alsop in 1974
(George Tames/The New York Times), and Pat Buchanan this year. (Associated
Press)

LOAD-DATE: October 4, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              27 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 6, 1992, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Storm Left Hard Future For Hawaii's Lush Island

BYLINE: By ROBERT REINHOLD,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 12; Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 1057 words

DATELINE: LIHUE, Hawaii, Oct. 1


For the last dozen years, Will Squyres, a former helicopter gunship pilot in
South Vietnam, has carried tourists up over the spectacular natural wonders of
Kauai. But this day he somewhat reluctantly agreed to fly a visiting
photographer and reporter to see what Hurricane Iniki had done to what many
consider the most beautiful of the Hawaiian Islands.

His Jet Ranger lifted over Kawaikini, the 5,243-foot volcanic peak. Below,
stands of Norfolk pines, koa and eucalyptus trees could be seen flattened like
match sticks. The Alakai swamp hardly looked touched, but soon the famed remote
Na Pali Coast came into view, its spectacular bluffs scoured by storm erosion
and the trail that is the only land access washed out.

"This will all come back soon," insisted Mr. Squyres, as much public relations
man as pilot. "We are already starting to get green."

Three weeks after the fierce hurricane swept in from the southwest with
160-mile-an-hour winds, the residents of the oldest and westernmost important
island of this archipelago state have begun to face a tough future with a mix of
grit, weariness and a caring family spirit known here as ohana.

Astonishing Destruction

A two-day tour of the 30-mile-wide island found astonishing destruction. Great
tangled masses of downed electric and phone wires line almost every street,
along with piles of mattresses, washing machines and other ruined household
items. The lush gardens that gave the island its sobriquet, The Garden Island,
are mostly gone now, though leaves have already sprouted. In spots, the lush
rain forest looks as though a giant weedwhacker had rushed through.

Naturalists worry that four plant species may have been wiped out by the
hurricane, and the population of certain rare birds may be even more precarious.
The tourism industry is almost as hard hit, and the damage forced the Pentagon
to postpone tests of new missile systems from a base here intended to help
develop "Star Wars" weapons.

But the everyday problems take center stage for most residents.

Crews from as far away as Southern California are restoring the electric system,
but so far only a fifth of the 24,469 homes and businesses have power, and only
about half have telephone service. Most people, including Mayor JoAnn A.
Yukimura, are still living in damaged homes with candles, flashlights and cold
showers, praying that heavy rains will not come before they repair their roofs.
About 7,000 homes were destroyed or rendered unfit for habitation.

But with help from 5,000 soldiers from the United States Army and the Hawaii
National Guard, the roads were all clear by today. Electric generators roared
everywhere, and grocery stores had reopened. On Rice Street, the main
thoroughfare of Lihue, City Liquor was selling cold beer, Kawamoto's Barber Shop
was open mornings and Dani's Restaurant was doing a thriving business feeding
the construction and demolition workers.

Blow to Tourist Industry

And folks were trading stories, like the one about the teen-age boys who
returned home the other day from Honolulu with food and other survival donations
from family friends. The boys spurned bags of rice, thinking that rice could not
be cooked without an electric rice maker.

But it was not as easy to chuckle over the island's future, either from the
point of view of the tourist economy or the fragile natural environment.

On a typical day, the island's 51,177 residents would be joined by nearly 20,000
tourists, who form the backbone of the economy. About half the island's work
force of 28,700 people appears to have lost their regular jobs, although many
have been able to shift to reconstruction work.

Nearly all the 7,846 hotel rooms have been wrecked, and most hotels do not
expect to reopen before early next year.

"The immediate crisis is over," Mayor Yukimura said. "We have water, and food
distribution is going fairly well." But she said the more difficult problem was
restoring the tourist industry. "All our services are not at optimum," she said.
"We cannot welcome visitors back now." But she expressed optimism that the
natural environment would recover quickly.

Endangered Species

Naturalists were less sure about what would grow back. Though hurricanes are
part of the natural cycle here, numerous birds and plants have been pushed to
the brink of extinction in recent decades by human introduction of outside
plants that crowd out native vegetation and eliminate important habitats. The
introduced species include banana poka, a Central American vine that smothers
trees.

Among the endangered species are water birds like the Hawaiian duck and the
Hawaiian coot and forest birds like the Kauai Akialoa and the Kauai thrush.

"A lot of these species are on the edge -- this didn't help," said Ronald L.
Walker, wildlife program manager at the Hawaii Department of Land and Natural
Resources.

Wildlife experts fanned out in recent days to assess the damage and are
considering reseeding certain areas by air. There is also concern about fire,
given all the dead trees.

Iniki has also raised questions about the Strategic Target System, a series of
missile launchings the Army had planned to make from the western edge of the
island as part of the Strategic Defense Initiative, or "Star Wars." The
launchings, scheduled to start in November after years of protest and delay, are
to send Polaris missiles southwest across the Pacific in a test to mimic
intercontinental ballistic missiles to be shot down.

The program has been bitterly fought by some residents on the ground that a
failed launching could damage the environment. The leader of this group,
Elizabeth Freeman, a graphic designer in Hanaeli, traveled to Washington after
the hurricane and lobbied for a moratorium. On Sept. 29, Senator Daniel K.
Inouye, Democrat of Hawaii, issued a vague announcement that the launchings had
been postponed indefinitely until the island recovered from Iniki.

Still, the launchings have considerable local support. The military base, the
Barking Sands Pacific Missile Range, employs nearly 700 people, and, with
widespread unemployment after the storm, it has not gone unnoticed that the base
was one of the few employers who retained all of its workers. The military's
efficient and much appreciated relief efforts have not hurt either.


LOAD-DATE: October 6, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Residents of the Hawaiian island of Kauai have begun to sort
through the destruction caused by Hurricane Iniki three weeks ago. Clyde Mukai
used a chainsaw to cut tree trunks along the road in Princeville. (Liliana Nieto
del Rio for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              28 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 6, 1992, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Holocaust Survivors Had Skills To Prosper

BYLINE: By DANIEL GOLEMAN

SECTION: Section C; Page 1; Column 5; Science Desk

LENGTH: 2202 words


WHEN he was just 7 years old, Sidney Shachnow and his family were seized by the
Nazis along with the other Jews in their Lithuanian town. Sidney's father
escaped, fighting with partisans against the Nazis; his mother was sent to a
concentration camp.

Sidney was assigned to a forced labor camp. Though laborers often starved or
were beaten to death, he somehow survived for four years, until World War II
ended.

Reunited with his parents, Sidney emigrated to Salem, Mass. There he finished
high school and fell in love with an American girl. Since neither family
approved of the match, he joined the Army so he could leave town and marry her.
He became a Green Beret commander in Vietnam, later led American forces in
Berlin and is now a major general at Fort Bragg.

That startling trajectory, from childhood captive of the Nazis to United States
general, displays an adaptability possessed by many Jews of any age who survived
captivity or being in hiding during the war, according to a new study by Dr.
William B. Helmreich, a sociologist at the City University of New York.

Dr. Helmreich's findings suggest that some survivors of the holocaust not only
managed to resume their lives but tended to be more successful than other
American Jews of comparable age. They had more stable marriages, often to other
survivors, and a lesser need to seek psychiatric help. Dr. Helmreich believes
that the traits that enabled them to survive their experience, like
adaptability, initiative and tenacity, may also account for their later success.
Other new studies have found that the biochemical changes characteristic of
post-traumatic stress syndrome persist in survivors even half a century later.

General Shachnow was one of hundreds of survivors of Nazi persecution whom Dr.
Helmreich interviewed. Dr. Helmreich himself was born in Switzerland in 1945,
his parents having escaped there in 1942 after a country-to-country odyssey.

No matter the particulars of their odyssey, most of the survivors endured years
of semi-starvation, the death of their loved ones and constant terror. Many were
shattered by the experience, but not all. In research that testifies to human
resilience under even the worst possible catastrophe, Dr. Helmreich has
identified the traits that set apart those Holocaust survivors who have moved on
in life from those who were undone by their wartime traumas.

Conducted nearly a half century after the war's end, the study is of particular
scientific importance for understanding the lifelong effects of severe trauma.
The results, Dr. Helmreich said, show that most survivors have adapted far more
successfully than has been suggested by much previous research, which has
sometimes been based on the more troubled among the survivors of the Holocaust.

One theory is that only the toughest survived. In a letter quoted in the new
biography by Walter Isaacson, Henry Kissinger noted the survivors' need for a
"singleness of purpose" that "had to disregard ordinary standards of morality."
He added, "One had to survive through lies, tricks and by somehow acquiring food
to fill one's belly."

Whatever permitted the survivors to survive, be it cunning, luck or a
combination, researchers and some survivors themselves say that surface success
at work and in family life may mask inward trouble. The psyches of many
survivors, they say, harbor a deeper, often hidden, layer of wounds that have
never completely healed.

"On one hand, it's true that survivors have done remarkably well in certain
ways," said Dr. Henry Krystal, a psychiatrist who examines Holocaust survivors
seeking reparations for disabilities from the German Government. "Most were able
to re-establish families, work and function in their communities and as parents.
But if you put these people under a microscope, then you discover they were also
having a great deal of physical and psychological symptoms."

Dr. Krystal is himself a survivor; at 14 he was sent to Auschwitz, and later to
Buchenwald. "If I had been part of Dr. Helmreich's study, he'd probably see me
as very well adjusted," Dr. Krystal said. "But I don't see myself that way; I
have lots of post-traumatic stress-type problems. Many survivors look better
from a sociological point of view than from a psychiatric one."

The ways in which Holocaust survivors have succeeded are evident in Dr.
Helmreich's study. He found, for example, that their marriages were remarkably
stable. In 1989, when the data were collected, 83 percent of the survivors were
still married, compared with just 62 percent for American Jews of the same ages.

Four of five survivors married other survivors, unions which many researchers
believe were beneficial to the couples' mental health. Though many survivors are
in general tight-lipped about what happened to them, several studies have found
that being able to talk over wartime experiences with others who understood them
was strongly related to a better adjustment. "In interview after interview,
survivors said how they appreciated that their spouses could understand their
sense of loss and their anxieties," Dr. Helmreich said.

Dr. Charles Figley, a psychologist at Florida State University and editor of The
Journal of Traumatic Stress, said, "When you look across the landscape of
trauma, from the Holocaust through Hurricane Andrew and on down, talking it over
helps you see that your reactions, no matter how extreme at the moment, were
normal or understandable given what happened."

One of the most striking findings, Dr. Helmreich said, is a virtual absence of
criminality among the 140,000 survivors who came to the United States. Dr.
Helmreich's findings, based on interviews with a randomly selected group of 211
survivors and a comparison group of 295 American-born Jews, are being published
this month by Simon & Schuster as "Against All Odds: Holocaust Survivors and the
Successful Lives They Made in America."

Few Seek Therapy

Another telling statistic from Dr. Helmreich's study is that just 18 percent of
survivors had seen a psychotherapist, compared with 31 percent for comparable
American Jews. While some of that variation is no doubt due to cultural
differences, the rate is low, given the traumatic past of the survivors. It also
calls into question the conclusions of many earlier studies of survivors, which
were based on those who had been in therapy.

Survivors themselves say, however, that a low psychotherapy rate does not
necessarily indicate emotional adjustment. "Most survivors don't want to deal
with the psychological trauma," said Abe Foxman, national director of the
Anti-Defamation League of B'nai B'rith, whose Polish nanny raised him disguised
as a Catholic during the War. "Most of us know that, in some sense, we have been
scarred, and we're hesitant to open up the scars when we talk."

Dr. Helmreich's finding that despite such scars, survivors have in some ways
done better in life than American Jews of comparable age is corroborated by
another major study of survivors conducted by Dr. Zev Harel, a sociologist, and
Dr. Boaz Kahana, a psychologist, both at Cleveland State University, and Dr. Eva
Kahana, a sociologist at Case Western Reserve University.

Their research compares survivors with European Jews of the same age who came to
the United States before World War II. It shows that though the survivors had,
on average, less education, their careers were more successful and their incomes
greater. They were also far more likely to do volunteer community service and to
be altruistic in outlook.

"As a child I was in hiding with my mother in Hungary, and what we found in the
study makes sense to me in my own life," said Dr. Eva Kahana. "The war put into
perspective for me what's really important in life: connectedness to other
people and giving."

Survivors are particularly concerned with their children and, Dr. Helmreich
found, have larger families on average than comparable Jewish couples. He also
notes, as do other researchers, that the survivors, perhaps understandably, tend
to be overprotective parents.

"Their children react by trying to take care of them," said Dr. Krystal. "A high
proportion go on to the caretaking professions. Both my sons are psychiatrists."

A 1989 Canadian study of the children of survivors, one of the few to use a
comparison group, found that in general they were not more neurotic than others,
contrary to earlier assertions by clinical researchers.

Most survivors ascribe their escape during the war in large part to luck. But,
Dr. Helmreich said: "It was not luck that they did well afterwards. The more
successful survivors are distinguished by specific traits which, far more than
the degree of trauma they endured, seem to be the keys to their recovery."

Tenacity and Adaptability

Among these, Dr. Helmreich found, are ready adaptation to changing cir
cumstances, a readiness to take the initiative, a stubborn tenacity and "street
smarts." "I found a widespread ability to think quickly, size up a situation,
break down its complex elements and make an intelligent decision," he said.

The ability to distance themselves from what had happened was also noted by Dr.
Helmreich in the more successful survivors. Dr. Robert Jay Lifton, in a study of
Japanese survivors of Hiroshima, called this "psychic numbing." The capacity to
seal off part of one's emotions and memories is seen by Dr. Helmreich as a
positive adaptation. But other researchers interpret it as a symptom of
post-traumatic stress syndrome.

Other data call into question just how solidly Holocaust memories are sealed
off. In the study by the two Dr. Kahanas and Dr. Harel, 61 percent of survivors
said they thought of the Holocaust almost daily, even close to 50 years later,
and 92 percent said they felt it still had an adverse impact on their emotional
well-being.

This study also found that, compared with European Jews who came to the United
States before the war, the survivors were more lonely, felt they had a lot to be
sad about and found that life was hard most of the time. Close to two-thirds of
the survivors said they got upset easily, more than half said they worried so
much they had trouble sleeping, and a third said they felt afraid of many
things.

Another study, among members of survivors' organizations, found close to
three-quarters of survivors said they often became anxious at reminders of the
Nazi persecution, like the sights of a uniform, a knock at the door or the
barking of dogs.

Only recently have there been well-designed studies of post-traumatic stress
syndrome among survivors. One is by Dr. Rachel Yehuda, a neurochemist and
director of the Traumatic Stress Studies Program at the Mount Sinai School of
Medicine in Manhattan and the Bronx Veterans Affairs Hospital.

In a study of 24 survivors and 18 controls matched for age and background, Dr.
Yehuda and colleagues found that half the Holocaust survivors still had
post-traumatic stress syndrome, marked by symptoms like frequent nightmares and
repetitive anxiety dreams, insomnia, intrusive disturbing thoughts,
hypervigilance and being easily startled.

Dr. Yehuda also found that a quarter of survivors had had such symptoms in the
past, but that they had subsided. And the final quarter seem never to have
suffered from post-traumatic stress syndrome. Dr. Yehuda, who considers her
results preliminary, will conduct a much larger study with Dr. Earl Giller, a
psychiatrist at the University of Connecticut, and Dr. Boaz Kahana.

Nightmares as Normality

Perhaps the most common sign of post-traumatic stress among survivors is
frequent nightmares, with some studies finding the rate as high as 80 percent.
"My parents woke up howling almost every night; for a long time as a child I
thought all parents did," said Art Spiegelman, author of the Pulitzer
Prize-winning books "Maus," about his own parents' experiences during the
Holocaust.

One survivor told Dr. Helmreich, "If you've been through Auschwitz and you don't
have nightmares, then you're not normal."

Dr. Yehuda is the first to report distinct biological changes in the survivors
who have post-traumatic stress symptoms: they had elevated levels of
norepinephrine, a stress hormone. Similar levels have been found in Vietnam
veterans who suffer from post-traumatic stress; researchers believe many of the
symptoms are due to a sympathetic nervous system that is too easily aroused.

"The implication is that by correcting this, we might one day alleviate the
biological changes, and so correct the symptoms," said Dr. Yehuda, who will be
starting a clinic for Holocaust survivors and their families later this year at
the Mount Sinai School of Medicine.

Despite the findings of post-traumatic stress among many survivors, researchers
emphasize the adjustments to life they have made.

"We needn't look at survivors as pathological specimens," said Dr. Eva Kahana.
"They are normal people who have endured something horrible, human beings who
are responding in surprisingly positive ways. Yes, they may have nightmares and
psychosomatic problems; they have been traumatized. But at the same time they
have lifted themselves."


LOAD-DATE: October 6, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Cartoon: Holocaust survivors often function well despite traumatic
memories. Here, panels from "Maus" show the artist's father and stepmother,
portrayed as mice, remembering their experiences as depicted by the artist.
("Maus I: My Father Bleeds History," Art Spiegelman (Pantheon)); Like the
imprisoned father in "Maus," outwardly successful survivors of Nazi captivity
showed ready adaptability to changing circumstances. (Maus II: And Here My
Troubles Began," Art Spiegelman (Pantheon)) (pg. C4)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              29 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 6, 1992, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Corrections

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 95 words


A front-page article on Sept. 22 about a Senate hearing on American prisoners in
the Vietnam War referred incompletely to President Richard M. Nixon's comment,
in March 1973, that he wanted to "get Vietnam out of the way." The comment, from
the White House tapes, is ambiguous. In its full context, it can be read as a
reflection of a desire to end the American entanglement in Vietnam because of
the growing Watergate scandal. Or it can as easily be interpreted as simply a
reference to the scheduling of a speech about Vietnam that Mr. Nixon was about
to deliver.

LOAD-DATE: October 6, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Correction

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              30 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 6, 1992, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Witch Hunt in the Navy

BYLINE: By James Webb;  James Webb, a former Marine officer, was Assistant
Secretary of Defense and Secretary of the Navy in the Reagan Administration.

SECTION: Section A; Page 23; Column 2; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 1208 words

DATELINE: CAMBRIDGE, Mass.


The Tailhook scandal has been "spun up," to borrow a service phrase, into a
crisis that affects the Navy leadership's credibility on a wide range of issues.
A botched internal investigation and the ongoing revelations of inexcusable
harassment of women at a Las Vegas convention of naval aviators a year ago have
also left in their wake a witch hunt that threatens to swamp the entire naval
service.

Careers have been ruined, often on the basis of mere innuendo and without a
shred of due process. And on Sept. 25 Acting Navy Secretary Sean O'Keefe made a
series of sweeping decisions -- and one altogether remarkable pronouncement --
guaranteeing that the effects of this scandal will reverberate for years.

After forcing the retirement of two rear admirals, reassigning a vice admiral
and censuring the Under Secretary of the Navy, Mr. O'Keefe then told a packed
briefing room that he needed to "emphasize a very, very important message." "We
get it," he said. "We know that the larger issue is a cultural problem which has
allowed demeaning behavior and attitudes toward women to exist within the Navy."

There is indeed a larger issue at work here, but it is not the one Mr. O'Keefe
mentioned. Mr. O'Keefe, a budgeteer who has yet to sit for Senate confirmation
of his post and who has never served in the military, decided after conferring
with Defense Secretary Dick Cheney, who likewise has never served, that he has
the moral authority to discredit the cultural ethos of the entire Navy based on
the conduct of a group of drunken aviators in a hotel suite.

Then last week Mr. O'Keefe announced a budgetary plan that would move the Navy
away from its operational centerpiece, the aircraft carrier. In an era marked by
greater emphasis on swift, maneuverable response, he reasoned that future
confrontations would begin after lengthy diplomacy -- unlike the dozens of
recent crises met or pre-empted through the quick dispatch of carriers.

A vacuum has emerged where the Navy used to have a spine. It was evident in the
Tailhook investigation, termed a cover-up by the Pentagon inspector general,
that should have been resolved quickly and without sweeping damnation. It is
evident today, as the Navy is being maligned and diminished before our eyes.

Where are the senior admirals?

We measure the greatness of institutions by their resilience and tenacity under
stress. These traits are manifested through leaders who were imbued, as they
made their way up the promotional ladder, with a solemn duty to preserve
sacrosanct ideals and pass them on to succeeding generations. A true leader
knows that this obligation transcends his own importance, and must outlast his
individual tour of duty.

In the military the seemingly arcane concepts of tradition, loyalty, discipline
and moral courage have carried the services through cyclical turbulence in peace
and war. Their continuance is far more important than the survival of any one
leader. It is the function of the military's top officers to articulate that
importance to the civilian political process. And an officer who allows a
weakening of these ideals in exchange for self-preservation is no leader at all.

Key military officials began making such swaps during the Vietnam War, beginning
an unhealthy pattern that still predominates. Too often, gaining high promotion
means hitching one's wagon to a political star, all the while either ducking or
finessing politically sensitive issues. Today at the highest levels of the U.S.
military one searches vainly for a leader who deserves mention along with the
giants of the past. Those who might have reached such heights failed the
"political correctness" test and were retired as colonels or junior flag
officers.

This reality, more than any other factor, explains the devastating and
continuing effect of the Tailhook scandal. Our ranking admirals have learned
full well to bob and weave when political issues confront them. And few issues
are as volatile as those surrounding the assimilation of women into the
military, particularly since ardent feminists have focused on the military as an
important symbolic battlefield. Military leaders are at best passive and most
often downright fearful when confronted by activists who allege that their
culture is inherently oppressive toward females and that full assimilation of
women depends only on a change in the mind-set of its misogynist leaders.

And so at this crucial moment, with the reputations, credibility and even the
missions of their people at risk, the senior admirals have either hidden or
demurred. In the process they have abandoned their most sacred fiduciary duty.
In military terms, it is called "loyalty down." Its abrogation has meant doing
nothing as civilian officials condemn their subordinates en masse without
rebuttal. It has also meant allowing a few junior admirals to be "taken out back
and shot," as one Pentagon officer put it to me, while they carefully avoid
public comment.

The most egregious case to date involves Rear Adm. Jack Snyder, who was
summarily relieved of his command once his former aide, Lieut. Paula Coughlin,
made her initial accusations regarding Tailhook. Admiral Snyder is a superb
officer known for his sensitivity as a leader. He has received dual honors as
the Navy's fighter-pilot of the year and commander of its outstanding fighter
squadron.

Once Lieutenant Coughlin told him of the specifics of her case, he flew in from
an out-of-town trip, helped her write her complaint regarding the incident, put
his own cover letter on the complaint and then hand-carried it to the Chief of
Naval Aviation, urging the matter be investigated.

But a second copy made its way to the Chief of Naval Personnel through
Lieutenant Coughlin's personal friends, without Admiral Snyder's cover letter.
He was then relieved, without being allowed to present his own case, ostensibly
for having failed to act promptly when Lieutenant Coughlin told him the morning
after the incident of being assaulted. Admiral Snyder denies this conversation
took place, and there is reason from Naval Investigative Service documents and
other interviews to support this denial.

The implications from the forced retirement of the other two rear admirals, as
well as a handful of related cases, suggest not that the Navy is getting tough
on those who practice intolerance, but that any accusation with political
overtones will be treated as a conviction. A lawsuit seems appropriate. Military
officers relieved of command have never been allowed constitutional due-process
protections, but it would appear that this tradition may have outlived its day.
When loyalty disappears, individual protections are the only remedy for the
wronged.

As for the senior admirals, they cannot have it both ways. Either they agree
with Mr. O'Keefe that the entire Navy has a "cultural problem" which has
encouraged demeaning behavior toward women, in which case they should be retired
for having allowed it to persist without acting on it. Or they do not agree, in
which case they must defend their culture where it is warranted, take action
where it is needed, and explain why they remained silent while good officers
were forced to walk the plank.

LOAD-DATE: October 6, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing.

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              31 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 7, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Democrats;
Clinton and Gore Return to the Call-In

BYLINE: By GWEN IFILL,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 18; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 845 words

DATELINE: NASHVILLE, Oct. 6


Gov. Bill Clinton and Senator Al Gore returned to the television talk-show
circuit Monday night and today, moving their joint campaign from the
old-fashioned handshaking of a bus trip to the newfangled discourse of viewer
call-ins.

Often, as was the case on "Larry King Live" on Monday night, the occasion was
comfortable: Mr. Gore wore blue jeans, Mr. Clinton's mother called to say hello
from Las Vegas, Nev., the broadcast originated from a livestock arena.

Other times the candidates, who are looking for what Mr. Clinton called the
"unfiltered" forum of live television, stumbled into lively encounters. For
example, Mr. Clinton entered the ring today with Phil Donahue, sparring with the
talk-show host in the pattern of heated exchange that the two perfected during a
spring appearance on the show.

Clinton Challenged

They talked about health care and jobs policy and free trade. But Mr. Clinton,
who completed a bus tour in Florida before flying here this afternoon, grew most
lively and irritated when Mr. Donahue or viewers of the call-in portions of the
program challenged him on his his military history, opposition to the Vietnam
War and his arms-length relationship with the Rev. Jesse Jackson.

"I don't think you can judge me just on how many meetings I've had with Reverend
Jackson," Mr. Clinton said, adding that he had talked to him twice recently on
the telephone.

When Mr. Donahue continued to press the point that his relationship with Mr.
Jackson was strained, Mr. Clinton shot back, "Are you his booking agent?"

Mr. Clinton was also dismissive and succinct when a viewer asked him how he
could serve as Commander in Chief if he worked to avoid military service during
the Vietnam War.

Anti-War Activities

"If you don't want to vote for me because of that, that's fine with me," he
said. "But that's not going to have anything to do with the way you're going to
live the day after the election."

At another point, asked about his anti-war activities during his days as a
Rhodes Scholar at Oxford University, Mr. Clinton said, "You are wrong to ignore
my entire public life, as you and a lot of others have done, and to make up your
own characterization on this so that you can once again divert people from the
discussion of things that will affect their lives."

In recent days, questions about Mr. Clinton's actions during his student years
in the late 1960's have cropped up once again as Representative Robert K.
Dornan, Republican of California, has used the House floor to challenge Mr.
Clinton's accounting of his anti-war activities.

Mr. Clinton said today that he was "proud" of his opposition to the Vietnam War
but that he was "not a big organizer of anti-war activities."

The "Donahue" program was broadcast from Mr. Gore's home state of Tennessee to
accommodate the campaign's desire to showcase workers from a defunct textile
plant that moved to El Salvador with Government help.

The Democratic nominees sought to draw attention to a State Department program
that attacks poverty by encouraging American businesses to create jobs in poor
nations. It was envisioned as a twist on standard foreign aid programs, which
give food and cash directly to foreign governments that may or may not use them
wisely. But labor unions complained bitterly this fall that the jobs the program
created in developing nations too often were taken from American workers.

For example, an El Salvador foundation used State Department money to advertise
in American trade journals, noting that textile workers in that nation could be
hired for as little as 33 cents an hour. One textile union has asserted that
Federal officials assured American companies that their Central American
factories would be union-free, and even helped compile a "blacklist" of labor
organizers in Honduras.

Officials with the Agency for International Development, the State Department
office that runs the program, have denied that they seek to "export" American
jobs overseas. In fact, they argue that the program creates American jobs by
stimulating the economies of poorer trading partners.

After they taped the Donahue program, the Democratic nominees met with several
people who were formerly employed at the Decatursville, Tenn., textile plant
that moved to El Salvador. Both Mr. Clinton and Mr. Gore accused the Bush
Administration of actively working to drive American jobs overseas.

"There are textile companies in America making money," Mr. Clinton said. "It is
not true that we can just throw all these jobs away."

Mr. Gore said: "George Bush has personally supported this program and steered
more tax dollars into it. And it is just flat wrong."

Mr. Gore also used the Donahue program to renew his accusations that the Bush
Administration provided aid to Iraq long after it knew that Saddam Hussein was
preparing for war.

"Bush called the fire department, but he set the blaze with his policies leading
up to the invasion of Kuwait," Mr. Gore said. "Once the blaze is set, you don't
stand by and let it burn out of control."

LOAD-DATE: October 7, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              32 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 7, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Kissinger Mistakes Role of Protesters

SECTION: Section A; Page 20; Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 253 words


To the Editor:

In Senate testimony on prisoners of war and those missing in action (front page,
Sept. 23), former Secretary of State Henry A. Kissinger blamed the antiwar
movement in part for making it impossible for him to exert pressure on North
Vietnam in 1973 to make a full accounting of the P.O.W.'s and M.I.A.'s.

There was no antiwar movement in the United States in 1973 -- or 1972 for that
matter. Ask George McGovern.

The last major antiwar demonstrations took place in Washington from April 18 to
May 6, 1971. After that, the movement disintegrated because of fratricidal
tactical disputes among disillusioned leaders, the beginning of the end of the
draft, troop withdrawals and decreasing American casualties, news media
inattention and, especially, President Nixon's successful -- and often illegal
-- attempts to penetrate, disrupt and harass antiwar groups.

Undoubtedly, the movement was important in affecting policy making from 1965
through 1971, but after that, Mr. Nixon demonstrated its relative impotence when
he mined Hanoi and Haiphong harbors in May 1972, and ordered the Christmas
bombing that December without confronting much significant domestic opposition.

Mr. Kissinger cannot blame the antiwar movement for his failure to pursue the
P.O.W.-M.I.A. issue from 1973 through 1976.

MELVIN SMALL
Detroit, Sept. 23, 1992

The writer, professor of history, Wayne State University, is co-editor, "Give
Peace a Chance: Exploring the Vietnam Antiwar Movement" (1992).

LOAD-DATE: October 7, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              33 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 7, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Campaign Trail;
Now Bush Is in Trouble in His 2d Home

BYLINE: By B. DRUMMOND AYRES Jr.

SECTION: Section A; Page 16; Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 611 words


And George Bush thought he had troubles in Texas. Now he has to worry about
Maine, where he also has a home.

It has been 24 years since a Democratic Presidential candidate carried Maine,
but two recent polls by The Portland Press Herald show that Bill Clinton is not
only ahead of President Bush in the Pine Tree State but that he is also widening
his lead.

And that's not all.

Mr. Clinton is running well ahead of the President even in the southern part of
the state, including York County. That's where Mr. Bush maintains a vacation
house, at Kennebunkport.

The poll results cannot be broken down enough to determine how the President
stands in Kennebunkport itself, population 3,356. But the other day when Mr.
Clinton visited southern Maine, Representative Thomas H. Andrews, a Democrat
whose district includes the seaside town, told him at the start of a rally,
"Bill, you're going to take Kennebunkport.'

A footnote: The polls in Maine also indicate that Mr. Andrews will almost
certainly win re-election. His Republican opponent is Linda Bean, as in the L.
L. Bean catalogue company.

Just for Fun, Pick an Appointee

Maybe it's just great expectations. But with Bill Clinton leading in national
polls and the possibility that as many as three Supreme Court justices might
retire in the next four years, some of Mr. Clinton's lawyer friends are already
beginning to speculate about possible Clinton appointees to the Court.

Most mentioned is Gov. Mario M. Cuomo of New York, whom Mr. Clinton himself once
said had earned an appointment. Others often mentioned include Stephen G.
Breyer, the chief judge of the Court of Appeals for the First Circuit, in
Boston; Senator Joseph I. Lieberman of Connecticut; Judge Amalya L. Kearse of
the Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit, in New York, and Jose A. Cabranes,
the chief judge of the Federal District Court in New Haven.

All are considered well grounded in the law, politically correct for a moderate
Democrat like Mr. Clinton and good bets to nudge the Court back toward the left
and maybe even tip its balance. As for always-sensitive ethnic and sex
considerations, Governor Cuomo is Italian, Senator Lieberman is Jewish, Judge
Kearse is a black woman and Judge Cabranes is Hispanic.

Trail Mix: New Creatures

*There's been another creature sighting out on the trail. First there were
protesters dressed as Bush and Clinton chickens. Then came a "Curious George"
gorilla. Now, from Daytona Beach comes a report of a duck waddling in.

It showed up at a Clinton rally. The message: the Governor ducked out of the
Vietnam draft.

*In Little Rock, the Clinton campaign headquarters has been offering bumper
stickers that read: "I'm from Arkansas. Ask me about my Governor."

Some of the takers are Bush supporters.

*Southern politicians with a love for campaign zingers like to talk about
"putting the hay down where the goats can get it." But at least one Northern
politician has a good understanding of the concept.

Tom Kean, the former New Jersey Governor who now runs Drew University, in
Madison, N.J., and is a Bush backer, was not on campus the other day when Bill
Clinton dropped in for a campus rally. But he left this note:

"I am convinced that our country faces a choice between two outstanding
candidates -- and right now I am in Newark meeting with the other one."

*Remember Bill Clinton's musical half-brother, Roger, who performed during the
Democratic Convention? He's got a new band out in Los Angeles, where he's doing
some television sit-com gigs. It's called "Politics."

"Life generally is political," he explained.

LOAD-DATE: October 31, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              34 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 8, 1992, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Republicans;
Bush Questions Clinton's Account Of Vietnam-Era Protests and Trip

BYLINE: By ANDREW ROSENTHAL,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1244 words

DATELINE: SAN ANTONIO, Texas, Oct. 7


President Bush tonight accused Gov. Bill Clinton of not telling the truth about
his visit to Moscow as a student in the late 1960's and sharply criticized the
Democratic nominee for demonstrating against the Vietnam War while he was
studying in England.

In an appearance on the CNN program "Larry King Live" that was broadcast around
the country and abroad, Mr. Bush made one of his strongest attacks yet on Mr.
Clinton's opposition to the Vietnam War, which Mr. Bush's advisers have long
considered perhaps the Democrat's weakest point.

The attack came during a visit by Mr. Bush to San Antonio in which he was
seeking to get the boost from foreign policy issues that has so far been denied
him in the campaign. He flew halfway across the country to promote the North
American Free Trade Agreement, which his advisers believe will be popular in the
pivotal state of Texas, even if it may hurt Mr. Bush in other parts of the
country.

While acknowledging that he had no evidence of wrongdoing by Mr. Clinton when he
visited Moscow as a student more than two decades ago, Mr. Bush sharply
criticized his opponent for demonstrating against the Vietnam War while he was
studying in England.

He also chided Mr. Clinton for not giving his full support to the North American
Free Trade Agreement. Mr. Bush's trip revolved around a largely symbolic event
at which officials of the United States, Canada and Mexico initialed the already
completed agreement.

Asked by Mr. King what he thought about Mr. Clinton visiting the Soviet Union
while he was a Rhodes scholar at Oxford in 1969, Mr. Bush seemed to choose his
words carefully. He avoided any direct accusation but at the same time clearly
conveyed the impression that he had suspicions and disapproved.

"I don't want to tell you what I really think, because I don't have the facts,"
he said. "But to go to Moscow one year after Russia crushed Czechoslovakia, not
remember who you saw? I really think the answer is, level with the American
people."

Attack Called 'Pathetic'

Mr. Clinton has said he visited Moscow for five days as part of a 40-day tour of
European capitals that was part of his studies at Oxford. While he has spoken of
the people with whom he met in other capitals, including Oslo, he has said he
cannot recall those he met in Moscow.

Mr. Bush said: "You can remember who you saw in the airport in Oslo, but you
can't remember who you saw in the airport in Moscow? I say level with the
American people on the draft, whether you went to Moscow, how many
demonstrations he led against his country from a foreign soil. Level, tell the
truth and then let the American voters decide."

Tonight, the Clinton campaign said Mr. Bush's comments were a sign of
desperation.

"It's a pathetic ploy by a desperate man who's been reading polls and not
talking to real people," said George Stephanopoulos, the campaign's
communications director. "He's more interested in what Bill Clinton did in 1969
than what the American people are going through in 1992."

Mr. Clinton has said he was proud of his opposition to the Vietnam War but that
he was "not a big organizer of anti-war activities."

Criticism of Anti-War Efforts

Mr. Bush said of the Moscow visit: "I don't have it as a Federal case. I am just
concerned about it. It's a pattern here."

If Mr. Bush trod gingerly on the issue of Mr. Clinton visiting Moscow, he did
not withhold his condemnation of the Arkansas Governor's anti-war activities.

"I'll tell you what concerns me, and I really feel viscerally about this,
demonstrating against your own country in a foreign land.

"To go to a foreign country and demonstrate against your own country when your
sons and daughters are dying halfway around the world, I just don't like it. I
think it's wrong. Wrong to do that."

Mr. Bush's appearance on the program, made before an audience hand-picked by the
Bush campaign, was his second session with Mr. King in three days, but his first
taking calls from viewers, something he once said was beneath the dignity of his
office.

Before he appeared, he witnessed the initialing of the North American Free Trade
Agreement. And his chief trade negotiator, Carla Hills, the United States trade
representative, raised hopes for a breakthrough this weekend at negotiations on
another trade pact, a 108-nation agreement to lower global trade barriers. The
Bush Administration has been hoping to make substantial progress on that
agreement before Election Day.

The White House cast today's visit to Texas, the latest in a series of attempts
to find something that will eat into Mr. Clinton's lead, as nonpolitical.

But the Bush re-election team was footing the bill for the trip, which consumed
much of one of the rapidly dwindling number of days left before the election,
and the North American trade pact has been central to Mr. Bush's assault on his
Democratic opponent.

The President's speech, while couched in the language of diplomacy, drew
directly from his political playbook. "Nafta means more exports, and more
exports mean more American jobs," he said.

The ceremony also gave Mr. Bush a chance to bask in the praise of two
colleagues, President Carlos Salinas de Gortari of Mexico and Prime Minister
Brian Mulroney of Canada, a close friend of Mr. Bush. In public remarks, Mr.
Mulroney told Mr. Bush that the trade agreement would have been impossible
"without your compelling vision of the Americas as a hemisphere of prosperity
built on cooperation."

Mr. Bush's day was marked by one small but noteworthy side event. The President,
who has repeatedly come under fire from groups that are dissatisfied with his
Administration's policies on AIDS, was seen for the first time wearing the red
ribbon commemorating AIDS patients on his lapel.

White House aides said Mr. Bush got it from the newest member of his AIDS
Commission, Mary Fisher, who has tested positive for the virus that causes AIDS
and spoke at the Republican National Convention in Houston. Mr. Bush wore the
ribbon during a photo session with Ms. Fisher this morning and then took it off
while he flew to Texas aboard Air Force One.

The North American trade agreement is popular in Texas, where it is assumed that
much of the increase in the flow of American goods to Mexico under the agreement
will come from Texas and that exports from other parts of the country will at
least flow through Texas.

The agreement does, however, threaten Texas agruculture interests, since Mexican
fruits and vegetables will be much cheaper to buy in the United States and it is
unpopular in other parts of the country where workers fear manufacturing jobs
will be lost to Mexico.

Mr. Bush will eventually sign the accord, the sort of event normally accorded
the pomp given to today's ceremonies. But that will not happen until after the
election - Dec. 17, since Congress has until then to scrutinize it under the
"fast-trace" legislation by which it was negotiated.

Photos: President Bush with an AIDS ribbon given to him by Mary D. Fisher, whom
he named to the National Commission on AIDS. With him were Brent Scowcroft,
national security adviser, and James A. Baker 3d, right, White House chief of
staff, in a rare appearance since joining the campaign team. (Reuters) (pg. A1);
President Bush stood up in the door of his limousine to respond to supporters
who greeted him yesterday as he arrived in San Antonio. (pg. A30) (Stephen
Crowley/The New York Times)

LOAD-DATE: October 8, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              35 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 8, 1992, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Debates;
CANDIDATES TRAIN FOR A KEY DEBATE

BYLINE: By MICHAEL WINES,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 1257 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 7


Nearing what advisers concede is his best remaining chance to pull close to Gov.
Bill Clinton, President Bush has summoned three of his party's most caustic and
quick-witted figures to help prepare for Sunday's Presidential debate against
Mr. Clinton and Ross Perot.

Aides said today that the President planned to stage a mock debate on Saturday
against Republican stand-ins for his two rivals, with his budget director,
Richard G. Darman, playing the part of Mr. Clinton and his onetime chief of
staff, John H. Sununu, masquerading as Mr. Perot.

And Roger Ailes, a New York media expert who helped execute the blistering
attacks that propelled Mr. Bush to victory over Gov. Michael S. Dukakis in 1988,
will critique the President's performance, the aides said.

A Shot for Clinton

Meanwhile, in Little Rock, Ark., Mr. Clinton received an allergy shot and rested
his voice today after a recurrence of the hoarseness that hindered his stump
speaking last winter and now threatens to crimp his debating style. Aides said
he, like Mr. Bush, was studying briefing books and working on oratorical weak
spots like a well-known tendency toward wordiness.

Both camps also pushed the view that Ross Perot's presence will serve largely as
a sideshow to the match between the two political parties' candidates. But
neither was willing to dismiss the importance of that sideshow, or even to
predict whether it would help the Democrats or the Republicans.

Mr. Perot stayed out of sight today, and aides said he was also readying himself
for the debates.

"He is studying feverishly," said Orson Swindle, the executive director of
United We Stand, America, Mr. Perot's political organization.

On both the Democratic and Republican sides, aides and strategists earnestly
turned today to the traditional task of shaping the expectations for the debate.
That is, they followed the hoary strategy of expressing confidence that their
man would do well, while at the same time arguing that their fellow was a bit of
an underdog and therefore even an average performance would rank as a win.

Drawing to Victory?

"All we need to do is have a draw in the debate and we win," said one senior
Clinton adviser. "We have to stand next to Bush and show that we are a contender
and not make any major errors."

Another adviser added, "I don't think we have to crush anybody."

Said one ranking Bush aide: "I don't think this first debate is the be-all and
end-all of the election. We've got four chances to get our message out there in
the next week. It's the whole that counts."

Mr. Clinton will spend most of the next few days in Kansas City, Mo., preparing
for the debate, while Mr. Bush planned to begin full-time preparations on Friday
at the White House.

The Clinton campaign's communications director, George Stephanopoulos, said Mr.
Clinton would hammer away at two points on Sunday: "Make sure people understand
Governor Clinton's plans for the country. Make sure they understand the truth
about the Bush record on the economy."

The Bush campaign's political director, Mary Matalin, said that suited Mr. Bush
fine.

"The President needs to talk about what's on his economic agenda," she said.
"And if people actually watch what each of these three guys say, we win. Because
I know when it's explained, they prefer our policies."

Bush and Clinton aides alike called it probable that Mr. Perot would use the
forum to berate Mr. Bush's economic policies more than to criticize Mr. Clinton,
and some Bush advisers expressed concern today that the Sunday session would
devolve into a steady "pinging on the President," as one put it.

But that same senior official, who spoke on condition of anonymity, also claimed
to see a potential upside in Mr. Perot's appearance: "Having the three of them
on the same stage, and with Perot as strange as he is, it does sort of
underscore who's President," he said.

Stealing Rival's Thunder

It was clear that Mr. Bush's campaign is looking hard for upsides these days,
and that the three Presidential debates and the one Vice-Presidential session
are being viewed almost as last-grasp opportunities to steal the momentum of the
race away from Mr. Clinton.

"If he lands punches on two of three nights, we're back in the game," said a
Republican strategist who is advising the Bush campaign. "Obviously, we need a
shift of about eight points out of the debates if we're going to be
competitive."

A senior White House official who spoke on the condition of anonymity said:
"Sunday is his best shot at breaking through. If Bush doesn't open up an avenue
that Quayle can pick up on Tuesday and that we can pursue again on Thursday,
we've got trouble."

The official was referring to the second scheduled Presidential debate, on
Thursday, and to Tuesday's planned debate between Vice President Quayle, Mr.
Clinton's running mate, Senator Al Gore of Tennessee, and retired Vice Adm.
James B. Stockdale, the former Vietnam prisoner of war who is Mr. Perot's choice
for Vice President.

Mr. Bush's advisers suggested their boss's debate preparation had been desultory
so far. The President has met once or twice for briefings with top policy and
political aides, including his chief of staff, James A. Baker 3d; Mr. Baker's
chief policy adviser, Robert Zoellick; the campaign chairman, Robert M. Teeter,
and Mr. Darman, the budget director. His studies beyond that have been limited
to reading papers in spare time, aides said.

Aides declined to say who chose Mr. Darman and Mr. Sununu for the President's
mock debate opponents. But they noted that Mr. Darman took a similar role in
1988, playing Mr. Dukakis in practice rounds. And they said that Mr. Sununu
volunteered for the Perot role.

The two are unlikely to go easy on the President. Both are identified in
countless newspaper articles with the adjectives "brainy" and "imperious," and
stories of their scorched-earth management styles are legendary in Washington.

For its own practice debate, the Clinton campaign has recruited Bob Barnett, a
Washington lawyer, to play the role of George Bush and Representative Mike
Synar, Democrat of Oklahoma, to stand in for Mr. Perot.

Two other lawyers are supervising the debate preparations for Mr. Clinton. They
are Thomas Donilon, who worked for Mr. Dukakis in 1988, and Victoria Raad, who
helped manage Mr. Clinton's Vice Presidential selection process this summer.

Unlike his rivals, Mr. Perot will limit his debate preparation to reading, not
practicing with stand-ins for his opponents, Mr. Swindle said. "He's doing it
without spin doctors, without preparation," he said. "He did not go home to rest
his voice like Mr. Clinton. He's not being rehearsed by mock Bill Clinton and
George Bushes."

In Mr. Gore's practice rounds for Tuesday's vice presidential debate,
Representative Dennis E. Eckart of Ohio will stand in for Vice President Dan
Quayle, Clinton campaign officials said.

Mr. Quayle is asking Senator Warren B. Rudman of New Hampshire to play Mr. Gore,
and Kenneth Adelman, an arms-control negotiator in the Reagan Administration, to
stand in for Mr. Stockdale.

Late today, officials in the campaigns were said to be close to agreeing on a
panel of journalists to ask questions at Sunday's debate, a process one aide
wearily complained had become "more elaborate than selecting a pope."

"They submit a list. We submit a list. They submit a list. We submit a list. We
find common names and they keep getting whittled down until you get the
panelists," that aide said.

LOAD-DATE: October 8, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: George Stephanopoulos, communications director for Gov. Bill
Clinton's campaign, said his candidate will "make sure people understand
Governor Clinton's plan for the country" during the Presidential debate Sunday.
Mr. Stephanopoulos viewed a campaign commercial yesterday in Little Rock, Ark.
(Monica Almeida/The New York Times) (pg. A30)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              36 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 8, 1992, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Panel to Study Aerial Photos for Hints on P.O.W.'s

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 13; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 674 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 7


A Senate committee investigating the fate of Americans still unaccounted for
from the Vietnam War has turned its attention to reports that satellite
photography may have picked up messages from prisoners as late as 1988.

The panel, the Senate Select Committee on P.O.W.-M.I.A. Affairs, plans to hold
hearings on this issue on Oct. 15 and 16 but has not decided how much will be
public, Senator John F. Kerry, Democrat of Massachusetts and the committee
chairman, said in an interview on Tuesday. The committee has been holding closed
intelligence briefings on the issue, and many once-classified Government
documents have been made public.

"There are some people saying these should be closed," Senator Charles E.
Grassley, Republican of Iowa, said of the hearings next week. "My general
approach to government is: If in doubt, have it out in the open." Many officials
are reluctant to risk discussion of intelligence-gathering methods in public.

The photographs under investigation, analyzed in newly released Pentagon and
Central Intelligence Agency documents, seemed to show letters or symbols marked
on the ground or incorporated in building markings. The signs appear to match
those that service personnel were told to use to identify their locations in
captivity.

Some analysts concede the possibility that the symbols could be military code,
but say they have no evidence that Americans created them. Vietnam has insisted
since 1973 that all American prisoners of war, including those in Laos, were
returned that year.

The two most compelling cases of apparent messages involve markings spotted on
the roof of the Dong Mang prison camp, near Cam Pha in northern Vietnam, in May
1976, and the letters "USA" and possibly "K" -- an assigned code -- seen on a
ricefield near Sam Neua, Laos, in 1988.

The C.I.A. analyzed the Dong Mang report in July 1976 and concluded, "We were
unable to find any conclusive evidence that this prison might contain American
P.O.W.'s."

Photographs apparently showed a pattern worked into roof coverings during repair
work. One of the symbols appeared to be "K" in Morse code; others, less clear,
may have read "NT" and "TA." Analysts have not explained what those letters
might mean.

In the Laotian ricefield, a January 1988 photo picked up "USA" in 11-foot-tall
letters over an area where it had not been the previous autumn and would not be
the following spring. The "K" seemed an older marking.

"Paddies in this area are generally harvested in October or November and are
allowed to remain fallow until planting season in February or March," a
Government report said in December 1988. "It is likely that the symbol was made
after the 1987 harvest, but before the paddy was replowed and flooded for the
1988 planting."

Missing Americans were known to have disappeared in the area. But
American-backed anti-Government Laotians also operated there, and United States
officials in Southeast Asia suspect that the letters could have been dug into
the ground by the rebels, some of whom have close ties with Americans who have
been active in the P.O.W.-M.I.A issue.

Some of those Americans are veterans who may have known the location codes,
leading some analysts to say that both the Americans and the rebels might want
to embarrass the Communist Government of Laos and publicize the issue in the
United States.

Today, the committee released closed-door testimony given on July 1 by Ross
Perot, the Texas businessman and candidate for President. A large part related
to his trips to Vietnam and Laos in 1969 and 1970.

Mr. Perot told the committee counsel that on several occasions between 1969 and
1987, he had discussed possible trades of money or equipment for prisoners.
Once, in 1970, Mr. Perot said, the North Vietnamese Ambassador in Laos offered
to release prisoners in return for medical equipment.

Mr. Perot also said in July and in public testimony in August that he had met
several times with a Communist Pathet Lao official who, he said, acknowledged
holding prisoners.

LOAD-DATE: October 8, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              37 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 8, 1992, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Foreign Affairs;
No More Hawks and Doves

BYLINE: By LESLIE H. GELB

SECTION: Section A; Page 35; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 713 words


Bill Clinton is actually doing something important in this campaign. He is
trying to replace the old hawk-dove divide by exploring new standards for U.S.
military intervention. He is also groping for a new American internationalism
for a messy new world where threats are largely economic and foreign and
domestic matters have become inseparable.

But it is virtually impossible to get a debate going on these ideas. The
Bush-Baker crowd, ever searching for an election-reversing glob of magical
slime, chooses not to engage. In fact, President Bush has not devoted a speech
to national security in months. Instead, he typically accuses Mr. Clinton of
being a closet dove hiding behind waffling rhetoric.

Typically, the press sets off on the trail of this well-designed hare. Alas, the
hare must then be cornered before the larger debate on future U.S. foreign
policy can begin.

The press game of psycho-historical analysis starts just where the Bush-Baker
crowd desires -- with Vietnam. Supposedly, old draft-dodger Clinton was so
traumatized by that war that he lacks the guts and moral stature to send
Americans off to fight.

What odd and hypocritical logic. Yes, many liberals were so traumatized. But no
one was more chastened on the use of force than Vietnam hawks like Republican
conservatives, right-wingers and the U.S military. Few put up stiffer resistance
to military action in Iraq and Bosnia than Defense Secretary Richard Cheney and
Gen. Colin Powell. Patrick Buchanan, the self-proclaimed tough guy, wanted no
part of the gulf war.

To be sure, Mr. Clinton's initial position on Iraq was fuzzier than he
subsequently claimed. He did struggle over what to do. But not much more than
General Powell, who is still rightly revered.

It no longer makes any sense to speak of hawks and doves. Vietnam was Vietnam.
The cold war was the cold war. The two old battlegrounds -- whether to send
armed forces to fight "Soviet surrogates" in the third world and how much to
spend on defense -- have largely vanished. Hawks like former Defense Secretary
James Schlesinger opposed intervention against Iraq. Doves like former Secretary
of State Cyrus Vance favor much tougher action against the Serbs than most
traditional hawks will even contemplate.

The old hawks are regrouping around the classic isolationist standard: Use force
only when U.S. interests and territory could be directly and militarily
threatened. That yardstick allows most of them to advocate force against
countries like Iraq that develop nuclear and long-range missile capabilities.
But it shuts the door on responding to other kinds of threats or protecting
other American values.

That narrowness troubles Mr. Clinton and the old doves. They too would respond
to direct threats, but not automatically with force. And they also want to
respond militarily in other cases. They would employ a small U.S. force to
control civil violence in Somalia or southern Iraq, simply to feed people and
save lives. They would use force in limited and specific ways in Bosnia both to
stop the slaughter and to guard broader U.S. interests in Europe.

As they see it, Serbian violence in Bosnia drives refugees westward, putting
undue pressure on West European economies and creating dangerous political
instability in Germany. Also, failing to check the Serbs in Bosnia might invite
them to move against Albanians in Kosovo. This could draw Turkey and Greece into
a wider war. Such situations threaten all kinds of U.S. economic-strategic
interests.

Mr. Clinton is working at these tough issues. Yet the Bush-Baker crowd dismisses
serious churning as waffling. Perhaps they have lost the capacity to distinguish
between waffling and thinking. Perhaps they are so stuck in old-think that they
cannot see the need to redefine American interests -- at the very moment when
narrow economic fears could drive the nation to a new form of isolationism.

There are few votes in these issues for either candidate. No banners will be
raised to advance Mr. Bush's charges of Mr. Clinton's dovishness or to celebrate
Mr. Clinton's thoughtfulness. Which makes it all the more troubling that George
Bush and James Baker, who have much to contribute on national security matters,
offer nothing but trivial slime.

LOAD-DATE: October 8, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              38 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 8, 1992, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Why Generals Get Nervous

BYLINE: By Colin L. Powell;  Gen. Colin L. Powell is Chairman of the Joint
Chiefs of Staff.

SECTION: Section A; Page 35; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 730 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


There has been a spate of commentary recently over the use of American military
force to deal with the vexing problems of an untidy post-cold war world. The
military has been criticized for being too reluctant to use force. In a recent
editorial, for example, The New York Times suggested that the military has a "no
can do" attitude and asked whether America is getting a fair return on its
defense investment.

The editorial even reached back to the famous exchange between President Lincoln
and General McClellan during the Civil War. Lincoln, frustrated with McClellan's
slowness in engaging the enemy, told him, "If you don't want to use the Army, I
should like to borrow it for a while."

Let me respond by reviewing a little more recent history. During the last three
years U.S. armed forces have been used repeatedly to defend our interests and
achieve our political objectives. In December 1989, a dictator was removed from
power in Panama. In that same month, when a coup threatened to topple democracy
in the Philippines, a limited use of force helped prevent it.

In January 1991, a daring night raid rescued our embassy in Somalia.  That same
month, we rescued stranded foreigners and protected our embassy in Liberia. We
waged a major war in the Persian Gulf to liberate Kuwait. Moreover, we have used
our forces for humanitarian relief operations in Iraq, Somalia, Bangladesh,
Russia and Bosnia. American C-130 aircraft are part of the relief effort in
Sarajevo.

All of these operations had one thing in common: they were successful. There
have been no Bay of Pigs, failed desert raids, Beirut bombings and no Vietnams.
Today, American troops around the world are protecting the peace in Europe, the
Persian Gulf, Korea, Cambodia, the Sinai and the western Sahara.

Unwilling to use the armed forces? Tell that to our troops who are constantly
being deployed to accomplish these missions. Americans know they are getting a
hell of a return on their defense investment, even as the critics shout for
imprudent reductions that would gut the armed forces.

The reason for our success is that in every instance we have carefully matched
the use of military force to our political objectives. President Bush, more than
any other recent President, understands the proper use of military force. In
every instance, he has made sure that the objective was clear and that we knew
what we were getting into. We owe it to the men and women who go in harm's way
to make sure that their lives are not squandered for unclear purposes.

Military men and women recognize more than most people that not every situation
will be crystal clear. We can and do operate in murky, unpredictable
circumstances. We offer a range of options. But we also recognize that military
force is not always the right answer. If force is used imprecisely or out of
frustration rather than clear analysis, the situation can be made worse.

Decisive means and results are always to be preferred, even if they are not
always possible. So you bet I get nervous when so-called experts suggest that
all we need is a little surgical bombing or a limited attack. When the desired
result isn't obtained, a new set of experts then comes forward with talk of a
little escalation. History has not been kind to this approach.

The crisis in Bosnia is especially complex. Our policy and the policy of the
international community have been to assist in providing humanitarian relief to
the victims of that terrible conflict, one with deep ethnic and religious roots
that go back a thousand years. The solution must ultimately be a political one.
Deeper military involvement beyond humanitarian purposes requires great care and
a full examination of possible outcomes. That is what we have been doing.

Whatever is decided on this or the other challenges that will come along,
Americans can be sure that their armed forces will be ready, willing and able to
accomplish the mission.

Finally, allow me to set the record straight on President Lincoln's frustration
with General McClellan. Lincoln's problem with McClellan was that McClellan
would not use the overwhelming force available to him to achieve a decisive
result. Lincoln had set out clear political objectives. McClellan acted in a
limited, inconclusive way.

We have learned the proper lessons of history, even if some journalists have
not.

LOAD-DATE: October 8, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              39 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 9, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Vietnam War;
Campaign Focus on Vietnam Reviving Debates of the 60's

BYLINE: By MICHAEL KELLY with DAVID JOHNSTON,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 2089 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 8


In the fall and winter of 1969, several important things happened in the life of
a bright, ambitious young man named Bill Clinton.

After months of elaborate effort, he finally beat the draft for the Vietnam War,
drawing a number high enough in the new national lottery that he would never be
inducted. He became, in a small way, a figure within the antiwar movement,
helping to organize one of the largest marches on Washington the movement ever
produced and serving as a chief organizer of two small demonstrations in London.
He took a trip through the Scandinavian countries, Russia and Czechoslovakia.

In later years, as Mr. Clinton charted the political course toward his childhood
dream of the Presidency, he did not often publicly speak of the events of that
year, and when he did, it was in vague and passive terms, as if he had been a
sort of accidental tourist of his times.

'Just a Fluke'

To hear Mr. Clinton bear reluctant witness to his past, it had been "just a
fluke" that he was never drafted. Of peace demonstrations, he remembered only
that he had "attended two or three, to hear the speeches."

Now, in the fall of 1992, with Mr. Clinton close to his goal, those who would
stop him have turned their increasingly frightened attention to events 23 years
ago, hoping to find in them something that will convince voters that a change
from George Bush is not worth the risk of Bill Clinton.

The Bush campaign's effort to use episodes from Mr. Clinton's past to embarrass
him began with accusations from surrogates and finally, this week, from the
President himself. [Page A20.]

What the Story Shows

The story, as far as it is clear, of Mr. Clinton's antiwar activities in 1969
and what he and the Republicans alike are saying about that in 1992 is
illustrative of several points about that time and this one.

It shows, as Democrats are saying publicly and even some Republicans are saying
privately, how desperate the Republicans have become. It shows, as Republicans
like to say, how Mr. Clinton has tended to shade the edges of his life.

But above all, it shows how sharp the difference remains between Mr. Bush's
world and Mr. Clinton's, between the clear moral absolutes of the generation of
World War II and the muddied gropings of those who came of age during the
Vietnam War.

The exact nature of Mr. Clinton's antiwar activities has been confused by both
Republican exaggeration and Democratic obfuscation. But a basic outline seems
clear.

Although Mr. Clinton has described his participation in peace demonstrations as
limited to that almost of a curious passer-by, the candidate's previous
statements and those of several friends and of antiwar protesters indicate a
more substantial involvement. Mr. Clinton was a chief organizer of two London
rallies in the fall of 1969 and also helped, to an apparently much lesser
degree, organize the huge march on Washington on Oct. 15, 1969.

Yet, if Mr. Clinton appears to have minimized his activities, it also appears
true that the Republicans are wrong to depict him, as they have in an escalating
campaign that critics have called red-baiting, as a major antiwar organizer or
Communist sympathizer.

No evidence has surfaced indicating that the young Mr. Clinton ever took part in
any violent political actions or was an important antiwar organizer, or was ever
radicalized in the process. And despite many Republican insinuations to the
contrary, neither has evidence been produced to indicate that Mr. Clinton's 1969
trip to the Soviet Union and Czechoslovakia was financed or controlled by the
Soviet Government.

Indeed, many of those involved with Mr. Clinton at the time recall him as
something of a milquetoast by the fire-breathing standards of late 1960's
radicalism, a young man driven by a desire to remake his country, not to reject
it.

It is also clear that the actions of the 23-year-old Mr. Clinton -- in avoiding
military induction, in demonstrating against the foreign policy of the United
States, even in traveling to the Soviet Union -- were not unusual in the context
of his generation. Indeed, they were almost prototypical of those who, like Mr.
Clinton, were part of the intellectual elite of that generation.

A Generation Apart

But if Mr. Clinton was typical of his class and time, the actions of that class
and the tenor of that time was not at all typical of American history; no other
generation has ever acted in quite the fashion as Mr. Clinton's did, nor stirred
more unresolved passions. Now, in the person of Mr. Clinton, American voters
face for the first time the possibility that a generation that once took to the
streets to publicly denounce America will lead it.

What is unknown -- but will be known on Nov. 3 -- is whether it matters much
anymore.

As Mr. Clinton pointed out today, "Mr. Bush in his Inaugural Address had a
wonderful phrase about how the Vietnam War cleaves us still and it was time to
put it behind us." He added, "And now, because he's behind, he's tried to raise
all the challenges of that time."

The Republican campaign to paint Mr. Clinton as a man with a secretly militant
history began on Sept. 18, the first night of eight in which a quartet of
conservative Congressmen took to the deserted floor of the House of
Representatives to denounce Mr. Clinton for the benefit of C-Span cameras.

The speeches of Representatives Robert K. Dornan, Randy (Duke) Cunningham and
Duncan Hunter, all Republicans from California, and Sam Johnson, Republican of
Texas, were extraordinary for a level of violent, hyperbolic accusations that
echoed the red-baiting rhetoric of 40 years ago.

In nightly tirades, the speakers described Mr. Clinton as a "useful idiot" to
the Soviet Government, as a man who, in other countries would have been "tried
as a traitor or even shot," as a "full-time organizer for demonstrations against
his country in a foreign country," as a man "directly responsible" for the
deaths of American military men in Vietnam. They compared the Democratic
Presidential nominee to Tokyo Rose, the anti-American radio propagandist of
World War II, and to Ho Chi Minh, the Communist leader of North Vietnam.

On Wednesday, Mr. Bush himself picked up the brush.

"I cannot for the life of me understand mobilizing demonstrations and
demonstrating against your own country, no matter how strongly you feel, when
you are in a foreign land," Mr. Bush said, in an interview on the CNN program
"Larry King Live." "Maybe I'm old-fashioned, but to go to a foreign country and
demonstrate against your own country when your sons and daughters are dying
halfway around the world, I am sorry but I think that is wrong."

Clinton Forced to Respond

Mr. Clinton was forced to respond, and did so today, calling Mr. Bush
"desperate" and saying he felt "really sad" for him.

Mr. Clinton said, as he has always said, that he had been an outspoken opponent
of the war, but defended his activities in 1969 as innocent and minor. He said
he "helped put together a teach-in at the University of London" and that had
been "the only thing I ever helped put together." He acknowleged that he had
"participated" in a demonstration at the American embassy.

Mr. Clinton's own words, included in a letter he wrote on Dec. 3, 1969, appear
to belie the claim that he organized, or helped to organize, only one event, the
teach-in.

"I have written and spoken and marched against the war," he wrote in a letter to
the director of the Reserve Officers Training Corps at the University of
Arkansas, explaining why he had reneged on a commitment to join the program.
"After I left Arkansas last summer, I went to Washington to work in the national
headquarters of the Moratorium, then to England to organize the Americans here
for demonstrations Oct. 15 and Nov. 16."

The "Moratorium" Mr. Clinton referred to was one of two enormous international
antiwar protests of 1969, culminating in a huge protest march in Washington on "
Vietnam Moratorium Day," Oct. 15.

David Mixner, a national co-chairman of the Moratorium, recalls Mr. Clinton as
"not at all a major player in the antiwar movement" but as someone who helped,
in a small way, in the summer of 1969 to organize the fall protests.

"He did some weeks of volunteer work that summer," said Mr. Mixner, who now runs
a political consulting business in Los Angeles. "But he was not a full-time
employee nor a full-time volunteer. He assisted, I remember that, but if you
asked me how, I couldn't tell you. He might have been stuffing envelopes."

In the fall, Mr. Clinton returned to England for his second year in the Rhodes
scholar program at Oxford. On Moratorium Day, about 300 people, mostly American
students, demonstrated peacefully outside the American Embassy in London. The
rally featured two well-known figures, the actor Paul Newman and his wife,
Joanne Woodward. It is apparently this rally that Mr. Clinton claims in his
December 1969 letter to have organized.

Ira Magaziner, who was a fellow student at Oxford in 1969 and is now a senior
economics adviser to the Clinton campaign, said he remembered the October rally
but did not recall Mr. Clinton as an organizer. Like several of Mr. Clinton's
friends of that time who were interviewed this week, he remembers the student
from Arkansas as intensely interested in issues like the war and racism, but not
as a radical.

'Very Conventional Group'

"This was a very conventional group of people, not people who were burning flags
or shouting 'pig' at the police," he said. "This was a group of people who had
succeeded at school and were in the mainstream in their campuses and believed
very much in solutions within the system."

On Nov. 15, in conjunction with the second major wave of protests in America,
another demonstration was held in front of the American Embassy at Grosvenor
Square. This rally, known as "the March of Death," was larger than the October
rally, drawing about 1,500 people, who filed silently in front of the embassy.
The marchers bore a coffin and, according to a contemporary account, carried
cards with the names of servicemen who died in Vietnam. They walked to a
megaphone in front of the embassy, called out the name and then dropped the card
into a makeshift coffin.

Republicans have said Mr. Clinton took part in this demonstration and even
helped negotiate with American Embassy officials to take the coffin inside. It
is not clear if this is true.

What is clear, both by his own account and those of others present, is that Mr.
Clinton played a role in organizing a related, but separate, demonstration on
Nov. 16, which also took place at the American Embassy and across the square at
St. Mark's Church.

That rally was peaceful, according to both witnesses and news accounts, but
pointed in its message of disapproval of American conduct in the war. "We
marched past the steps of the American Embassy," said Richard Stearns, a Rhodes
scholar who is now a circuit court judge in Massachusetts. "I remember we all
laid little white crosses on the steps, in silence, one by one, and then marched
across the square to the church."

These same accounts -- and all verifiable accounts to date -- also argue
strongly against Republican claims and insinuations that Mr. Clinton was either
a major organizer of antiwar protests or a radical one.

In the case of the Nov. 16 rally, for instance, Mr. Clinton's friends recall
that he wished to hold the rally a day later than the "March of Death" affair
precisely because he thought the larger demonstration would be too radical.

Mr. Stearns said that while there were many radical and Communist-influenced
groups involved in the antiwar protests in London at that time, Mr. Clinton
shunned them. "They were pretty much over the edge of what Bill considered
respectable," he said.

A second aspect of Mr. Clinton's activities that has come under heavy Republican
assault is a 40-day trip in late 1969 and early 1970 to several Northern
European and Eastern bloc countries, including the Soviet Union. Mr. Clinton has
been vague about the details of the trip, and his New Year's Eve visit to Moscow
in 1969 has been the subject of the most searing attacks by Republicans.

Mr. Bush elevated the attack on the issue on Wednesday evening. During an
appearance on "Larry King Live" he asked about the trip. "I don't want to tell
you what I really think," Mr. Bush said, adding, "To go to Moscow, one year
after Russia crushed Czechoslovakia, not remember what you saw there."

NAME: Bill Clinton

LOAD-DATE: October 9, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: "I cannot for the life of me understand mobilizing
demonstrations and demonstrating against your own country, no matter how
strongly you feel, when you are in a foreign land," President Bush said of Gov.
Bill Clinton's anti-war activities in London in 1969. Mr. Bush spoke in an
interview Wednesday night on the CNN program "Larry King Live." (CNN) (pg. A20)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              40 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 9, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Independent;
New Questions About Perot-Bush Link on Vietnam

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 21; Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 684 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 8


Ross Perot's re-entry into the Presidential race and the release this week of
testimony he gave to a Senate panel last summer has reawakened interest in his
involvement with President Bush in efforts to resolve the issue of Americans
missing from the Vietnam War.

In a closed session on July 1, Mr. Perot told the counsel for the Senate panel
that in 1986, Vice President George Bush asked him to look into a report that a
man imprisoned in Singapore was offering to sell, for $4.2 million, a videotape
of Americans being held in slave labor in Laos.

"The Vice President asked me if I would acquire the tape and, if it were
authentic, the U.S. Government was to reimburse me," Mr. Perot told the counsel,
J. William Codinha of the Senate Select Committee on P.O.W.-M.I.A. Affairs. The
committee made the 315-page transcript public on Wednesday.

Although Mr. Perot repeated that testimony in a public hearing in August, it
received little attention at the time because he had withdrawn from the
Presidential race.

Bush Active on the Issue

The videotape never materialized in 1986. Mr. Perot said that when he tried to
reach Mr. Bush later to report on his findings, the Vice President said that he
knew nothing about the project.

At the Senate's request, the Bush Administration is declassifying thousands of
Government documents on Americans missing in Indochina. The documents, along
with Mr. Perot's testimony last summer, have renewed interest in the issue as
the Presidential campaign enters its final weeks. The testimony indicates that
Mr. Bush was actively involved in the issue and eager to enlist Mr. Perot's
support.

Later in 1986, Mr. Bush asked Mr. Perot to "make one last sweep" through the
files of the prisoners of war and the missing in action to re-examine cases, the
Texas billionaire said.

"I told him I did not want to because I knew we had left men in Laos and I did
not need to make a study to prove that, and that I had real concerns whether or
not our Government would do anything if I did make a study and proved it again,"
Mr. Perot told the committee counsel in July.

In testimony in both July and August, Mr. Perot did not produce any new evidence
that Americans had survived captivity in Laos or Vietnam.

Mr. Perot became active in the prisoner issue in 1969, while the war was still
going on and captive Americans were being denied internationally accepted
standards of reasonable treatment and communications with their families. He
continued to follow cases of the missing after American troops were withdrawn
from Indochina in 1973. He made his last trip to Laos in 1987.

Perot Sees a Pattern

In his testimony, Mr. Perot said that as recently as last year, Government
officials were asking him to pay for projects concerning prisoners of war and
those missing in action. He said the Central Intelligence Agency asked him in
1991 to help the Defense Department pay for the production of information
demanded by the Senate committee.

"Now, if you just look at how we operate, any time I get a call like this, there
is a pattern," Mr. Perot told the committee in a public session on Aug. 11.
"I'll say, 'Have the head of the National Security Council give me a green light
and I'll do it.' I never heard back."

Mr. Perot repeated earlier assertions that the Vietnamese had sent a death squad
to the United States to kill him during the Vietnam War, and he said that when
he was invited to Hanoi in 1986 he demanded that the United States Government
send a team of officials ahead of him.

Throughout his testimony to the committee, Mr. Perot sought to portray himself
as a man who understood how the Indochinese countries worked and knew how to
deal with Hanoi.

In his July testimony, Mr. Perot and the committee counsel, Mr. Codinha, sparred
over the Texan's belief that any Americans might still be alive.

In responding to the counsel, Mr. Perot said that the onus was not on the United
States to prove that Americans are still alive in Indochina, but on the
Governments of Laos and Vietnam to account for what happened to them.

LOAD-DATE: October 9, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              41 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 9, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Political Memo;
Clinton's 4-Point Plan To Win the First Debate

BYLINE: By GWEN IFILL,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 21; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 769 words

DATELINE: KANSAS CITY, Mo., Oct. 8


Gov. Bill Clinton landed in this rainy, cold, windswept city today to huddle
with top aides to try to figure out how to embarrass George Bush, quash Ross
Perot and leave St. Louis on Sunday night the victor of the first debate.

"I'm going to try to hole up in my room and read my briefing books and get my
voice back and practice a little," Mr. Clinton said in a hoarse voice before he
disappeared.

To hear Mr. Clinton's advisers tell it, they are in the catbird's seat. The sort
of political spin that campaign advisers usually save until after the debate
started informally today as reporters waited on the tarmac at the Little Rock,
Ark., airport for Mr. Clinton to arrive.

To the extent that political spin reflects political strategy, here is an idea
of what the Clinton partisans are hoping to accomplish in the days leading up to
the first debate.

TACTIC ONE Make sure that President Bush enters the debate looking like a
struggling loser. He does not deserve re-election, this reasoning goes, because
he has done what voters claim to hate -- attack, attack, attack.

"What has George Bush done in the last two months?" demanded George
Stephanopoulos, the campaign's communications director. "He's got ads up on TV
that don't mention a word about him. He hasn't on the stump offered one
proposal, offered one new idea, said anything positive about where he wants to
take the country, hasn't given the American people anything to hold onto in a
second Bush term. And I think it's really stupid politics."

TACTIC TWO Publicly ignore Ross Perot, but prepare anyway, because no one really
knows what to expect from him. He may not look like much in the polls, but a
candidate who attracted 16 million television viewers for a half-hour political
commercial and got on the ballot in 50 states cannot be written off.

TACTIC THREE "It's the economy, stupid." This slogan, posted in the Little Rock
campaign headquarters, is a reminder to all who approach the Clinton campaign
that their strongest hand is reminding voters what has made them angry about
George Bush.

"George Bush is diminishing himself," said Stan Greenberg, the campaign's poll
taker. "Every minute he spends talking about something other than the economy, I
think, is a problem for him. Part of the reason people are angry at the
President is because he's not addressing the economy."

TACTIC FOURBe prepared to counterattack. Aides to Mr. Clinton were startled by
the President's decision to begin a frontal attack on Mr. Clinton by
characterizing him as an anti-war activist who demonstrated against his own
country on foreign soil -- while he was a Rhodes Scholar at Oxford University in
England.

But even before Mr. Bush made his remarks on the CNN program "Larry King Live"
on Wednesday night, Mr. Clinton's strategists had begun stepping up their effort
to build a case against Mr. Bush's trustworthiness by criticizing the Bush
Administration's role in providing loans to Iraq shortly before the Persian Gulf
war.

Avoiding Too Much Detail

For millions of potential voters who do not attend political rallies or
exclusive fund-raising dinners, the three Presidential debates will become the
first opportunity that they have had to assess the candidates for themselves.

During the primary season, when Mr. Clinton shared a stage with as many as five
other candidates at a time, the Arkansas Governor often proved himself a
pedantic debater.

Asked last week what the hardest part of debating was, he said it "may be just
remembering that it's not like an oral exam." He added, "You can't tell
everything you know on every question."

When Mr. Clinton broke through his tendency to talk too long and in too much
detail, it was often with calculated but seemingly genuine explosions of anger.
He did this during an Illinois debate when he warned former Gov. Edmund G. Brown
Jr. of California not to criticize his wife, Hillary.

And, of course, the candidate's aides are working to guard against that most
fatal of debate problems -- the major gaffe.

"I'm not worried about what we say, but how we say it," an adviser said. "If
you're defensive, you're dead meat."

Mr. Clinton's aides have one other concern: Mr. Bush will attack, Mr. Clinton
will counterattack and Mr. Perot will smilingly remain above the fray watching
the two career politicians go at it.

Presented with this scenario, Mr. Stephanopoulos paused. He shrugged.

The problem for the President, he said, is "if he spends the whole time
attacking, he will continue to fall." He paused again as he turned to walk away,
then added: "I think."

LOAD-DATE: October 9, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Gov. Bill Clinton of Arkansas arriving yesterday in Kansas City
to prepare for the Presidential candidates' debate on Sunday in St. Louis.
(Monica Almeida/The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              42 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 9, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Republicans;
Bush Escalates Attack on Clinton For His Anti-Vietnam War Protests

BYLINE: By ANDREW ROSENTHAL,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 20; Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 1005 words

DATELINE: HOUSTON, Oct. 8


President Bush tonight escalated his attack on Gov. Bill Clinton for his antiwar
activities in London 23 years ago as the Republican campaign pressed its effort
to portray the Democratic nominee as unpatriotic and incapable of safeguarding
the nation's security.

"I can't understand someone mobilizing demonstrations in a foreign country when
poor kids, drafted out of the ghettos, are dying in a faraway land," Mr. Bush
said at an elaborate fund-raising dinner here that was linked by satellite to
similar dinners across the country.

"You can call me old-fashioned," Mr. Bush said, "but that just does not make
sense to me."

Although Mr. Bush's assault on Mr. Clinton was direct and unapologetic tonight,
it grew out of a much more indirect effort conducted behind the scenes in recent
weeks by his advisers to unearth embarrassing episodes from Mr. Clinton's past
and force them into public view.

The offensive followed the pattern set by the Bush campaign's earlier handling
of Mr. Clinton's draft record: a common political tactic of gathering damaging
information about an opponent and making it public initially through surrogates.
This generates the news coverage the campaign is seeking, and it allows the
candidate to say that he is merely responding to questions that are already in
public discussion.

Mr. Bush, pressed by Republican lawmakers at a breakfast on Tuesday to be much
tougher in his comments on the draft and related issues, signaled today that he
intended to continue attacking Mr. Clinton over his antiwar activities.
Republicans hope the issue will haunt Mr. Clinton at the first Presidential
debate on Sunday night, just as the Clinton team hopes that by raising questions
about Mr. Bush's Iraq policy and the Iran-contra scandal now, those issues will
come up in the debate.

Mr. Bush might feel uncomfortable about raising Mr. Clinton's antiwar activities
himself at the debate. But they are the sort of issue that Bush aides think
might be raised by the panel of reporters that they insisted be included in two
of the debates. "We're urgently trying to find out everything we can" about Mr.
Clinton's past, a Bush aide said today.

But just as the Republicans may have gone too far in pushing the "family values"
issue at their convention in Houston, they have had trouble in managing the
public discussion of the Vietnam issue.

Bush aides insisted that they were talking about Mr. Clinton's participation in
demonstrations against the Vietnam War in London and about his visit to Moscow
in 1969 to show a pattern of deceptions and half-truths by the Arkansas
Governor, not to make an issue out of what he did two decades ago. "It's
pathological deception," said Mary Matalin, the Bush campaign's political
director.

"If we cannot believe what he says about the past, how can we believe anything
he says about the future?" she asked today as Mr. Bush campaigned in Texas and
Louisiana.

Reopening Old Wounds

But Republican strategists are clearly aware that they are bringing powerful
emotional issues into the campaign and reopening old and deep wounds, and Mr.
Bush has gone well beyond the relatively narrow question of Mr. Clinton's
veracity.

He has not confined himself to simply asking whether Mr. Clinton told the truth
about his draft status and his antiwar activities. Instead, Mr. Bush has
attacked Mr. Clinton for going to Moscow and demonstrating overseas against the
Vietnam War, just as he had made clear on several occasions that he was
specifically making an issue of Mr. Clinton's lack of military service.

"The sons and daughters of Louisiana that served in Desert Storm deserve our
thanks and deserve our support," he shouted today at a rally here. "And so do
those that served in Vietnam."

Mr. Bush said in an interview on Cable News Network on Wednesday night that it
was "wrong" of Mr. Clinton to participate in antiwar demonstrations outside the
borders of the United States. He said Mr. Clinton was lying about his visit to
Moscow, but he offered no evidence of any lies.

And Marlin Fitzwater, Mr. Bush's spokesman, said today: "There's an important
difference about protesting in foreign countries against America. There's a
strong tradition and patriotic sense of supporting our country on foreign
shores."

Reminiscent of '88 Attack

The attack on Mr. Clinton first over the draft and now over his antiwar
activities was reminiscent of Mr. Bush's attack on Gov. Michael S. Dukakis in
1988 on the issues of flag burning and the Pledge of Allegiance.

It also seemed to follow the pattern of a recent foreign election that Mr. Bush
followed closely: Prime Minister John Major's come-from-behind defeat of the
Labor Party candidate Neil Kinnock in Britain. In that case, one newspaper
account raised questions about a visit in the early 1980's by Mr. Kinnock to the
Soviet Embassy in London.

For weeks, the Republicans had been carefully building their case on the issue
of Mr. Clinton's antiwar activities and his Moscow visit. Mr. Bush's research
staff had been combing through records of Mr. Clinton's travels through Europe,
including to Moscow, as part of his tour as a Rhodes scholar at Oxford
University, to find questionable activities or contradictions with his current
account of those years.

One senior campaign official said: "Our line is that it isn't what he did or
didn't do 22 or 23 years ago that's important. It's how his account has changed
dramatically since he first ran for office in 1978."

Bush Campaign Waited

But the Bush campaign did not open its own offensive right away. It waited until
there was a body of public statements by Republican lawmakers and newspaper
articles, all of which could be disclaimed by the re-election team as coming
from other sources.

Last month, Representative Robert K. Dornan, Republican of California, began
talking about Mr. Clinton's Moscow trip in speeches on the floor of the House.
He raised the issue at a Bush campaign rally in Orange County, Calif., a few
weeks ago.

LOAD-DATE: October 9, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: President Bush greeting dockworkers who came to hear him speak
yesterday in New Orleans. (Stephen Crowley/The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              43 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 9, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN;
Clinton Says Desperation Is Fueling Bush Criticism

BYLINE: By GWEN IFILL,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 20; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 378 words

DATELINE: KANSAS CITY, Mo., Oct. 8


Gov. Bill Clinton today dismissed President Bush's criticism of his
participation in anti-war demonstrations as accusations from a political
opponent who was "apparently desperate."

"His campaign has sunk to a new level," he said. "It's just amazing."

"This election so desperately needs to be about the future," Mr. Clinton said as
he left Little Rock, Ark., for a few days of debate preparation here. "Mr. Bush
in his inaugural address had a wonderful phrase about how the Vietnam War
cleaves us still and it was time to put it behind us. And now, because he's
behind, he's tried to raise all the challenges of that time.

'An Outspoken Opponent'

"I was opposed to the war," he said. "I was an outspoken opponent of the war.
Everybody knows that, and I just don't know what else to say to you."

In a television interview on Wednesday night, President Bush criticized the
Democratic Presidential nominee for participating in rallies opposing United
States involvement in Vietnam while he was studying abroad. Other Republicans
have also raised questions about Mr. Clinton's travel to the Soviet Union and
attempted to paint him as a Communist sympathizer.

Mr. Clinton said he did not meet with government officials or peace activists
when he traveled to Moscow in 1969 while he was a Rhodes scholar in England.

"I paid my own way," he said. "I got a visa. And I mostly was just a tourist. I
stayed in the National Hotel as I remember and I toured around the city. I went
out to the university there and talked to some students there. Most of the
people I met even then were very much anti-Soviet, anti-Communist folks."

Mr. Clinton would not characterize the Republican criticism as Red-baiting, but
several of his supporters in Washington called a news conference to denounce Mr.
Bush for questioning Mr. Clinton's patriotism.

Adm. William Crowe, the former chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff under Mr.
Bush and President Reagan, said he was "very distressed" by the President's
remarks.

"I strongly resent the implication that any candidate or any party -- any
political party -- has a monopoly on patriotism," said Admiral Crowe, who had
endorsed Mr. Clinton. "I can testify from my own life and my own service it is
simply not true."


LOAD-DATE: October 9, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              44 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 9, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

BYLINE: By ARI L. GOLDMAN

SECTION: Section A; Page 24; Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 716 words


The Rev. Joseph M. Kitagawa, a theologian who was instrumental in establishing
religion as an independent discipline on America's campuses and in introducing
the religions of Japan to the West, died Wednesday in Chicago.  He was 77 years
old.

He died of pneumonia at the Bernard Mitchell Hospital after suffering a stroke
earlier this year, said Jeff Makos, a spokesman for the University of Chicago.
Dr. Kitagawa was the former dean of the university's School of Divinity.

Dr. Kitagawa, who lived in Hyde Park, had been associated with the divinity
school since he was a doctoral student there in the late 1940's. He joined the
faculty after he graduated in 1951. At the time of his death, he held the title
of professor emeritus and until recently continued publishing and consulting
with students.

A colleague at the divinity school, the Rev. Martin E. Marty, said of Dr.
Kitagawa: "He wrote more books after retirement than many professors write
during their entire lifetime."

His effort to introduce the religions of Japan to the West virtually spanned his
publishing career from his "Religions of the East" in 1960 (Westminster Press)
to "Spiritual Liberation and Human Freedom in Contemporary Asia" in 1990 (Peter
Lang). But his interests were not limited to Japan. His last book, published
earlier this year, was "The Christian Tradition: Beyond its European Captivity"
(Trinity Press International).

Together with the late Mircea Eliade, the theologian who was a colleague at the
divinity school, and others, Dr. Kitagawa was a founding editor in 1960 of the
international journal, "History of Religions." The journal helped define and
establish the study of religion as an independent academic discipline rather
than as an aspect of some other course of study such as sociology or psychology.

Publication of the journal grew out of an international conference on the
History of Religions held in 1959 at the University of Chicago. Essays from the
conference were collected in "The History of Religions: Essays in Methodology,"
(University of Chicago Press), one of numerous books edited by Dr. Kitagawa and
Dr. Eliade.

Dr. Kitagawa served as dean of the divinity school, one of the nation's most
prominent training grounds for Protestant ministers and for the academic study
of religion, from 1970 to 1980.

Surviving Through 'Spirit'

He was born in Osaka, Japan, on March 8, 1915. He came to the United States in
1941 to study theology but his life was disrupted when, like tens of thousands
of others of Japanese ancestry, he was sent to a detention camp by the
Government. He spent three and a half year in detention, first at the Enemy
Alien Detention Camp in Santa Fe, N.M., and later at the Army Internment Camp at
Lordsburg, N.M., where he was ordained as a priest by an Episcopal bishop who
visited the camp. He was then sent to the Minidoka War Relocation Center Camp at
Hunt, Idaho, where he remained until October 1945.

While in internment in Idaho he served as a minister to an Episcopal church as
he did later in Seattle after his release. In his early days at the University
of Chicago, he also worked with Japanese-Americans on behalf of the Episcopal
bishop of Chicago.

Only recently, in his new book, "The Christian Tradition," did he write about
his incarceration. He wrote that the immigrants survived the ordeal through
their "spirit, which enabled them to endure and overcome almost insurmountable
difficulties, disappointments and setbacks."

Dr. Marty, who served as an associate dean during Dr. Kitagawa's first five
years as head of the divinity school, said that Dr. Kitagawa drew on his
incarceration when students at the school were protesting the War in Vietnam.

"He related his experiences as a war-time prisoner during a speech to students,"
Dr. Marty said. "It was the only time I remember him talking about it. He said,
'I know you all have criticism of our country. I do too. You're not the only
generation that has suffered. For almost four years I was detained in a camp.
But I still want this to be my place of destiny.' "

He became a United States citizen in 1955.

Dr. Kitagawa is survived by his wife, Evelyn; a daughter, Anne Rose Kitagawa of
Chicago, and two sisters, Michi Tsuda and Mie Kitagawa of Oaska, Japan.


NAME: Joseph M. Kitagawa

LOAD-DATE: October 9, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Biography; Obituary (Obit)
HEADLINE>Joseph Kitagawa, 77, a Leading Theologian, Dies

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              45 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 9, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Mr. Bush's Campaign Mode: Nasty

SECTION: Section A; Page 32; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 356 words


President Bush's attacks on Gov. Bill Clinton have grown more bitter by the day.
Now Mr. Bush is impugning Mr. Clinton's patriotism with absurd charges that date
back to the Vietnam War. That's not just nasty, it's demagogic. It also consumes
time that Mr. Bush might better spend telling voters why they should re-elect
him.

Mr. Bush's assaults escalated last week when he campaigned in Florida. He
charged Mr. Clinton with having "weak knees and sweaty palms" and said that
electing him would be tantamount to replacing "the American eagle with a
chameleon in the White House."

Mr. Bush has always drawn an odd distinction between his executive and campaign
"modes." The inevitable result is that he ends up sounding more mean-spirited
than Presidential.

He seems fixated on Vietnam, as if one's feelings about that war constitute a
litmus test of patriotism and fitness for high office. He once seemed
comfortable with the sensible position that brave, principled people stood on
both sides of the Vietnam debate. Yet in Florida he offered the divisive and
absurd contention that only those who served in uniform are fit to lead.

Then, in a television interview Wednesday, Mr. Bush made something sinister of
the fact that Mr. Clinton participated in an anti-war demonstration and visited
the Soviet Union, both while he was a student at Oxford University in England.
Millions of Americans demonstrated against the war. No doubt thousands visited
the Soviet Union. Are all of them suspect as well?

What Mr. Bush doesn't seem to get is that all this silly negativism inflicts
more damage on himself than it does on his opponent. First, the public has
become increasingly inured to sour campaigning. Second, the energy Mr. Bush
expends bashing Mr. Clinton could surely be more profitably diverted to putting
his own best foot forward.

The Bush Administration is not without impressive achievements to advertise and
celebrate. It took skillful diplomacy to end the cold war and to assemble the
coalition that confronted Saddam Hussein in Iraq. It's unclear why Mr. Bush has
chosen instead to be nasty and shrill.

LOAD-DATE: October 9, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              46 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 10, 1992, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN;
Bush Softens Attack On Trip by Clinton

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 112 words


President Bush muted his accusation that Gov. Bill Clinton was hiding details of
a trip to Moscow in 1969, at the Vietnam War's height.

Mr. Bush said he now accepted Mr. Clinton's assertion that the visit was a
tourist excursion unrelated to his antiwar activities while a student at Oxford
University in England. But he said he would not stop criticizing Mr. Clinton's
role in antiwar protests that year because "I feel strongly about it" and
asserted, "The American people probably agree with me."

Mr. Clinton dismissed Mr. Bush's contention that his comments were "from the
heart," attributing them to "a prescribed political strategy."

Article, page 9.

LOAD-DATE: October 10, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              47 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 10, 1992, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Overview;
Bush Tones Down Criticism Of Clinton Visit to Moscow

BYLINE: By MICHAEL WINES,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 9; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 908 words

DATELINE: CINCINNATI, Oct. 9


President Bush rushed today to mute an accusation that Gov. Bill Clinton was
hiding details of a trip he took to Moscow at the height of the Vietnam War.

In a morning television interview, Mr. Bush softened somewhat a tactic that an
aide said had backfired. The President said he now accepted Mr. Clinton's
statement that the visit was a tourist excursion unrelated to his activities in
the anti-Vietnam war effort while he was studying at Oxford University in
England.

Mr. Clinton has said that he visited Moscow alone and stayed about a week but
that he cannot remember everyone he met there.

"If that is what he's said and that is the whole truth, sure; I accept that,"
Mr. Bush said in an interview on the ABC program "Good Morning America." "If
he's told all there is to tell on Moscow, fine. I'm not suggesting anything
unpatriotic about that. A lot of people went to Moscow. That's the end of that
one as far as I'm concerned."

But he said he would not stop criticizing Mr. Clinton's role in anti-Vietnam war
protests that same year because, he said, "I feel strongly about it" and "the
American people probably agree with me."

He made good on that pledge hours later in Cincinnati. There he told some 200
police officers that it was wrong to "demonstrate against your country in a
foreign land when soldiers are being held captive and soldiers are dying in
Vietnam."

"I feel strongly about it," he said, the cries from the crowd drowning out his
words. "You let the liberal elite do their number today, trying to call me Joe
McCarthy. I'm standing with American principle."

Mr. Bush was here in Cincinnati to accept the endorsement of the 240,000-member
Fraternal order of Police, the nation's largest police union.

Mr. Clinton has expressed carefully worded outrage about Mr. Bush's charges.

Clinton Challenges

Taking a break from his work to speak to reporters in Kansas City, Mr. Clinton
dismissed Mr. Bush's contention that his comments about Mr. Clinton were "from
the heart."

"It is now obvious from the press reports that far from speaking from his heart,
he is speaking from a prescribed political strategy cooked up in the White House
by Robert Dornan and other extreme right wingers," said Mr. Clinton, referring
to the Republican Representative from California.

An aide to Mr. Bush said today that the President's attempt to use the Moscow
trip as another lever to pry voters away from Mr. Clinton had come across as too
strident, and had only damaged the Bush campaign.

"It backfired," said the aide, who spoke on condition of anonymity. "The intent
was to suggest that this was part of Clinton's efforts to mislead about his
past, not that something clandestine occurred in Moscow. But that's the way it
came off. The interpretation, frankly, bombed."

Conflicting Interpretation

But another Administration official, traveling with Mr. Bush, played down any
interpretation that Mr. Bush was retreating.

"If Clinton has told the truth about his trip to Moscow, as the President has
said, that's fine," the official said, speaking only on the condition of
anonymity. "But if not, he should come clean. Like on the draft issue, he should
tell the truth. Clinton doesn't have a good record on putting forward all the
facts."

The Moscow controversy erupted on Tuesday when, responding to a question on a
Cable News Network interview program, Mr. Bush called on Mr. Clinton to "level
with the American people" about the trip, adding: "You can remember who you saw
in an airport in Oslo, but you can't remember who you saw in Moscow?"

Asked for his opinion of the trip then, Mr. Bush had said: "I don't want to tell
you what I really think. To go to Moscow, one year after Russia crushed
Czechoslovakia, not remember who you saw there----"

Aides said today and on Thursday that Mr. Bush had made the remarks on CNN in
part because he had been "pumped up" on Mr. Clinton's Moscow trip during a
Tuesday breakfast with four Republican Congressmen.

The four -- Representatives Duncan Hunter, Randy (Duke) Cunningham and Dornan,
all of California, and Sam Johnson of Texas -- have spoken angrily in the House
about Mr. Clinton's antiwar activities.

But Mr. Clinton has termed Mr. Bush's offensive a "pathetic" and "desperate"
attempt to gain votes.

The episode paralleled the campaign's effort in August to create a wave of
support for Mr. Bush's emphasis on "family values" at the Republican National
Convention.

Not Backing Away

While saying he now accepted Mr. Clinton's account of the Moscow trip, the
President labored today to keep alive qualms about his opponent's antiwar
activities, saying they raise questions "of judgment and character, not of
patriotism."

In a day in which he divided his attacks equally between his Democratic opponent
and the press, Mr. Bush said he "will continue to define Governor Clinton for
what he is and what his record is," and added: "I'm not going to back away from
it one single bit."

Mr. Clinton, closeted in a hotel in Kansas City to bone up for the debate, said
in his brief session with reporters that Mr. Bush had "turned the Republican
Convention over to the far right for two days and now he's apparently going to
turn his campaign over." The Governor said that in opposing the war in Vietnam,
he spoke out against only "the policy of the Government, not against my
country." He argued that many Vietnam veterans accept that rationale.

LOAD-DATE: October 10, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: President Bush boarding a helicopter yesterday on the grounds of
the White House as he left for several campaign stops in Ohio. (Stephen
Crowley/The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              48 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 10, 1992, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Political Memo;
Of Knights and Presidents: Race of Mythic Proportions

BYLINE: By MAUREEN DOWD,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1675 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 9


The candidates are rehearsing talking points on everything from Arkansas fowl to
the spotted owl. But it is an edgy time for the men who will meet in St. Louis
on Sunday night, because they know that they cannot fully prepare for the most
important, least tangible dimension of Presidential debates.

On the surface, Presidential campaigns are a din of competing issues and a
display of contrasting styles. But there is also a subliminal battle, played out
in rituals like debates and photo opportunities, in which the candidates strive
to show that they are superior in the knightly virtues of temperance, loyalty
and courage.

"There is an unconscious aspect in politics, where we are looking for a hero who
will turn out to be a father figure for the country," said Alan Dundes, a
folklorist at the University of California at Berkeley.

Robin Lakeoff, a professor of linguistics at Berkeley, said that while Americans
like to think of themselves as logical beings who make decisions on a rational
basis, it is not that simple.

"We act modern, cool and sophisticated," Dr. Lakeoff said. "But underneath, we
want a daddy, a king, a god, a hero. We'll take the heel if we can get Achilles,
a champion who will carry that lance and that sword into the field and fight for
us. We're not as rational as we think. It's sort of scary."

Western culture is rooted in millennia of hero legends, from Prometheus stealing
fire from the gods for mankind's benefit, to Jason getting past the dragon to
bring back the Golden Fleece, to young Arthur pulling the sword from the stone
to be King. On top of ancient myths, American culture has overlaid legends of
frontier life, cowboy justice and cops and robbers. Hollywood has been spinning
heroic sagas for decades, from the westerns of John Wayne and Clint Eastwood to
the "Star Wars" trilogy to "Robin Hood" and the latest fall movies, "The Last of
the Mohicans" and "Hero."

Elections, like myths, are about seasons of renewal and how a culture expresses
itself through its choice of leaders. Mr. Dundes observed that America began in
the manner of a classic hero legend: A young hero (George Washington) led a
rebellion against the cruel old king and parent (England) and became the father
of the country himself.

The arc of a political campaign traces the standard pattern of mythological
adventure, as described by Joseph Campbell, in "The Hero With a Thousand Faces"
(Princeton University Press, 1949): "A hero ventures forth from the world of
common day into a region of supernatural wonder; fabulous forces are there
encountered and a decisive victory is won; the hero comes back from this
mysterious adventure with the power to bestow boons on his fellow man."

Candidates and Their Dragons

One important campaign ritual comes when the candidate assures the voters that
he has completed the "hero-task," as it is called by myth experts, that he has
slain the dragon or the giant.

President Bush offers a traditional conquest: He fought the enemy as a pilot in
World War II. Ross Perot left the Navy in persnickety disgust, but he can
promote his "On Wings of Eagles" exploit arranging the rescue of employees from
prison in Iran.

A new generation of leaders who did not go to war, men like Bill Clinton and Dan
Quayle, have had to conjure up other slain Gorgons or Hydras from their past.
The Arkansas Governor has dramatized his account of the moment when, as a
teen-ager, he stood up to an alcoholic stepfather, telling him not to hit his
mother again. The Vice President has said that his character was tested when he
survived the wild beast of politics -- the traveling press corps -- in the 1988
campaign.

Both Mr. Bush and Mr. Clinton feel vulnerable on the critical issue of valor,
and perhaps this is why, even more than usual, the air has been filled with
macho taunts. Mr. Clinton has suggested that Mr. Bush lacks moral courage and
Mr. Bush has contended that Mr. Clinton maneuvered his way out of serving in
Vietnam and was an anti-war activist around the world while "poor kids, drafted
out of the ghettos, were dying in a far-away land."

Mr. Clinton challenged Mr. Bush to face him "man to man" in debates and sent
supporters dressed as chickens to mock the President. Mr. Bush asked each fowl
if it was "the draft-record chicken." When the Bush campaign suggested that
Hillary Clinton was too strong, a classic ploy to suggest that Mr. Clinton is
weak, Mr. Clinton riposted by painting Mr. Bush as feminine, asking whether he
was running for President or First Lady.

The diminutive Ross Perot talks more like Goliath than David, accusing female
reporters of trying to prove their manhood by asking tough questions and summing
up his campaign this way in his half-hour television advertisement this week:
"Y'all understand sports? You got to be the best."

It is so important for the President to prove himself the more valorous that the
Bush campaign is willing to keep tearing at the painfully reopened scars of the
Vietnam war -- after polls have indicated that the American public wants to move
away from the issue. Folklorists note that the stress on this generational
division enhances the epic imagery of a battle between a son and a father in a
land scarred by blight: the young man, raised by a foster parent, who arrives
from the outlands and challenges the old king, who insists his time has not
passed.

Tests of manliness are an extremely sensitive matter with Mr. Bush, who was
coached in 1988 by his media adviser, Roger Ailes, on less flitting hand
gestures. His short list of enemies is topped by critics who have made cracks
about his manhood to convey disdain for his lack of political spine: the
cartoonist Garry Trudeau and the columnist George Will.

Verbal Jousting

Debates offer a modern echo of single combat, once waged with slingshots and
swords in jousting and wrestling matches. "They are the ultimate test of
manhood," said Sheila Tate, a Washington public relations executive who was a
campaign aide to George Bush in 1988. The tension in debates comes not from
palavering on positions but from the prospect that one candidate might be able
to unseat the other with a bold stroke.

At a 1980 debate in New Hampshire, when the organizers threatened to turn off
the sound system as George Bush protested Ronald Reagan's opening the event to
other candidates, Mr. Reagan, who was once described by an aide as having the
demeanor of "an ancient king," borrowed a line from Spencer Tracy in the movie
"State of the Union." "I paid for this microphone," he said, instantly making
Mr. Bush look smaller and more pinched.

In his 1988 debate with Mr. Bush, Michael S. Dukakis bombed when he offered a
robotic response when asked if he would favor the death penalty if someone raped
and murdered his wife, Kitty. Hero-kings do not see tragedy from a legalistic
point of view.

The reason there are always such tortuous negotiations between the two camps
about whether the candidates will be standing or sitting, and how big and how
far apart the lecterns will be, is that strategists understand that Americans,
despite their cynicism, still long for a President who looks heroic. In election
after election, voters respond better to candidates who are tall, handsome and
male. As Mr. Dundes puts it: "There is very little place for women in the hero
pattern. The underlying psychology of elections is about sports and war, where
women were not welcome."

Wendy Sherman, a Democratic consultant, said that women respond to archetypes as
much as men do. "We were all brought up to believe that Prince Charming would
come on a horse and make our life all right," she said.

Television interviews can also be used to simulate single combat. Mr. Bush's
advisers, desperately trying to help him shed the wimp image in 1988, were giddy
after Mr. Bush used the occasion of a testy interview with Dan Rather to issue a
premeditated insult about the time Mr. Rather walked off the "CBS Evening News"
for several minutes, leaving the screen black.

Since 1988, men who would be President have been expected to show more
vulnerability and sensitivity. And this year, the electorate is clearly in the
mood for some nurturing on the domestic front. But strategists agree that while
male candidates can now cry and talk about problems, they still must wage the
epic battle to try to prove that they are stronger, healthier and more gutsy.

Above all, candidates must not let their opponents paint them as weak or wimpy
or chicken or feminine or overly cerebral. Adlai Stevenson and Michael Dukakis
both got into trouble when their opponents tagged them as eggheads.

"Any good advance man automatically looks for virile, macho settings for the
candidate," said Michael McCurry, an adviser to the Clinton campaign. "Of
course, that didn't work when Michael Dukakis drove the tank."

Michael Deaver, a top Reagan aide, said he arranged to light the top of Mr.
Reagan's head at public appearances to give his chestnut mane a soft, halo
effect, and he told the former actor to stand as much as possible to show off
his broad shoulders.

Although candidates are always trying to show off Spartan athletic valor by
tossing footballs around -- usually badly -- and carting reporters off to watch
them play basketball or golf or swim or hunt turkeys or wield axes, it can
backfire. Mr. Clinton recently joined in a nighttime softball game in Glen
Burnie, Md., hoping to beam images of inspiring vigor, and ended up in a
huffing, lumbering run to first base that took so long the outfielder, the first
baseman and the umpire all had to conspire to call him safe.

"On the manhood issue, Clinton has a problem besides the draft," said Lyn
Nofziger, a portly former Reagan aide. "He's basically a fat boy. And he has my
sympathy for that."

The pictures of Bill Clinton and Al Gore jogging have been so relentless that
Jay Leno joked that when the two Democrats appeared this week on the Phil
Donahue show, the topic was "Men who look bad in jogging shorts."

LOAD-DATE: October 10, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Chart: "Debates on the Air"
Live television coverages will be provided by ABC, CBS, NBC, Fox, C-Span, CNN
and PBS. all times are Eastern.

Presidential -- Oct. 11, Sunday
St. Louis, 7 P.M.

Vice Presidential -- Oct. 13, Tuesday
Atlanta, 7 P.M.

Presidential -- Oct. 15, Thursday
Richmond, Va., 9 P.M.

Presidential -- Oct. 19, Monday
East Lansing, Mich., 7 P.M.

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              49 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 10, 1992, Saturday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

ABOUT NEW YORK;
Life, Death and the Need to Explain

BYLINE: By Michael T. Kaufman

SECTION: Section 1; Page 25; Column 4; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 853 words


THEY held a memorial service at St. John the Divine yesterday for H. L. Humes,
who died as a street person in Massachusetts last month some 30 years after his
prodigiously promising literary career was diverted by mental illness.

Among his contemporaries at the service were people like George Plimpton, with
whom he founded The Paris Review, and Joe Fox, the Random House editor who
worked with him on "Underground City," a 750-page novel of war and collaboration
that appeared to enthusiastic reviews when it was published in 1958 when the
author was 32. There were also many younger people among the 200 who filled St.
James Chapel, one a man with a parrot on his shoulder. They could not have met
him as a writer but as the wandering commentator who would hold forth with
brilliance on any of many subjects.

One man remembered how Mr. Humes had once blurted out to a group of people at a
cafe: "Will someone please ask me something? I feel the need to explain."

That image reinforced this columnist's own recollections of the man he had known
as Doc and of his obsessions. Though painful for those who loved him, these
often seemed to take the form of an epochal madness for a nuclear age.

It was 1969. He had turned up at a dormitory at Columbia University, where he
was handing out $100 bills to students along with instructions to spend the
money as fast as they could. I had been sent to cover the story. "We are going
to set off a reverbatory shock wave that will destroy Western finance capital by
Friday," he had explained while sprawled on a bed, a line of students stretching
down the hall. A few weeks later, when the few thousand dollars he had been left
by his father was given away, he was sleeping in parked cars on the Upper West
Side.

In that period, during walks up and down Broadway he revealed ideas and concerns
about the bomb that had thoroughly seized his mind. At the heart of it all was a
total belief that the entire world, all history and all human experience could
end before the completion of an uttered sentence if someone somewhere were to
push the nuclear button. It was obvious on those walks that all those bombs
hidden in silos and poised for delivery, all those images of mushroom clouds,
were as real to him as breakfast. He was crazy because he could not stop
thinking about them while the rest of us were sane and functional because we
could. It did seem odd.

In those conversations, lectures really, Doc Humes kept outlining the clear and
present danger, citing the stockpiles of deadly megatonnage, the likelihood of
accidents and the prospects of proliferation. His last novel, "Men Die,"
published in 1960, had concerned the arms race in a fictional third-world
country.

While he kept focused on the countdown to atomic doomsday, he avoided full
despair by evoking and trusting to what he called "Fido, the family dog." It was
Fido, he said, who offered the only slim chance of bucking the nuclear odds.
Fido, the centerpiece of his complex world view, he confided, was a computer
created by the same humanistically inclined scientists who had ushered in the
nuclear age. It was programmed to protect children and learning and it was doing
its job, whirling around somewhere in space. He said he called it Fido because
it was friendly and protective like the family dog.

Doc Humes, who had gone to M.I.T., understood science. While he was growing up
in Princeton he had known and admired his neighbors Albert Einstein and John Von
Neumann. He insisted that both scientists had been good men who would not have
opened the Pandora's box of nuclear energy without providing some kind of
antidote. Von Neumann, who worked on both the hydrogen bomb and on early
computers, and Einstein must have provided some universal fail-safe mechanism,
he reasoned. If science had led us into the predicament, then science would lead
us out.

He was full of proofs. One day he mentioned that 10 or 12 inches of rain had
fallen on Mississippi in a few days. This, he said, had never happened before.
It was clear, he argued, that Fido was intervening to signal displeasure with a
police attack a week earlier on students in California protesting the Vietnam
War. The way he saw it, Fido had set off a "thumper" in the ionosphere that
caused the rain. The President, the C.I.A. and the leaders in the Kremlin all
knew about Fido, he said, and they had to take the computer's actions into
account and shape their policies accordingly.

By the time Doc Humes died in Cambridge, of cancer at the age of 66, nuclear
stockpiles were shrinking and the megatonnage was coming down. What had for so
long seemed so frighteningly possible seemed less likely. Fears that had
inspired the obsessions of an imaginative writer were fading. If not Fido, then
fate or collective wisdom or Providence or wise or lucky leaders had brought us
from the days of balanced terror.

Rest in peace, Doc.

The column also referred imprecisely to Mr. Humes's residence. He used to live
in New York City, but for the last 15 years of his life he maintained an
apartment in Cambridge, Mass.

LOAD-DATE: October 10, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: October 17, 1992, Saturday

CORRECTION:

The About New York column last Saturday about H. L. Humes misstated his place of
death. It was St. Rose's Home in New York City. The column also omitted a
founder of The Paris Review, along with Mr. Humes and George Plimpton. He was
Peter Matthiessen. The column also referred imprecisely to the money Mr. Humes
gave away to students at Columbia University in 1969. It was a few thousand
dollars, representing only a small part of his inheritance from his father.

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              50 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 10, 1992, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Observer;
Once More Unto The Grave

BYLINE: By RUSSELL BAKER

SECTION: Section 1; Page 21; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 701 words


The Vietnam War is like Marilyn Monroe, who is the American equivalent of Count
Dracula. The Count, remember, was doomed to eternal exhumation. Though dead, he
was never allowed to die, and still isn't.

Hollywood, which has not been famous lately for new ideas, is about to trot him
out of the coffin one more time under orders to bring back another big payday.
Threadbare with overuse he is, and this probably guarantees box-office success.

From "I Love Lucy" to "Rocky CLXVII" to "Schwarzenegger's Return" to "Scarlett,"
the evidence shows that when it comes to entertainment nothing succeeds like
warmed-over hash. If Americans' tastes in consumer goods matched their tastes in
books and entertainment we would all be driving on bald tires, wearing blue
serge suits with high shine on the lapels and taking two mustard plasters a day
for the flu.

Like Count Dracula, Marilyn Monroe inhabits an unquiet grave. When a writer
confronts a mountain of unpaid bills and a royalty statement announcing that the
bookshops returned 150,000 unsold copies of his latest opus, what does he think
of immediately after noting the market is glutted with Kennedys? The grave of
Marilyn Monroe.

Yes, it is terrible to do this to her. Shameful if you insist, but come on now,
a man has to eat, doesn't he? And no tasteless remarks about cannibalism, thank
you. Anyhow, they all do it, so raiding the grave is just being mainstream. Just
giving people what they want.

If the parallels between Count Dracula and Miss Monroe seem inexact, it is only
because adapting the Dracula concept to American culture required changing the
dark central European ambience of the Count's story to something a little more
"Entertainment Tonight."

Transylvanian castle, white-tie-and-tails get-up -- it's great mood-setting
stuff for dark movie theaters, but an American crypt myth needed glitz, strong
show-biz angles, sexy star quality. Instead of menace it needed sentimental
heartbreak. Instead of a forbidding alien name like "Dracula" it needed a warm,
friendly, Rotary-lunch kind of first name like "Marilyn."

At this very moment Miss Monroe walks again through a bookstore fiction which
submits her to ill use by Kennedys, now dead too, of course. The grave brings no
peace when the plight of the living becomes harsh enough to justify a shaking of
the shroud, as seems to be the present case with President Bush, who has dug up
the Vietnam War again.

What Count Dracula is to idea-bereft movie makers, what Marilyn is to literary
desperadoes, Vietnam is to politicians maddened by fear of defeat. Digging it up
again may be shameful, but the people have always had a wonderful time fuming
and cussing and abusing each other about it in the past.

Things being as tough as they clearly are for the President, he obviously thinks
this is no time for delicacy if there's any chance that exhuming Vietnam may
hold back the night of a Democratic Presidency.

Exhuming Dracula satisfies our need for the romance of ghosts with their
suggestion that the world is more interesting than the media are revealing.
Exhuming Marilyn satisfies our hunger for confirmation of the soap-opera
principle that no matter how dull your own life may be, you might still get
lucky and wind up in a terrible mess.

Exhuming Vietnam satisfies our blood's need to boil. This is why the President
opened the coffin. He is conforming to Patrick Buchanan's campaign theory, which
holds that you've got to make people mad as hell if you're going to win.

Vietnam used to do that to people during the endless years when it was the real
thing and for a long time afterward, but it is some 20 years gone now, and
whether it has the staying power of a Dracula or a Marilyn remains to be seen.
Mr. Bush is testing it by going along with a Republican effort to hint that
during the war Mr. Clinton, then age 23, engaged in possibly treasonous doings
or at least treacherous dovelike doings and possibly . . . possibly . . .
possibly . . .

If this saves the Bush campaign we may be doomed to a century of watching old
Vietnam walk again every four years. Laugh not: Dracula has been up and about
since Bram Stoker buried him 95 years ago.

LOAD-DATE: October 31, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              51 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 11, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Apartheid's Children: Afrikaner Writers Today

BYLINE: By Christopher S. Wren;  Christopher S. Wren recently returned from
Africa after nearly four years as The Times's bureau chief in Johannesburg. He
is now editor of new projects.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 1; Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 3597 words


DURING the eight years that South Africa's white minority regime locked him up
for treason, Carl Niehaus, then a young theological student, read books written
by his fellow Afrikaners to keep abreast of the world beyond his cell in
Pretoria's Central Prison. "When you're in prison, you read very carefully and
you search for every implication to understand what is going on outside," said
Mr. Niehaus, who was freed in 1990.

Mr. Niehaus, who is now a spokesman for the African National Congress, took
advantage of his white nation's pride in its language, the 17th-century Dutch
imported to southern Africa by the first white settlers and rendered indigenous
by the infusion of Portuguese, Malay and African language like Zulu and Xhosa.
Even as a political prisoner, he could order books from the public library in
Pretoria.

"It is not a good library, but it did give us access to Afrikaans literature,"
said Mr. Niehaus, who was among the writers and poets and other intellectuals
interviewed about South African fiction over the last year and a half. "I saw
there was movement, but I didn't know whether there was movement in the larger
population or in a small group of intelligentsia. When I got out, I found that
it was limited to a small group."

Afrikaans literature, which the exiled poet Breyten Breytenbach once described
as the most vibrant on the African continent, has grappled more candidly than
outsiders might expect with the white man's place in a changing South Africa.
Yet it is uncertain how Afrikaans writing, targeted at a potential audience of
barely three million whites and even fewer South Africans of color, will weather
the nation's inevitable transition to black majority rule.

Unlike English-language writers such as Alan Paton, Athol Fugard and Nadine
Gordimer, writers in Afrikaans remain largely unknown overseas, with some
important exceptions like the novelists Andre Brink and J. M. Coetzee. Yet at no
time has Afrikaans fiction been as relevant as now.

"The demise of apartheid takes away the feeling of the stigma of Afrikaans being
the language of apartheid. It becomes a more natural expression of people using
their own language," Mr. Brink said in a telephone interview. His latest novel,
"An Act of Terror," about an idealistic Afrikaner like Mr. Niehaus who enlists
in the underground war against apartheid, was published in the United States
earlier this year.

HEIN WILLEMSE, a poet of mixed race who offers the foremost black perspective on
Afrikaans literature, describes it as sophisticated in style and content but
also tentative in its identity. It is a young literature, born of a language
that only coalesced at the turn of the century. "It's essentially
inward-looking, trying to come to terms with what it is doing as a literature,"
said Mr. Willemse, who teaches at the mixed-race University of the Western Cape
near Cape Town.

"The thing about Afrikaans writing since the 60's is that it has rid itself of
this overt kind of racism. I think most Afrikaner writers would see themselves
as nonracist, would see themselves as anti-apartheid, and that is significant,"
Mr. Willemse added. "But many Afrikaners look at Afrikaans as only the language
of [white] Afrikaners. When you look at a black reader, there's a difference. We
tend to look at Afrikaans literature as holistic, as without seams."

In "White Writing: On the Culture of Letters in South Africa," a collection of
essays published in 1988, Mr. Coetzee, the Afrikaner novelist ("Waiting for the
Barbarians" and "Age of Iron," among others) and literary critic, identified an
intrinsic flaw in South Africa's early pastoral literature. He decried "the
occlusion of black labor from the scene: the black man becomes a shadowy
presence flitting across the stage now and then to hold a horse or serve a
meal." Since the late 19th century, writers in Afrikaans were expected to
contribute their talents to the emancipation of the Afrikaner volk, or nation,
from the legacy of British colonialism, much as black writers in South Africa
today are pressed to inspire their own people's rejection of white oppression.

After the National Party came to power in 1948 and ushered in apartheid,
intellectual dissent was suppressed among whites as well as blacks. Through the
1950's, Afrikaans writers mostly confined themselves to stylistic
experimentation. Mr. Brink and Mr. Breytenbach were pioneers in breaking out of
this self-imposed censorship to challenge Afrikaner complicity in legalized
racial discrimination. "Brink was the standard bearer for a very long time of an
Afrikaner intellectual who felt responsible," Mr. Willemse said. Mr. Brink's
novel "Looking on Darkness" in 1974 became the first Afrikaans novel to be
banned by the Government; his novel "A Dry White Season" was also banned five
years later.

In the 1960's the sestigers, or sixty-ers, as the leading writers of that decade
called themselves, claimed the right to speak as individuals rather than mere
members of the volk. They wrested their native Afrikaans from the proprietary
control of the National Party, which internationalized apartheid, meaning racial
apartness, as a household word. They also applied Afrikaans to the hitherto
forbidden themes of sex, politics and mores. "We wanted to show that Afrikaans
is not only the possession of the policy makers and the apartheid regime but
belongs to the whole people," said Elsa Joubert, the matriarch of contemporary
Afrikaans fiction.

Ms. Joubert's documentary novel, "The Long Journey of Poppie Nongena," first
published in 1978 (and currently available in a trade paperback edition in this
country), may rank behind only the Bible in its impact on Afrikaners. While the
actual influence of Afrikaans writers was limited, Mr. Niehaus said, " 'Poppie'
was one book I found that was an exception. People will say the biggest
influence on them was 'Poppie.' It's a book that the average Afrikaner family
can relate to, because they have someone like Poppie Nongena working in their
home."

"Poppie" was the first popular Afrikaans novel to document the daily suffering
of black South Africans. Based on the real life of a plucky but unlettered
Xhosa-speaking black woman, the novel tersely describes a bleak world of fear
and deprivation to which most whites were oblivious. Having survived a bitter
childhood of malnutrition and poverty, Poppie struggles to keep her family
together in the face of the bureaucratic cruelties systematically inflicted on
South Africans of color, like forced removals from their homes and laws
requiring blacks to carry passes justifying their presence in areas designated
for whites only. "What have I done wrong, where have I sinned?" Poppie asks
herself after apartheid's malicious social engineering has driven away her
husband, killed her grandchild and destroyed any hope of an ordinary life.

"I think the book did more than any other Afrikaner book to turn Afrikaners
around," said Danie van Niekirk, the managing director of Tafelburg Publishers,
a Cape Town publishing house that issued "Poppie." "It has never stopped
selling. It's a set [required] book at Afrikaner universities."

Ms. Joubert drew her material from tape-recorded interviews with a black
domestic worker, on whose relentlessly grim life "Poppie" was based. As Ms.
Joubert sat down to write, she recalled, "I was indignant. I was like a warrior
with a sword cutting things down." Yet after her book helped to demolish the
official myth that racial separation benefited blacks and whites alike, Ms.
Joubert said, "It's quite amazing; not one piece of hate mail did I receive."
The book appeared two years after the Soweto riots and a year after the
black-consciousness leader Steve Biko, whose life was celebrated in the film
"Cry Freedom," was fatally beaten to death by police and left to die in the back
of a van. Ms. Joubert said three Cabinet ministers told her privately that
"Poppie" had opened their eyes about the Government's mistreatment of blacks. A
few years later, the Government embarked on its first hesitant reforms.

"The Afrikaners are a strange nation," said Alexander Strachan, a Pretoria
novelist who is chairman of the Afrikaner Writers' Guild, which Ms. Joubert
helped found. "Secretly they are proud of even the most left-wing writers
because they are of Afrikaner origin, because those writers got where they are
because of the Afrikaans language."

"It was difficult for the reader to reject them totally, because they were
writing in the mother tongue," Mr. Strachan explained. "The readers had to
identify with some literature and it was Afrikaans literature, so they had to
bear with the alternative message."

Etienne van Heerden, another young novelist, reported that as a columnist for
Rapport, an Afrikaans-language Sunday newspaper, "I get the most awful hate
mail, with people threatening to kill me." But his novels, he reported, seldom
draw a viscerally negative reaction.

"PEOPLE who buy the book will say to themselves, 'He's not well mannered, he's
an angry young man, but we accept it because it's fiction,' " Mr. van Heerden
said. "It is the Afrikaner being protective about his culture, even when that
culture is dissident. The Afrikaner writer is held to the breast of the volk,
but in qualified terms."

Mr. van Heerden offers the new face of Afrikaans fiction. Raised on a family
farm in the prairie town of Graaff Reinet, he says he is the first member of his
family in 12 generations not to work the land or own a gun. He trained as a
lawyer but then went into advertising before quitting to write and teach, first
at the University of Zululand in Natal and currently at Rhodes University there.

His most recent novel, "Casspirs and Camparis," published in South Africa last
year, examines, in his words, "the guilt about being young and white and
privileged in South Africa." The title plays the Casspir armored cars used by
the police to suppress unrest in black townships against the Italian aperitif
sipped by trendy white liberals.

The hero of the massive novel, which abounds in sarcasm and sex, is Erwin, a
young white advertising copywriter in the Cape Town of the mid-80's who gets
assigned to Project Charm, a goofy campaign to manufacture a kinder, gentler
image for South Africa's President (at the time the irascible and widely
disliked P. W. Botha). In attempting this herculean public-relations task, the
yuppyish Erwin confronts the angst of township rebellion, realizes he is
prostituting his talents for the state, refuses to report for military service
and is exiled to a remote Zulu village. The novel ends with a metaphor for his
salvation: Erwin tunnels his way from house arrest to freedom, breaking through
the floor of a rural black church as its parishioners sing "Nkosi Sikelel'
iAfrika" ("God Bless Africa"), a hymn that has become the anthem of the African
liberation struggle.

Mr. van Heerden's previous novel, "Toorberg" (literally "Magic Mountain"), which
was published here this year as "Ancestral Voices," explores the history of
miscegenation in the lineage of one upstanding Afrikaner family. Many young
Afrikaner writers, he noted, are similarly trying to exorcise the unjust legacy
of white privilege they inherited. "We call ourselves the children of apartheid
because we were born after 1948," said Mr. van Heerden, who is 37 years old.
"Rebelling against that means, for me, writing it out of my system."

Afrikaner writers have challenged other longstanding taboos. John Miles, who
teaches at the University of the Witswatersrand, has written about the
structural violence of apartheid, including the terror of its police hit squads.
Koos Prinsloo, a literary critic, writes about the gay culture in a
self-consciously macho South Africa.

"The great thing about Afrikaans literature," said Mr. Strachan, "is breaking
down the barriers that were regarded as holy by the Afrikaner, probing into
things that were forbidden initially, not only about the Afrikaner establishment
but also about literary theory."

Mr. Strachan, a husky former paratrooper, became a foremost exponent of the
grensliteratuur, or frontier literature, that emerged from South Africa's long
entanglement in the bush wars of Namibia and Angola. This genre caught the
disillusionment among war veterans dispatched to defend a racist ideology.
"Among young men, like the Americans in Vietnam, they were suddenly confronted
with an enemy that they had to kill," Ms. Joubert said. "They began
questioning."

Mr. Strachan speaks laconically about his wartime role, but a friend says he was
a "reccie," an elite reconnaissance commando who patrolled behind enemy lines in
Angola. He came home to write about a covert war that brutalized otherwise
decent men. His collected short stories, published in 1984 under the title "A
World Without Frontiers," defied a news blackout that the South African Defense
Force imposed on its soldiers in combat. He described young Afrikaners so
dehumanized that, in one story, language was reduced to a primal scream.

"The army was very upset with my book. It was too close to home. In South
Africa, we were not used to that kind of exposure," recalled Mr. Strachan, who
now teaches Zulu at a black college in Pretoria. "All the people with me there
said that was exactly how it was, and the higher officers who were sitting in
the offices denied it. Those with me said it couldn't get closer to the truth."
His Afrikaner roots and war record spared Mr. Strachan reprisals.

He published his first novel, "The Jackal Hunter," in 1990. It tells of a hunter
who arrives at an Afrikaner farm to kill jackals preying on the livestock and
who, as the plot unfolds, is seen through the perspective of four different
characters, including a wide-eyed young farm boy. Mr. Strachan, who grew up on
such a farm in Natal, is finishing a second novel, "The Yard Baboon." And in
attempting to stretch the literary horizons of his fellow Afrikaners, he is
coordinating the translation of 15 stories from black African languages for
publication in Afrikaans next year.

Otherwise, black writers are largely absent from Afrikaner fiction, as well as
from fiction written in English. An exception is "Mating Birds," whose author,
Lewis Nkosi, returned home last year after three decades in exile with a new
novel, "Underground People." Richard Rive, a mixed-race writer in Cape Town
whose works include "Buckingham Palace," wrote in English. He was murdered in
1989.

"I have been critical about black writing; the story they have to tell about the
townships is so powerful but they do not turn to craft," Mr. Nkosi told The
Sunday Star newspaper of Johannesburg last December. "On this I blame this
system that has deprived them of opportunities."

Mr. Willemse agrees that the casualties of apartheid include black fiction. "In
terms of producing, the black Afrikaner writers have not been writing," he said.
"There are all kinds of constraints, not least being education. Having to sit
down and work on a novel for two years, a certain level of education is needed.
You need to have a sense of what a story is, to have a design in your head. You
actually need an electric light in many cases."

So the creativity of black South Africans has been channeled into poetry more
consistent with Africa's rich oral traditions. "Poetry in South Africa has a
very popular edge to it," said Mr. Willemse, who is highly regarded as a poet in
Afrikaans. "During the dark years of apartheid, poetry was one way of providing
entertainment at mass rallies. It was the fact of production. You could write a
poem one night and read it at a mass rally the next day."

"A novel is a private thing. The reader will have to read it at his home. Poetry
is a public act," Mr. Willemse continued. "In black Afrikaans writing, people
have defined themselves in terms of an audience, in terms of a public."

"The Long Journey of Poppie Nongena" notwithstanding, many white Afrikaner
novelists feel they cannot do justice to the black experience. "Where is the
black Dickens we want to read?" Mr. van Heerden asked. "The struggle against
apartheid is so immediate that we will only get the real story from black
writers in 10 years' time. I think the toll of apartheid has been so terrible --
the question of inferior education -- that the people who could rise above it
became politically important," frequently came into conflict with the white
regime, and often went into exile.

Among whites, Afrikaans fiction has matured even as the political primacy of the
Afrikaner approaches its twilight. In the racial turbulence of the 80's, young
writers confined themselves to short stories and novellas that were minimalist
in content and style. "The short story had a tremendous explosion because nobody
felt he could sit down and write a healing novel," Mr. van Heerden said.

"These short, short pieces in their little volumes," Ms. Joubert said, "it was
very distressing to me because it meant that the center was falling apart." Over
the last year, she observed, eight major novels were published in Afrikaans, as
more writers turned to longer books. "The fact that they are sitting and writing
long pieces of fiction is to me very significant," she said. "People worry about
the future of Afrikaans, but there are so many good writers in Afrikaans that I
am very encouraged."

Andre Brink agrees that political reform in South Africa has unleashed "an
explosion of creativity" among blacks and whites alike: "It seems as if the
urgency of the political situation drives people to some literary or creative
examination of what is going on." But he suggests that the genesis of such books
predates the dismantling of apartheid undertaken by President F. W. de Klerk on
Feb. 2, 1990.

"Because it takes such a long time to write, it requires deeper reflection. They
may have been in the pipeline for longer than the de Klerk era," said Mr. Brink,
who spent 10 years writing "An Act of Terror."

Ms. Joubert said the demise of apartheid can only liberate writers in Afrikaans.
"We who have been dissenting Afrikaners are not trying to batter down the door
now, but the door is opening by itself," said Ms. Joubert, who is nearly 70
years old. "Now we can explore more universal themes and deeper conflicts. We
don't need battle-axes in our hands. We can take up pens. There's more time for
self-discovery."

Yet the prospects for Afrikaans fiction are limited by its modest profitability,
the consequences of a finite domestic readership and the lack of resources to
translate writers for publication abroad. Mr. van Niekirk, the publisher of
"Poppie," said printings begin at about 3,000 copies and run to a maximum of
60,000. Ms. Joubert estimated that a novel published in Afrikaans earns its
writer as little as 5,000 rand, or less than $2,000, which is why Mr. Strachan
and Mr. van Heerden live by teaching -- not unlike many writers in the United
States.

While Mr. van Niekirk talks of a potential reading public of five million
Afrikaners of all races, only a fraction of that public buys the books. A
disproportionate number are white women belonging to the reading clubs that are
active in many South African towns. Afrikaner men seem to hold rugby or hunting
as more suitable pursuits than reading. Mr. van Heerden does not lack for male
friends in Grahamstown, where he teaches; but, he said, "Their wives read my
books."

The limited readership is another reason why the Government has tended to ignore
dissident Afrikaner writers. Mr. Breytenbach was imprisoned and driven into
exile in Europe for active political opposition to apartheid rather than for his
poems, in which many Afrikaners privately express pride.

Moreover, the preoccupations of white Afrikaans writers tend to strike potential
black readers as obvious or irrelevant. "In Afrikaans writing up to now, there's
such a lot of guilt," Mr. Willemse said. "Black Afrikaans writers can't have
that sense of the apocalypse. It can only get better. Black writers have a
different sense of where they're at."

As for translation problems, Ms. Joubert said she translated her best seller
"The Long Journey of Poppie Nongena" into English herself. The subsequent Dutch
translation was done from the English version, not the Afrikaans original,
though Afrikaans is derived from Dutch. Ms. Joubert wants South Africa's
business corporations, not the Government, to subsidize more translations of
Afrikaans writers.

But Mr. van Heerden sees a danger in reaching for a larger audience beyond
Afrikaans speakers, because "you start dealing in stereotypes. You simplify and
are too explanatory. Good writing deals with ambiguity and complexity."

Does the new vigor in Afrikaans literature reflect a faith of sorts in the
survival of Afrikaner writers beyond apartheid? "I think 'optimism' is too
strong a word," Mr. Brink said. "I think 'cautiously optimistic' would be
closer."

Ms. Joubert said English-language writers in South Africa tend to feel colonial
and peripheral. "That is what we have escaped," she said. "We are peripheral to
nobody. Afrikaners feel they are people in their own right."

But Mr. van Heerden spoke more tentatively: "The central concern of the
Afrikaner writer is whether we can find this space in Africa as Afrikaner
writers, whether we can find a new identity. We are still looking at Europe and
America, but if the borders open up, we will have to ask ourselves to what
extent we belong to Africa."

LOAD-DATE: October 11, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Alexander Strachan: "Secretly [the Afrikaners] are proud of
even the most left-wing writers because they are of Afrikaner origin."
(Tafelberg Publishers)(pg. 30); Elsa Joubert: "Afrikaans is not only the
possession of the policy makers and the apartheid regime but belongs to the
whole people." (Tafelberg Publishers)(pg. 29); Etienne van Heerden: The
Afrikaner is "protective about his culture, even when that culture is
dissident." (Tafelberg Publishers); Lewis Nkosi: "The story [black writers] have
to tell about the townships is so powerful but they do not turn to craft."
(Agence France-Presse)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              52 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 11, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Gay Politics Goes Mainstream

BYLINE: By Jeffrey Schmalz;  Jeffrey Schmalz is an assistant national editor at
The New York Times who reports on politics.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 18; Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 5892 words


When David B. Mixner decided to come out of the closet, among the first people
he called were his old friends Bill and Hillary Clinton. So it seemed fitting
that 15 years later, when Bill Clinton reached a turning point in his own life
-- deciding he would run for President -- one of the first people he called was
Mixner. But instead of the unqualified support the Arkansas Governor had
expected, there was a hitch.

"I said, 'Bill, I've lost over 180 friends to AIDS,' " recalls Mixner, an
influential political organizer and fund-raiser in California. " 'Before I can
get behind this campaign, I have to know where you stand on this, where you
stand on AIDS and our struggle for our freedom.' "

At first, Clinton was unsure. "There was a little bit of stress there, let me
tell you," Mixner says. But the Governor agreed to come to Los Angeles last
October for a meeting with a group of wealthy homosexual activists -- a meeting
that ultimately led to his pledge to fight discrimination against gay men and
lesbians and to support a larger Federal commitment to combat AIDS.

"He was impressive," says Diane Abbitt, a lawyer and member of the group, called
Angle (Access Now for Gay and Lesbian Equality). "He mostly just listened, but
intently."

Clinton vividly remembers the Los Angeles meeting and the original conversation
with Mixner. "I needed to learn," he says.

The Governor is sitting in the back of a black Cadillac, shuttling between
campaign stops in the Detroit suburbs, no longer just another wanna-be but the
Democratic candidate for President. "What the conversation brought home to me,"
he says of Los Angeles, "was the fact that running for President would require
me to think about things that I just didn't have to deal with as Governor."

As Clinton speaks, shortly after the Republican National Convention, he is
already being attacked by Republicans for his strong support of gay rights. But
he contends that the country agrees with his opposition to discrimination. "I
think there's been a rethinking," he says.

Still, this is untested ground in a Presidential race. When it is suggested that
his pro-gay positions might be political suicide, he shakes his head no. But
then he bursts out laughing and says, "Maybe."

THROUGHOUT THE COUNTRY, homosexuals by the tens of thousands have been coming
out of the closet, and out of the shadows of American politics as well. For the
first time in a race for the White House, gay and lesbian issues are being
raised -- and fought over. During the primaries, the five leading Democratic
contenders, especially former Senator Paul Tsongas of Massachusetts, actively
courted the gay vote. All five endorsed a repeal of the ban on homosexuals in
the military, as eventually did Ross Perot. Questions about gay and lesbian
issues, virtually unbroachable just four years ago, are now asked routinely of
candidates, including the President.

For years, politicians of all stripes hid or returned financial contributions
from homosexuals for fear of being tainted. Today, they seek them out. One of
the fastest-growing organizations in Washington is the Human Rights Campaign
Fund, a leading gay lobbying and political-action group that will raise an
estimated $4.5 million this year -- double the amount of two years ago.

But big success also means big backlash. As homosexuality becomes more and more
of a thread in the fabric of American life, gays, gay rights and gay life styles
have become a chief political target of the right. Many fundamentalist ministers
regularly denounce homosexuality in even stronger terms than they do abortion,
insisting that it is against God's law. In Colorado and Oregon and in cities
like Tampa and Portland, Me., bitter -- occasionally even violent -- battles are
being waged this fall, most taking the form of Election Day referendums that
would expressly deny homosexuals protection against discimination.

"In the 60's and 70's, all homosexuals claimed they wanted was privacy and
tolerance," says Lon Mabon, a former businessman who is leading the fight for
the Oregon measure, which would declare homosexuality "perverse." "Well, they
got that. Now they want social acceptance passed into law. But homosexuality is
not a civil right. It's an aberration."

For some political strategists, especially those in the Presidential race, this
is a game, with the gay issue to be manipulated from state to state for maximum
electoral advantage. But for many on both sides of the sexual-orientation
divide, it is a holy war -- an inevitable confrontation of two forces that have
been building stength for a decade. And it is ugly. The religious right and some
other conservatives push the fear button, linking homosexuality to child
molesting, while homosexuals tug at compassion one minute, invoking AIDS, then
spew venom the next, outing conservative gay Congressmen and the gay and lesbian
children of Government officials and right-wingers.

Strictly speaking, this is a battle about specific issues, like whether
homosexuals have a right to equal job opportunities or to serve in the military.
(Clinton stresses that his commitment to gay rights ends there.) But it is
really a bigger and more complex fight over whether America can accept
homosexuality, over whether it is O.K. to be gay.

The battle is playing out in dissonant images across the country: It is dancers
at a gay club in Chicago chanting "Clinton, Clinton, Clinton." It is AIDS
patients in Atlanta carrying home absentee ballots. It is a mother in Portland,
Ore., clutching her son as she shouts "No" at gay demonstrators. It is a
frightened gay Clinton aide, wondering, "Will they come after me as a way of
getting Bill?" It is protesters dogging candidates from state to state with
their chant that has become a gay anthem: "Act up! Fight back! Fight AIDS!" It
is Barbara Bush wearing the red AIDS ribbon on the sidelines of the Republican
convention, then taking it off before joining her husband on the podium.

Vehement attacks at that convention by speakers like the Rev. Pat Robertson and
Pat Buchanan -- as well as the more veiled criticisms from the Bushes and the
Quayles under the rubric "family values" -- seem to have backfired, engendering
less support for the G.O.P., according to polls, than sympathy for gay men and
lesbians. "I think there was a thought that this would be the new Willie
Horton," says Kevin Phillips, the conservative political analyst. "But the
Administration overdid it. The gay-bashing turned people off. It's become a
minus for the Republicans."

Yet the religious right is not about to give up. A group called the Christian
Action Network has begun raising money to run 30-second television ads that show
clips of protest marches by homosexuals, some of them hugging and in black
leather. "Bill Clinton's vision for a better America includes job quotas for
homosexuals," the voice-over says, inaccurately. "Is this your vision for a
better America?"

All that leaves the Bush forces in a bind as the campaign enters its final, most
heated weeks. If Republican leaders press the gay issue too hard, they stand in
danger of offending mainstream voters; but if they abandon it altogether, they
risk antagonizing the religious right (which includes not just evangelical
Christians but some Catholics and Orthodox Jews), whose votes they sorely need.
The upshot is likely to be a more subtle form of gay-bashing by the Bush
campaign, with winks and nods and code words, like calling Clinton and his
running mate, Senator Al Gore, "pretty boys." The message will almost certainly
be carried not by George Bush or Dan Quayle, who has conspicuously backed off
earlier attacks on homosexuality, but by Presidential surrogates and in
last-minute local ads and mailings, especially in the South.

In this age of instant communications, going too negative too soon and on too
broad a scale can be risky, since the major news organizations can all too
easily get wind of it. That leads to more narrowly targeted mailings and radio
ads in the final days of the campaign. Republican campaign workers acknowledge
that radio ads have already been prepared linking the election of Clinton to an
increase in hiring of gay teachers.

Regardless of whether such tactics work, it is clear that homosexuals have
crossed a threshold, becoming an integral part of American political life. On
Election Day, they are expected to exceed the Jewish turnout of four million
voters, with some estimates gauging their number as high as nine million. Scared
into action by AIDS, drawing on lessons of AIDS organizing and fund raising,
they have learned how to play the game. Voter-registration tables line gay
neighborhoods. In discos, between videos of Madonna and the Pet Shop Boys,
images flash on the screen of gay men and lesbians exhorting the crowds to vote.
"Voting for Our Lives," say the signs in gay bars, bookstores and churches.

For years, homosexuals have, for the most part, been politically apathetic.
Rarely did a candidate stir their enthusiasm; when homosexuals did vote, many of
the more affluent ones tended to go Republican. But now the gay and lesbian
community appears to be united for the first time in a Presidential race behind
a single candidate -- Bill Clinton. And the money is pouring into the Clinton
campaign -- $2 million so far from identifiably gay sources, according to
Democratic Party estimates. "The gay community is the new Jewish community,"
says Rahm Emanuel, the Clinton campaign's national finance director. "It's
highly politicized, with fundamental health and civil rights concerns. And it
contributes money. All that makes for a potent political force, indeed."

The biggest center of gay activism in this election is in California, where
homosexual voters are expected to turn out in record numbers. They have been
re-energized after forcing Gov. Pete Wilson to reverse himself in late September
and sign a measure that makes California the seventh state to ban job
discrimination based on sexual orientation. (One hundred cities already have
such laws. Another seven states ban discrimination only in government jobs.)
With an estimated 10 percent of the state's electorate -- larger even than its
black population -- homosexuals might well play a decisive role in determining
who gets California's 54 electoral votes. "Clinton will carry California, but
not by as huge a margin as the polls now show," predicts Bob Mulholland,
political director of the state Democratic Party. "So that makes the gay vote
all the more critical to him here. He knows that."

Smaller but similar get-out-the-vote and fund-raising efforts by the Clinton
campaign are under way throughout the country, especially in crucial states like
New York, Florida and Texas. In Illinois, gay Clinton forces are working with
the campaign of Carol Mosely Braun, the Democratic candidate for Senate, who
credits her primary victory in part to a strong homosexual turnout.

But even as gay men and lesbians are demonstrating new political muscle, their
movement is showing the strain of 12 years of AIDS. Some lesbians, patient all
these years as the disease held center stage, now want to focus on women's
issues. Act Up and similar organizations are increasingly divided between
radicals and moderates, young and old -- between those who are H.I.V. positive
and those who are not. Paradoxically, at the very moment when it is entering the
mainstream of American politics, the gay community finds itself drained, beset
by infighting, burnout, illness and death.

THE STORY OF THE political awakening of homosexuals is, of course, the story of
AIDS, the story of gay life shattered into two eras -- pre-plague and
post-plague.

In the last decade, 230,000 Americans -- 65 percent of them gay men --have been
diagnosed with full-blown AIDS. Of those, more than 150,000 have already died,
surpassing the total number of Americans killed in the Vietnam and Korean Wars
combined. One million more are believed to be infected. Many homosexuals who are
not sick themselves go through life as walking wounded, in a depressed daze of
loss and survivor guilt. To be gay is to watch as a dozen, then five dozen, then
10 dozen friends die. To be gay is to wake up and read those box scores of
homosexual life and death -- the obituary pages -- then wonder about every
sniffle, every rash. To be gay is to be angry.

"I have straight friends who are sympathetic," says Steve Shellabarger, a gay
activist in Columbus, Ohio. "But they don't get it. They don't understand that
when your lover dies, it's like a spouse dying. I used to have friends all over
the state of Ohio. Now they're all dead. When we want to network, we go to our
younger friends. At least some of their friends are still alive."

At first, in the early 1980's, the gay community organized out of medical
necessity, forming groups like the Gay Men's Health Crisis in New York to
provide support to those who were sick. But as homosexuals began to conclude
that the Federal Government was doing next to nothing, that it didn't care that
they were dying, the movement thrust into the political arena, with protest
groups like Act Up shouting down political officials and religious leaders,
demanding regulatory changes that would speed the approval of new anti-AIDS
drugs.

The terrifying spread of AIDS over the last decade pushed many homosexuals out
of the closet -- some because they actually had the disease, others because they
were moved by the crisis's call to solidarity. "AIDS de-invisiblized us," says
Benjamin Schatz, the executive director of the American Association of
Physicians for Human Rights in San Francisco. "The biggest difference between us
and blacks was that we were invisible. AIDS made it so we couldn't hide
anymore."

Although thousands of homosexuals have remained closeted, fearful of ridicule or
losing their jobs, the trend has shifted decidedly in the direction of coming
out. Forty-three percent of Americans now say they know someone who is
homosexual, double the number of just seven years ago. Put another way, there
are fewer and fewer lies like the one David Mixner used to tell Bill and Hillary
Clinton.

The Governor, who met Mixner in the late 60's at a retreat for antiwar
activists, had been surprised to learn a decade later that his friend was gay.
After all, he says, "I'd known he had once been engaged," adding that the girl
had died in a car crash.

"Oh, that," Mixner explains. "I made her up. We all did that sort of thing in
those days."

Barney Frank, one of two openly gay Congressmen, recalls that for years after he
arrived in Washington in 1981 he kept his homosexuality a secret. "I would lobby
on gay stuff," says Frank, who now displays a snapshot of his lover, Herb, on
his desk. "And my colleagues would say: 'Ah, you're right. But you know, it's
not that important.' The pain gay people felt was unknown. We were hiding it
from them. How the hell are they supposed to know when we were making damn sure
they didn't?"

Once the dimensions of the AIDS epidemic started to become known, Frank says,
many of his House colleagues "started voting pro-gay because they saw that
life-and-death issues were at stake. They had to do the right thing, even though
they thought it might hurt them politically. Then, guess what? It turned out not
to hurt them politically very much."

THE GAY COMMUNITY hoped that once he asssumed the Presidency in 1989, George
Bush would be more responsive to their cause than his predecessor had been. Most
homosexuals bitterly resented Ronald Reagan for failing to provide the money and
moral leadership they believed the AIDS crisis demanded.

During the 1988 campaign, homosexuals had been disappointed by the candidacy of
Michael Dukakis. The Democratic candidate had mentioned AIDS in his acceptance
speech at the Atlanta convention, but kept silent on gay rights for the
remainder of the race. "The Republicans were painting us as liberal, so we
stayed away from causes like gay rights that played into that," explains Susan
Estrich, who managed the Dukakis campaign. She maintains that the then
54-year-old Dukakis was "less comfortable with gay issues" than the 46-year-old
Bill Clinton, adding, "I think a lot of it is generational."

Bush, on the other hand, had sent several signals during the 1988 campaign that
homosexual groups interpreted warmly. In the second Presidential debate, he had
named as one of his heroes Anthony S. Fauci, who, as head of the National
Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, is the Government's leading AIDS
researcher. Later, as President, Bush signed into law in 1990 a bill ordering a
Federal study of hate crimes, including attacks on homosexuals -- the first time
a Federal civil rights law had covered sexual orientation.

But earlier this year, as the Bush Administration faltered badly and the
President's popularity began to sink under harsh attack by his opponent in the
Republican primaries, Pat Buchanan, Bush began to heed complaints by religious
fundamentalists and ultraconservatives that he was coming too close to being an
advocate for homosexuality. Concerned about shoring up its right-wing base, the
Bush camp dispatched Vice President Quayle in March to Kingsport, Tenn., where
he campaigned at a Cracker Barrel restaurant, part of a chain that had generated
extensive publicity for its abrupt dismissal of homosexual workers.

In a conversation aboard his campaign plane just before the Republican
convention in August, Quayle was asked if he opposed gay rights. "I'm not sure
what you mean by gay rights," he replied. "If you are talking about
discrimination, let me just tell you we will not discriminate against anyone.
But if you're saying we're going to give moral equivalence to a heterosexual
marriage between a man and woman and a gay marriage where you have a marriage
between those of the same sex, yes, we do not recognize the moral equivalence.
And I'm sure the gay rights activists will not allow Bill Clinton to say that
there isn't moral equivalence."

At the Republican convention, Clinton was repeatedly denounced as a supporter of
homosexual rights and even homosexual marriages -- part of a broad, hard-hitting
attack on the Governor to portray him as an enemy of family values. In fact,
Clinton opposes legal recognition of same-sex marriages. Yet there are sharp
differences between Clinton and Bush on several key homosexual issues: The
Governor favors allowing homosexuals in the military, while Bush opposes it.
Clinton supports a Federal law that would protect homosexuals against
discrimination in hiring and public accommodations; Bush is against it.

The convention in Houston was a clear attempt by the Republicans to play the
homosexual card. With two Southerners on the Democratic ticket, G.O.P.
strategists were convinced they needed a fresh issue to reinvigorate the hold on
the South they'd enjoyed since 1980, when Ronald Reagan had lured evangelical
Christians away from their lifelong allegiance to the Democratic Party. "We need
that vote," says J. Warren Tompkins, a senior Southern adviser for the Bush
campaign. "You get it on abortion, on prayer in the schools and -- I don't want
to use the word 'gay' -- on other-than-normal life styles."

Indeed, post-convention polls showed that the anti-gay strategy had played well
in the South. The big surprise is that, so far at least, the strategy has
appeared to backfire nationwide. More than a quarter of those surveyed in a
Gallup poll said the Republicans had gone too far. "The issue just doesn't have
the shock value it had 10 years ago," says Richard P. Schwarm, the chairman of
the Iowa Republican Party. "You can tell when an issue clicks, and I don't think
this has clicked with the swing voters."

In particular, the convention's fusillade of insinuations and outright attacks
on homosexuals seems to have hurt most in the all-important suburbs, where many
political analysts think the election will be won or lost. "Upper-middle-class
suburban voters are not wildly pro-gay, but they do not want to be associated
with a party that is overtly bigoted," says William Schneider, a political
analyst with the American Enterprise Institute.

About 80 percent of Americans, according to a New York Times/CBS News poll
conducted after the Republican convention, believe homosexuals should have equal
rights to job opportunities, an increase of more than a third from 15 years ago.
But only 38 percent believe homosexuality is an acceptable alternative life
style, about the same number who think that homosexual marriages should be
recognized and that homosexual relations between consenting adults should be
legal. (Sodomy is still illegal in 22 states.) Fifty-seven percent support the
idea of homosexuals serving in the military.

The Presidential candidates are clearly reading the polls -- and just as clearly
reading them differently. To Clinton supporters, the polls show overwhelming
opposition to discrimination against homosexuals, which emboldens them to go
public with the gay rights issue. But to the Bush camp, it is apparent that a
lot of Americans still disapprove of the gay life style; if they can portray
Clinton as promoting that life style, they think they can turn the issue to
their advantage.

Poll responses vary widely by sex, region and education. For example, almost
half of American women consider homosexuality an acceptable life style, compared
with less than a third of the men. Fifty-five percent of college graduates rate
it acceptable, more than twice the percentage of those who did not graduate from
high school. "The Bush people look at these numbers and say, 'What issue can we
use to get those noncollege men we're losing so badly,' " says Schneider. "I
think they're answering, 'The gay issue.' "

Robert Mosbacher, the former Secretary of Commerce who has been a close friend
of the Bushes for 40 years, strongly denies that the Bush campaign would ever
try to exploit the homosexual issue. "I have never -- ever -- heard George Bush
being anti-gay in any way," says Mosbacher, who is now the chief fund-raiser for
the Republican National Committee. "Sure, the convention had people on the far
right. But it had people in the middle, too. It's a big tent. You don't have to
agree with everything that everybody says at the convention to be a Republican."

Mosbacher is at the top of the list of Republicans who have been targeted by
homosexual groups as a hypocrite. His daughter Dee is homosexual, as are more
than a dozen Administration officials and campaign aides.

"The hypocrisy is sickening," says Dee Mosbacher, a 43-year-old doctor in San
Francisco. She displays a photograph of herself and her lover of 17 years,
another physician, along with a beaming President Bush at her father's
Department of Commerce swearing-in ceremony. Mosbacher and her lover have a pet
caption for the picture: "George Bush Meets Lesbians, 1989."

After the convention in Houston, she says, she was angry and didn't talk to her
father for a while. "I said, 'Dad, it's hard to talk now.' I feel sorry for my
father. He doesn't believe in the turn the campaign has taken. But I'm angry,
too. It's mean-spirited. It's dangerous."

Dee Mosbacher is a Democrat. But her disenchantment with the Bush Administration
is shared even by homosexuals who have regularly voted Republican in the past.
Richard Tafel, the president of the Log Cabin Federation, a gay Republican
group, estimates that 40 percent of gay men and lesbians pulled the lever for
Bush four years ago; this time, he predicts less than 10 percent of them will go
to Bush.

"How can anyone who is gay vote for George Bush?" asks Marvin Liebman, a
homosexual who was a founder of the New York State Conservative Party. He plans
to vote for Clinton, the first time he will have voted Democratic since Truman's
election in 1948. But Liebman, who came out of the closet two years ago at the
age of 67, intends to stay in the Republican Party. "The only salvation of the
party," he says, "is for the national ticket to go down to defeat and for the
good guys to pick up the pieces."

IN THE VICTORIAN PARLOR OF Lynn Greer's living room in Columbus, Ohio, two dozen
men and women, all homosexuals, have come to talk about what they can do to help
get Bill Clinton elected President.

Many of them are political novices: one, a lesbian house painter; another, a gay
teacher; a third, a gay lawyer. After some social warm-ups, the morning centers
around the television, where everyone is transfixed by a tape of Governor
Clinton speaking at a Los Angeles fund-raising event in May. It had been an
unusually emotional speech for the Democratic candidate. "If I could, if I could
wave my arm for those of you that are H.I.V. positive and make it go away
tomorrow," Clinton tells his Los Angeles listeners, some of them gay, many of
them in tears. "I would do it, so help me, God, I would. If I gave up my race
for the White House and everything else, I would do that."

Videotapes of the speech, thousands of which have been circulated around the
country by homosexual groups, are a major reason Clinton has become so popular
in the homosexual community. Even those in Greer's living room who have seen the
tape over and over, like Steve Shellabarger, an antiques dealer who lost his
lover to AIDS two years ago, still grow teary-eyed watching it.

The 47-year-old Shellabarger, one of the few people in the room with political
experience, first got active in gay politics more than a decade ago, at the
height of the singer Anita Bryant's crusade against homosexuality. Many of the
younger people see this election as their own political coming of age.

"It's scary," says Chris Wooten, who sells alarm systems. "I'm tired of hearing
that I have no family values." Like the others in the room, she will carry the
Clinton banner into Columbus's gay neighborhoods, like German Village and
Victorian Village, organizing rallies and helping turn out the vote.

Where once homosexual activism was confined to the major cities of the East and
West Coasts, it has now moved into the heartland. Dozens of large and mid-size
cities have gay pride events each year -- not just San Francisco and New York,
but places like Columbus, Omaha, Memphis, Asbury Park, N.J., and Phoenix, where
a proposal to ban discrimination against homosexuals was championed by Barry
Goldwater.

Yet despite a national reputation for flag-waving conservatism and religious
devotion to football, Columbus has produced an unusually strong homosexual
community. It had one of the first gay cable-television shows and has more
members per capita in the Human Rights Campaign Fund than any other city. Over
the summer, the city implemented a law that prohibits discrimination against
homosexuals in the workplace. One was already in effect for housing and public
accommodations.

No one is quite sure why Columbus has become such a hotbed of gay political
activity. One reason may be that Ohio State University is there, and college
towns tend to breed activism. Another may be the two well-regarded professors at
the university's law school, open homosexuals who have encouraged others to come
out. And then there was Anita Bryant, whose vitriolic campaign 15 years ago so
traumatized gay people in Columbus, as well as in other parts of other country,
that they decided to band together.

Even before the Anita Bryant campaign, there had been a gay booth at the Ohio
State Fair, which is held in Columbus every year. But this year, on a sweltering
August afternoon, it seems especially busy as it gives out literature on AIDS
and other gay causes, drawing some to gawk, others to condemn, still others to
cheer. "I don't understand how people can be gay," says a nurse who identifies
herself simply as Ellen and walks away.

Mark Carter, a 38-year-old salesman, drops by the booth to browse. "I have no
problem with gay people," he says. "But I worry about my son, who is 6. I
wouldn't want him to have a gay teacher. I guess that's bigoted. But I can't
help it."

A look at the log kept by booth workers reveals a mix of hate and sympathy, as
well as plenty of curiosity. Entry dated 9:45 A.M., Aug. 16: "A teen-age girl
who had scoped out the booth earlier walked by and palmed a copy of 'Coming Out
to Your Parents.' Slicker than slick. Never missed a step. Never looked at the
table. It was great. Glad she had the chance and the nerve."

PEOPLE IN ARKANSAS don't know what to make of the new Bill Clinton, the one who
is a champion of gay rights. His record in the state differs from his rhetoric
on the campaign trail.

When Clinton first became Arkansas Attorney General in 1977, a new sodomy
statute was passed by the State Legislature. Clinton says he lobbied behind the
scenes to get the bill killed, but gay activists in Little Rock find no evidence
of that. In general, homosexual groups say they've found the Governor
unavailable and unwilling to meet such simple requests as issuing a proclamation
for gay pride day.

On AIDS, Clinton's Arkansas spends virtually none of its own money -- about 10
cents per capita, compared with $2.90 per capita in neighboring Louisiana. A
running joke in the capital is that George Bush has done more about AIDS in
Arkansas than Bill Clinton. But that isn't quite fair. AIDS cases in Arkansas
have only recently begun to rise. (The state now ranks 28th in the number of
cases per 100,000 of population.)

In his Presidential campaign, Clinton has called for unspecified large increases
in Federal spending and for a "Manhattan Project" on AIDS, while Bush argues
that current efforts are sufficient. But his own AIDS commission disagrees. Just
three weeks ago, Magic Johnson quit the commission, charging the President with
failing to commit the money and attention needed.

Homosexual groups believe Clinton is genuinely empathetic to AIDS victims. But
given his record on gay issues in general, they're not sure what has prompted
his newly discovered enthusiasm for gay rights.

"Some of us are dumbfounded," says Suzanne Pharr, a lesbian who is a staff
member of the Women's Project in Little Rock, a city of 175,000 that has one gay
bar and one lesbian bar. "On the other hand, we didn't press him all that hard."

Speaking in his own defense, Clinton asserts that homosexual issues have never
really come to the fore in Arkansas. "These issues have just never been issues,"
he says.

The Governor denies any political motive in his transformation. "To me, this was
an issue I came to on almost completely human terms," he says. "I just think in
the last few years, knowing people who had AIDS, having a friend die of AIDS,
made a big difference. It just sort of made me more, I don't know, comfortable
in dealing with it." (Clinton refuses to name the friend.)

Clinton recalls that when he was growing up in Hot Springs, Ark., there was a
gay couple living in town. "I don't know if we had anybody openly gay, but we
had gay people in town and everybody knew who they were," he says. "Every now
and then, there were snickers behind their back, but there was no overt
persecution of them. See, this is more about saying than doing, this whole
thing. It's not so much whether you're gay or not, but whether you can own up to
being gay and still have your job or serve your country."

By and large, Clinton has become savvy and self-assured in dealing with the
homosexual community. Yet occasionally he does get uncharacteristically rattled
when discussing homosexual issues.

Asked during an interview if he had ever considered whether his support of gay
rights might be a deciding factor in a close California race, he responds: "It
might have been. No, it wasn't. I mean it was just personal. No. Maybe. But I
can honestly say I never thought of it that way. You're absolutely right, but I
never thought of that."

LARRY KRAMER SITS IN his living room, on the edge of Washington Square in
Manhattan, looking exhausted. The leading figure among AIDS activists -- famous
for his television tirades against Government inaction -- is gentle in person,
offering a cup of tea: "Regular or herbal?" Kramer seems spent -- not
physically, though he is infected with H.I.V. -- but emotionally.

"I think we're all tired," he says. "We're all a little frayed."

Act Up, the organization Kramer founded in 1987, is in the process of
splintering off into several smaller groups, most notably Queer Nation, which
has borrowed Act Up's street-fighting style but concentrates exclusively on
non-AIDS concerns.

The larger homosexual movement is also split -- between those who believe in
working within the system and those who want to continue to pursue
confrontation. Part of this is because the social and political life of gay men
is becoming more segregated -- with those who are H.I.V. positive on one side
and those who are H.I.V. negative on the other.

But there is another less complicated reason: battle fatigue. Homosexuals are
just now realizing that AIDS will continue to be a destructive force for years,
and perhaps decades, to come. "It takes enormous energy to be angry all the
time, and people can't do it anymore," says Maer Roshan, the editor of QW
magazine. The magazine denies that the "Q" stands for "Queer," but it might as
well. The word is in vogue now, with some lesbians preferring it to "gay,"
which, despite common usage, technically applies only to men.

There is no Martin Luther King Jr. of the homosexual rights movement, no leader
to negotiate on the community's behalf or to resolve internal strife. In part,
that's because homosexuals do not trust authority figures and institutions;
their whole lives are a flaunting of convention. But it is also because
homosexuals have little in common to unite them. They are not bound by skin
color or religion or social class or geography. There really is no comparable
movement in the country's history, although in some ways it echoes American Jews
right after World War II -- an outcast group that was also just beginning to
attain political influence, that also had no leader and that also had members
who tried to conceal who they were.

Some see connections with the civil rights movement of the 50's and 60's. "The
gay movement is pretty far in advance of where the black civil rights movement
was 30 years ago," says Clayborne Carson, editor of the Martin Luther King
papers and a history professor at Stanford University. "It's gotten beyond civil
rights; it's benefited from the black movement. Now it's about cultural
conflict. The fight now will be over whether the life style is acceptable, not
just tolerated."

Whatever the results of the election next month, gay activists are confident
that the homosexual rights cause will continue to advance. They see a broader
fight taking hold in businesses across the country to expand spousal benefits to
include homosexual lovers. And they predict that within 10 years Congress will
pass a Federal law that will confer upon homosexuals what blacks have already
achieved -- Government protection against discrimination in employment, housing
and public accommodations.

Thomas B. Stoddard, a homosexual-rights lawyer in New York who himself has AIDS,
puts it this way: "It's no longer whether, but how fast."

LOAD-DATE: October 11, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Demonstrating at the Democratic National Convention. (Ron
Haviv/Saba); David B. Mixner, right, Bill Clinton's longtime friend, at a
National Gay and Lesbian Task Force fund-raising event in Los Angeles. (Dana
Fineman/Sygma for The New York Times); Carl Goodman, at microphone, and Michael
Petrelis of Queer Nation reacting angrily to Ross Perot's comments on banning
homosexuals from the military. (Tom McKitterick/Impact Visuals); A sign of the
times at the Democratic convention. (Ralf-Finn Hestoft/Saba); Hand in hand at a
parade in New York. (Steven Rubin/J. B. Pictures)(pg. 18-19); Steve
Shellabarger, left, a 47-year-old antiques dealer who lost his lover to AIDS two
years ago, rallying support for Bill Clinton at a meeting in Columbus, Ohio.
(Rebecca Cooney for The New York Times); Voter registration at "Wigstock," the
drag-queen festival at Tompkins Square Park in Manhattan's East Village. (Donna
Binder/Impact Visuals)(pg. 20); Barney Frank, one of two openly gay members of
the House, at a Human Rights Campaign Fund reception in New York. (T. L.
Litt/Impact Visuals)(pg. 21); Lt. (j.g.) Tracy Thorne, a Navy
bombardier-navigator whose revelation of his homosexuality prompted discharge
proceedings, spoke to the Log Cabin Federation, a gay Republican group, prior to
the G.O.P. national convention. (Photograph by Brian Palmer/Impact Visuals)(pg.
29)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              53 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 11, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

ABOUT MEN;
About-Face

BYLINE: By Michael Norman;  Michael Norman, an associate professor of journalism
at New York University, is the author of "These Good Men," a memoir that
explores the bonds he and his Marine comrades forged during and after the
Vietnam War.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 14; Column 3; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 998 words


We're all prisoners of the past, especially in the voting booth. I've tried to
break free of memory and vote my head instead of my heart, but when I close the
curtain behind me, too often I hear the echo of old footfalls, the call of
long-forgotten voices.

I served with a Marine rifle company in Vietnam in 1968, the bloodiest year of
that war. I remember my comrades as men of commitment and sacrifice. I've
tracked a few who survived the battlefield. They've led flawed lives -- some
have wandered, some have stumbled, some have failed -- but they are essentially
the same, men with a moral core.

I know that their code, their character, was born of a particular time and
place. Combat changes a man profoundly, beyond all understanding, whether he
wishes it or not. I know, too, that to use my comrades as a measure of other men
is to invite a false reading. "We had the experience," wrote T. S. Eliot, "but
missed the meaning." When the counterweight is memory, I never trust the scale.

But in no other election season has the political seemed so personal; in no
other public moment has the past appeared to have such a hold. I want to vote
the "issues," look forward not back, but the closer we get to Election Day, the
more I think about the events that shaped me and my comrades -- and the man from
Arkansas who wants our vote.

I could say it matters little that Bill Clinton never saw service. Long nights
in a fighting hole would have given him no help with defense budgets or weapons
systems. And if he's ever faced with the decision to send young men off to die,
he can turn for guidance to the pages of "Men Against Fire" by S. L. A. Marshall
or "The Warriors" by J. Glen Gray. As for moral authority, that comes from the
office, not the man. Dan Quayle's weapon of choice during the Vietnam War was a
5-iron, and yet if some unfortunate circumstance should put him in command, the
Chairman of the Joint Chiefs would unhesitatingly follow his orders, even if
they were issued from the 10th tee.

I know as well that too many men forget the lessons they learned in uniform.
Those I know who suffered loss came home compassionate men. It may seem
paradoxical, but the butchery of the battlefield made them more humane, brought
out the woman in them, if you will, their best part. George Bush saw combat as a
Navy fighter pilot in World War II, yet his political record and legislative
program show little compassion. I grow angry at that record whenever I descend
into the grimy subway vaults beneath Times Square and encounter a hollow-eyed
woman and two little girls squatting against a wall, begging for pocket change.

Decorations or awards don't say much about a man either. A few years ago, I was
in a reviewing line with a Medal of Honor winner. It was hard to reconcile the
selfless hero described in his citation with the braggart and stumbling drunk
standing next to me.

And yet, in the case of Bill Clinton, the past matters. It matters a great deal
because he wants to be President of the United States. His moral dilemma reminds
me of what Henry James said of Epictetus, the enduring Stoic and slave who lived
and taught in the latter part of the first century. James tells us that
Epictetus lived in an age when the behavior of a public figure "increased or
diminished the force" of his ideas.

In that vein, I wish that Bill Clinton had served his country -- not on his
terms, as he wants to do now, but on the Government's terms, the indifferent and
often inimical rules and regulations that affected the lives of millions of
draftees and volunteers. He might have learned a lot in uniform. I've never
lived a more egalitarian life, never had a more "democratic" moment. My comrades
and I had nothing but who we were, which in the end leveled us, made us equals.

I wish a young Bill Clinton had put himself at risk -- either in uniform or in
the ranks of the brave men who publicly defied the Government by refusing
induction and protesting the war. I wish he'd shown some commitment -- to his
country, to a cause, to an idea, commitment to anything except his own future,
his "political viability," as he called it then. As he stands before us now, we
have no true sense of his strength, his heart, his capacity for sacrifice.

I am, of course, troubled that my candidate was once willing to let another man
take his place in the line of march. I wonder if his anonymous stand-in turned
out to be one of the 58,000 who did not come home or one of the 300,000 who were
wounded.

The thousands of young men who, in James Fallows words, "weaseled" their way out
of the draft -- who found "painless ways" to escape service -- suffered from
misplaced metaphysics. They felt no sense of connection, no link to their
less-privileged brothers. I wonder how many came to regret that distance or how
many ever tried to truly close the gap.

If Bill Clinton had traded his scholar's robes for battle dress or jailhouse
jeans, he would have a personal stake in those years. If he had faced either the
enemy or the F.B.I., he'd be able to talk with credibility about the waste, the
loss, the unspeakable sorrow of the war. But, as Fallows said, the experience of
the men who evaded the draft was "bloodless, theoretical." Can such men really
understand the tragedy of Vietnam or the awful consequences of making the same
mistake again?

I do not know whether Sergeant Clinton would have made a better President than
Citizen Clinton. The truth is I long for the day when a pacifist -- man or woman
-- sits in the Oval Office and the question of service is moot. I don't want
Bill Clinton or anyone else calling up my sons to fight.

But I think Henry James was right when he talked about how a man's past, his
conduct, can give an "autobiographical force" to his precepts, his political
plan. Maybe in the end I simply want a bolder President, someone who did not
play it safe and dodge the trials and challenges of a dangerous era, an
uncertain day.

LOAD-DATE: October 11, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              54 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 11, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

A DIRECTORY OF CRUISES WORLDWIDE;
The Roster Grows As Trips Shrink

BYLINE: By EDWIN McDOWELL;  EDWIN McDOWELL reports on the travel industry for
The Times.

SECTION: Section 5; Page 14; Column 3; Travel Desk

LENGTH: 1736 words


SO many millions of Americans took advantage of last summer's bargain air fares
that some travel industry executives wondered if all that spur-of-the-moment
travel would cut into fall and winter cruises. While a final answer won't be
known for months, early indications are that the cruise industry will post its
22d consecutive annual increase, thanks in large part to fall and winter
travelers. While some analysts see storm clouds on the industry's horizon, a few
years from now, cruise line officials expect 4.4 million passengers this year,
up from 4 million in 1991, and some winter cruises already have "sold out" signs
on them.

"Several ships are already full for cruises around Christmas and New Year, and
most others for that time are filling up quickly," said Cheryl Myerson,
president of the National Association of Cruise Only Agents. But hundreds of
other cruises scheduled between now and spring are yet to be filled.

This year's cruises range from A to Z, with stops at Anguilla (on Windjammer,
Clipper Cruise and Renaissance) and Zanzibar (Paquet French, Renaissance, Royal
Viking, Sea Quest and Pearl Cruises). There is also a Sagafjord cruise to remote
Pitcairn, the South Seas island colonized by mutineers from the British naval
ship Bounty, and five lines have scheduled stops at Devils Island, one of the
three Iles du Salut 10 miles off the coast of French Guiana and a one-time penal
colony.

Vietnam is slowly returning to cruise line itineraries, and two ships will make
their first calls there: Royal Cruise Line's 450-passenger Golden Odyssey, on a
12-day trip from Singapore to Hong Kong, with an overnight in Ho Chi Minh City
(Saigon), sailing Jan. 5, 1993. And Classical Cruises' 80-passenger Aurora I,
departing Singapore Dec. 24, 1992, and returning to Hong Kong Jan. 5, with stops
in the Vietnamese cities of Haiphong, Danang, Ho Chi Minh City and Rach Gia.

"This is a trip for people who feel they've been just about everywhere else,"
said Jamie Rosen, the president of Classical Cruises. "It's like visiting China
15 years ago."

The fastest-growing cruises are still two to five days, a category that has
grown 329 percent since 1980 -- or almost twice the 178 percent overall growth
rate during that period, according to the Cruise Lines International
Association, whose 32 members' ships visit some 400 ports in almost 100
countries. The next fastest growing is the six-to-eight-day category, at 155
percent, which still attracts the biggest share (54.3 percent) of the cruise
market.

Majesty Cruise Line's Royal Majesty, which entered service Sept. 18, has
designated both its dining room and 132 of its 528 cabins nonsmoking -- the
first cruise ship to do so, according to industry officials. And while cruises
and dieting seem basically incompatible, most ships these days offer at least
two low-fat, low-calorie entree selections at each meal.

While many cruises cost $600 or more a person a day, Barbara Weiner, an industry
spokeswoman, said the average was between $175 and $225, including air fare and
meals.

The most popular cruise ship destination is still the Caribbean, accounting for
about 35.4 percent of passengers. Together with the Bahamas (13.6 percent) and
eastern Mexico ports (7.5 percent), which the cruise industry lumps with the
Caribbean, the total Caribbean market is well above 50 percent. Other leading
destinations are western Mexico (8.7 percent), the Mediterranean (8.1), Alaska
(6.2) and Europe (3.5).

One destination growing in popularity is the "deep south" of the Caribbean,
cruises of up to 11 days that usually depart from San Juan and call at Grenada,
Bonaire, Barbados, Martinique, Curacao, Virgin Gorda and Tortola.

Other increasingly popular ports of call in the Caribbean are private islands,
usually in the Bahamas but some off Haiti or the Dominican Republic. The day
after the Norwegian Cruise Line's 1,246-passenger Dreamward is christened at
Port Everglades in Fort Lauderdale on Dec. 5, the ship will sail to the
Caribbean on a seven-day trip that includes a stop at Pleasure Island, the
line's four-mile-long private island in the Berry Islands, the Bahamas.

Other lines with private islands in the Caribbean or the Bahamas -- where
passengers can beachcomb, barbecue, swing in a hammock, snorkel, sail or
water-ski -- include Princess, Costa Cruises, Dolphin, Majesty, Premier, Crown
and Commodore. This year, Royal Caribbean completed a $7 million-dollar
renovation of Coco Cay, its private island in the Bahamas.

Royal Caribbean also has a private resort on the northwest coast of Haiti,
Labadee, but the cruise line has been unable to call there since Washington
imposed an economic embargo on Haiti last year.

Although Hurricane Andrew struck the Bahamas before bearing down on the United
States mainland, it did only minor damage to the private islands and barely
touched Nassau and Freeport. Thus it did not effect cruise itineraries.

Hawaii was not as lucky. Hurricane damage to Kauai forced American Hawaii
Cruises to suspend cruises there for the time being; instead, its ships are
spending more time in Maui and the Big Island of Hawaii.

Cruises through the Panama Canal represent only 3 percent of all cruises, but
are a fast-growing segment. Thirty-four ships representing 16 cruise lines have
scheduled dozens of such trips this fall and winter.  Princess alone has
scheduled 27 transcanal trips in 1992-93 (14 between November and April by its
Royal Princess), while the Song of Norway will make 10 canal transits this
winter. The Holland America Line's Statendam, the fifth ship to bear that name,
will transit the canal on her maiden voyage in January, while that same month
Carnival's Tropicale will inaugurate 10- and 11-day cruises through the canal.
Sun Line is offering 12 cruises through the canal that depart from and return to
Galveston, Tex.

The busiest cruise port remains Miami, with almost 1.3 million embarkations last
year of two-day cruises or longer, followed by Port Canaveral (502,000) and Port
Everglades (442,000). New York ranks seventh in North America, with 165,121
embarkations last year, but that was 22 percent higher than in 1990. Celebrity,
Crown, Crystal, Regency, Royal Caribbean and Royal Cruise all offer cruises from
New York to the Caribbean this fall and winter, while Cunard's Queen Elizabeth 2
has two Caribbean tours scheduled from New York.

On Jan. 3, the QE2 is scheduled to sail from New York on a six-continent 104-day
world cruise, which can be broken up into 35- to 56-day segments covering South
America, the Pacific and Orient, the tropics and the Mediterranean. Other ships
planning world cruises this fall or winter are Costa's Daphne (103 days), World
Explorer's Universe (100), the Royal Viking's Royal Viking Sun (97) and Cunard's
Sagafjord (96).

The QE2 was out of action two months after striking a rocky ledge near Martha's
Vineyard on Aug. 7, and to allow more time for an overhaul, the line canceled an
8-day Iberian cruise that had been scheduled for November. Cruise ships
operating out of Miami escaped the wrath of Hurricane Andrew, as did the port
itself, although a few ships canceled departures because the airport was closed
about 36 hours.

Many passengers are apparently waiting until the last minute to book passage --
just as for the last few years vacationers have waited until the last minute to
make airplane, hotel and guesthouse reservations.  Travel industry officials say
that trend started when the nation's economy softened, and people waited to see
whether and what kind of vacation they could afford. While the economy is hardly
robust now, much of the procrastination is fueled by the expectation of bigger
discounts and more add-ons, the closer the departure dates of ships with unsold
cabins.

SOME cruise lines, such as Royal Caribbean, Princess and SeaQuest, have tried to
counter last-minute deep discounting and haggling for upgrades by offering their
lowest discounts for those who make reservations early or by pledging that if a
lower fare becomes available after passengers book, those passengers will
receive the lower rate.

Nevertheless, discounts of at least 35 percent off published prices are common,
although cruise lines have been trying to apply them selectively rather than
across the board. Thus Sun Line Cruises is offering fares of $100 a person, plus
air fare, for third and fourth passengers who share a cabin with two passengers
who each pay full fare, from $2,590 to $5,460, on its Stella Solaris' 15-day
Caribbean cruise in December. Fantasy Cruises is offering half off the regular
fare for seniors traveling as the second occupant in a cabin with a full-fare
passenger, on cruises to Nassau, the Caribbean or to eastern Mexico. Norwegian
Cruise Lines lets a companion sail free, from Los Angeles to Mexico, when one
passenger pays full fare.

Four new cruise ships will go into service later this year: Norwegian Cruise
Line's Dreamward (1,246 passengers), Starlite's Rainbow (1,195), Costa's Allegra
(800 passengers) and Club Med's Club Med II (386). Eight other new ships,
totaling 6,416 beds, previously went into service in 1992, including Royal
Caribbean's 2,766-passenger Majesty of the Seas.

Some industry sources cite the new ships scheduled for this year and into the
future as proof of the cruise industry's vigor. The industry has grown, in terms
of numbers of passengers, an average 9.8 percent every year from 1980 to 1991,
and occupancy rates above 90 percent are taken for granted. But others fear that
the new vessels may create a glut with attendant losses. The Trends Research
Institute, formerly the Socioeconomic Research Institute, in Rhinebeck, N.Y.,
for example, recently forecast that not only will the cruise business not grow
according to industry expectations, but also that occupancy rates will fall from
their current 90 percent to 70 percent by 1996.

"The industry's primary market, the middle class, is being squeezed with
declining discretionary income compounded by increasing inflation," the
institute, which tracks trends of all kinds, said. Seeking to maintain high
occupancy levels, the cruise lines are slashing prices, it added, a strategy
"that will cause some of the great names in cruises to become caught by a
socioeconomic undertow that could take them into a whirlpool and lead to their
reorganization, sale or closure."

LOAD-DATE: October 11, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: The new Royal Majesty, shown in New York harbor, has a
nonsmoking dining room. (Jonathan Atkin for The New York Times)(pg. 14); The
Golden Odyssey, which stops overnight in Ho Chi Minh City, in Hong Kong harbor.
(Royal Cruise Line)(pg. 19)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              55 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 11, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

BENEFITS

SECTION: Section 9; Page 15; Column 4; Styles of The Times

LENGTH: 1006 words



Evening for Cystic Fibrosis

TUESDAY -- A black-tie evening at the Pierre will benefit research projects of
the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation. Cocktails at 6:30 P.M. will be followed by
dinner, dancing and an auction of special vacation trips. Tickets, $500, from
(212) 986-8783.


Anglo-American Reception

TUESDAY -- The Royal Oak Foundation, which sponsors exchanges of exhibits,
lectures and other cultural events between the United States and England, will
hold a champagne reception from 5 to 8 P.M. at the Foundation's specially
designed showcase house at 121 East 73d Street. Dinner at Mortimer's restaurant,
1057 Lexington Avenue, at 75th Street, follows. Tickets, $125, from (212)
966-6565.

 Benefit for Gay Services

TUESDAY -- Joan Rivers will head a cast of comedy acts at Town Hall to benefit
the Lesbian and Gay Community Services Center. The 8 P.M. show will be preceded
by a cocktail reception across the street at the Century Cafe, 132 West 43d
Street, from 6:30 to 7:30 P.M. Tickets, $50 for the show, $100 for cocktail
party and show, from (212) 620-7310.

 Reflections by the Powerful

WEDNESDAY -- Leaders from the military, corporate and academic fields meet in
Aspen, Colo., for several days each summer for some unfettered intellectual
exchanges. The host is the Aspen Institute, which will honor two of those
leaders at its annual awards dinner: Defense Secretary Dick Cheney and Lodwrick
Cook, chairman and chief executive of ARCO. Cocktails at 7 P.M. open the
black-tie evening at the Pierre. Dinner and dancing follow. Tickets, $500, from
(212) 735-0721.

 Rooftop Psychics at the 'Y'

WEDNESDAY -- Psychics will read palms, cards and heads at a rooftop garden
benefit at the Lexington Avenue YWCA at 53d Street. From 6 to 8 P.M., there will
also be beer, wine and hors d'oeuvres to raise funds for the Harlem Y. Tickets,
$30, from (212) 735-9734, or $35 at the door.

 Cabaret for Literacy

WEDNESDAY -- Literacy Volunteers of New York City will benefit from a party with
a Caribbean flavor starting at 8 P.M. at the T. P. International Club, 27 West
24th Street. Tito Puente and his orchestra will be among the performers.
Tickets, $100, from (212) 925-3001.

 Masked Ball on the River

THURSDAY -- The annual masked ball of the Young Leadership Committee of the
Juvenile Diabetes Foundation will be at the Water's Edge in Long Island City,
Queens. Cocktails, at 7:30 P.M., will be followed by dinner, dancing and
entertainment. Black tie. Tickets, $150, from (212) 689-2860.

 Food Service Behind Bars

THURSDAY -- Fresh Start, a culinary and food service program for inmates on
Rikers Island, will hold a benefit from 6 to 9 P.M. at the Nahan Galleries, 381
West Broadway, between Spring and Broome streets. Wine and hors d'oeuvres will
be provided by several restaurants owned by chefs who have taught in the jail
program. Tickets, $75, from (212) 620-0340.

 'Mambo Madness' at SUNY

SATURDAY -- Mario Bauza and his Afro-Cuban Jazz Band will offer dance lessons, a
performance and then dancing at a benefit for the Performing Arts Center at the
State University of New York at Purchase. The evening of "Mambo Madness" starts
at 7 P.M., and there will be tapas, champagne, desserts and a raffle. Tickets,
$75, from (914) 251-6200.

 Afternoon for Opera

OCT. 18 -- The Amato Opera's 45th-anniversary celebration to benefit the
company's production fund will be held at the National Arts Club, 15 Gramercy
Park South. A reception at 12:30 P.M. will be followed by lunch and an operatic
program. Tickets, $45, from (212) 228-8200.

 Jazzy Night at Lincoln Center

OCT. 19 -- Bill Cosby and Ed Bradley will be the hosts, Wynton Marsalis will
perform with the Lincoln Center Jazz Orchestra with Kathleen Battle singing, and
the Duke Ellington Orchestra will play for an evening of music, dancing and
dining at Lincoln Center. The black-tie evening, starting with cocktails at 6:30
P.M. in the New York State Theater and followed by dinner and dancing, will
benefit Lincoln Center programs. Tickets, $500, from (212) 875-5460.

 Birthright Sports Auction

OCT. 19 -- Birthright, a privately financed organization that provides services
to women and children in need of assistance, will hold an auction of sports
memorabilia, including autographed National Football League helmets, at Terrace
on the Hudson, 21 South Route 9W, in Haverstraw, N.Y. Cash bar at 7 P.M. will be
followed by dinner and the auction. Tickets, $50, from (914) 268-4886 or (914)
358-4160.

 Lenox Hill at the Waldorf

OCT. 19 -- Lenox Hill's annual autumn ball will be at the Waldorf-Astoria
starting with cocktails at 6:30 P.M., followed by dinner and dancing. Black tie.
Tickets, $500, from (212) 439-2544.

 Second Century of Service

OCT. 19 -- University Settlement will hold a Second Century Celebration Dinner
-- it was actually founded in 1886 -- to mark its many services to the people of
the Lower East Side. Cocktails at 6:30 P.M. will be followed by dinner and
entertainment and presentations of awards to Matilda Cuomo, the wife of Gov.
Mario M.Cuomo, and to the actor-musician Ruben Blades. Tickets, $250, from (212)
674-9120, ext. 158.

 Talks at St. Luke's

OCT. 27 -- Anna Quindlen, the columnist for The New York Times, will open a
four-evening series on the American scene at St. Luke's School, 487 Hudson
Street, at Grove Street. Each talk starts at 7:30 and will be followed by a
reception. Tickets for the series, $75, from Ticket Central, (212) 279-4200.
Individual tickets, $25, are available at the door. Following is the schedule of
other talks.

DEC. 1 -- David Halberstam, the author of books including "The Best and the
Brightest," on the Vietnam war, and his latest, "The Next Century." MARCH 2 --
Linda Ellerbee, the television journalist, producer of children's programs and
author most recently of "Move On: Adventures in the Real World." APRIL 20 --
Calvin Trillin, the New Yorker writer, syndicated columnist and author.

LOAD-DATE: October 11, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Schedule

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              56 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 11, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Voters;
While Not Squarely Pro-Clinton, One Town Is Definitely Anti-Bush

BYLINE: By JEFFREY SCHMALZ,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1; Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 1224 words

DATELINE: RICHMOND HEIGHTS, Mo., Oct. 10


This St. Louis suburb tends to be up for grabs in Presidential elections. It
split 50-50 in the vote four years ago. But ask about George Bush this time
around, and the response among even his dwindling supporters tends to be a
merger of disappointment and disbelief, all the more so since the President
started attacking Gov. Bill Clinton's activities in the 1960's. Here at least,
that maneuver has backfired in a big way.

"This is just a lot of garbage," 73-year-old Audrey Mueller said of the Bush
attacks on Mr. Clinton for traveling to Russia in 1969 and attending antiwar
demonstrations in England. "I wish he'd get away from this stuff. The President
of the United States shouldn't be doing this."

'No Way for Bush'

Her husband, Leslie Mueller, 75, put it this way: "I was in World War II. Who
cares? That was 45 years ago. Who cares what Clinton did 20 years ago as a young
man? Let's talk about the homeless and unemployment, Mr. President. What are you
going to do about those?"

With that, Mrs. Mueller repeated, 'Garbage!" Both she and her husband voted for
Mr. Bush four years ago. They will not say whether they are voting this time for
Mr. Clinton or Ross Perot, but they do say this: "No way for Bush," Mr. Mueller
said. "Forget it," said his wife.

In close to a hundred conversations over three days in this mostly white, though
racially mixed suburb of blue- and white-collar families, about one in three
people remained loyal to Mr. Bush. But in the library and the health club, on
the streets and in the mall, most others were for Mr. Clinton, though a few said
they liked Mr. Perot based on his recent televised appeals. But for the most
part, Mr. Perot was treated as a joke. The man who set out to be the antidote
for cynicism about government has wound up fueling it.

"I'm embarrassed I ever wanted to vote for Perot," said Christine Griffin, 23.
Along with her two co-workers who sell cosmetics, she said she would vote for
Mr. Clinton.

Said Rudy Douglas, a 37-year-old shoe salesman who says he will vote for Mr.
Clinton: "It turns out Perot was just power hungry. He's flaky. Who knows what
he would do as President?"

Judy De Weerdt, a teacher who says she is leaning toward Mr. Clinton, summed up
Mr. Perot this way: "He's a mealy-mouthed little critter."

But while Mr. Clinton seems to have most of the support here, it is a grudging
support, with people not sure he is up to the job and not convinced he has been
straightforward with them. People made it loud and clear that this would be an
anti-Bush election, not a pro-Clinton election.

"I'm voting for Clinton, but I want to like him more than I like him," said Nick
Niederlander, 45, the librarian here.

Raymond Stay, 51, is more skeptical of Mr. Clinton and says he is voting for Mr.
Perot. "I don't trust Clinton," he said. "You always have the feeling he's not
being square with you. He should have been man enough to say, 'I didn't want to
go to war. I pulled a couple of strings to stay out.' "

If there was one word that dominated the interviews, it was trust. Even more
than the economy, it is the big issue in this city of 10,000 people, which is
adjacent to the St. Louis suburb of Clayton, where the Presidential debate will
be held Sunday night.

Truth be told, most people do not seem to trust any of the candidates. They
believe Mr. Bush lied to them about not raising taxes and Mr. Perot about
whether he was running or not. As for Governor Clinton, they do not think he has
come clean with them about the draft. And they are not sure they trust him to
run the Government, though most say they have no choice.

"I don't trust any of them," said Lee Lawrence, 37, a secretary who didn't vote
in 1988 and may not vote this time. "Clinton has good ideas, but I'm not sure
you can trust him to carry them out."

Said Pete Curtis, 39: "I just don't trust Perot. He scares me."

Mary Davitt, 38, an accountant, says she voted last time for Mr. Bush but
regrets that now. "I don't trust Bush," she said. "He hasn't told the truth
about Iran-contra. He's desperate. He's burned out. It's time for someone else."

The conversations here in Richmond Heights were different than those from close
to a thousand similar interviews throughout the country since the start of the
primary season. For one thing, with the election imminent and their decisions
now seeming real, people took more time to think about their answers. For
another, they talked much less about allegations that Mr. Clinton had once had
an extramarital affair. In fact, part of the resentment about Mr. Bush's raising
of the issue of what Mr. Clinton did 20 years ago is that the voters have
already put the character issue behind them. What had been an amusement in March
seems a trivial distraction in October.

But perhaps the most important difference between the interviews here and the
earlier ones is that more and more people talk not just of a failed George Bush
but also of a failed Republican philosophy.

"I voted for Bush, I voted for Reagan," said Angela Gelb, 50, an interior
designer. "But I think the Republicans have been in power long enough. They were
great on defense. But we have to concentrate at home now. Let's see what the
Democrats do. They'll have the White House and Congress. Maybe it'll work."

'Need for Change'

Keith Lilek, 35, a sales manager, voted for Mr. Bush last time. "We like being
Republicans," he said. "We don't like giving our money away. But after 12 years,
I can see the need for change."

Like many other Republicans here, Mr. Lilek is upset that in the final weeks of
the campaign, the President has turned to attacking Mr. Clinton for
demonstrating against the Vietnam War. "Who wasn't demonstrating 20 years ago?"
he asked.

For some Republicans, the election is over, and they want to see their President
leave with dignity. "It's the desperate ploy of a desperate man," William
Guttman, 48, an accountant, said of the latest Bush attack on Mr. Clinton.

But for other Republicans, it isn't over until it's over. They hold out hope,
though they feel let down by their man's tactics.

"You have to be for Bush, he's the only one who can help the economy," said
Roger Miller, 39, a sales representative for a medical equipment company. "He
may pull this off yet. But the liberal media is against him."

'It's Beneath Him'

Still, even Mr. Miller is offended by the attacks on Mr. Clinton's antiwar
demonstrating. "I hate it," he said. "I wish Bush would stop it. It's beneath
him."

There is an autumn briskness in the air here. The nights are chilly. The leaves
are just beginning to turn on street after street of neat brick homes. On one
block, Rose Mary Ammon stands in front of her house, wearing a red-white-and
blue flag pin and looking as if she had just stepped off the cover of a
Republican leaflet. At the age of 84, she has been a Republican all her life.

"I've been a Bush supporter for a long, long time," she said. "I've been a
contributor. But not this year. I think Bush has been in office for as many
years as he should be."

With that, she turned to walk away, then stopped to say: "This is one of the
worst elections I've lived through. All this mud-slinging. Now this stuff with
Clinton that they're saying is such a big deal. They ought to point to their own
Vice President."

LOAD-DATE: October 11, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: "I've been a Bush supporter for a long, long time," said Rose
Mary Ammon of Richmond Heights, Mo. "But not this year. I think Bush has been in
office for as many years as he should be."; "It turns out Perot was just power
hungry," said Rudy Douglas, left, a shoe salesman in Richmond Heights. "He's
flaky. Who knows what he would do as President?" he said. Keith Lilek, a sales
manager, right, with his son Heath, said he voted for President Bush in the last
election. "We like being Republicans," he said. "We don't like giving our money
away. But after 12 years, I can see the need for change." (Photographs by Bill
Stover for The New York Times) (pg. 24)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              57 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 11, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Campaign Profile;
Perot's Spokesman, a Former Prisoner of War, Is His Boss's Truest Believer

BYLINE: By KEVIN SACK,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 28; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1220 words

DATELINE: DALLAS, Oct. 10


With the candidate out of sight, the voice of the Ross Perot campaign speaks
these days not with a Texarkana twang but with the droopy drawl of southwest
Georgia. It belongs to Orson G. Swindle 3d, who seems to share Mr. Perot's
penchant for both patriotic fervor and backwoods philosophy.

Ten weeks ago, Mr. Swindle was minding his own business, running an association
of preschools in Honolulu, where he had recently moved. Now, as executive
director of United We Stand, America, Mr. Perot's political organization, he
spends his days jousting with the likes of Ted Koppel on "Nightline" and John H.
Sununu on "Crossfire," when, of course, he is not appearing on "Good Morning
America" or the "MacNeil/Lehrer Newshour."

When Mr. Perot announced in July that he would halt his Presidential campaign,
he strained his relationship with some longtime allies like Thomas W. Luce 3d
and burned his bridges with hired guns like Edward J. Rollins. What was left by
the time he re-entered the race last week was a small coterie of loyalists, some
of them relatives, some of them employees, and some, like Mr. Swindle, true
believers.

Of that group, the 55-year-old Mr. Swindle has emerged as the campaign's most
public presence. After directing the Hawaii Perot campaign, which he joined in
the early stages of its first incarnation, he was appointed director of United
We Stand on July 31 by the state coordinators who still hoped Mr. Perot would
get in the race. He gave up his job in Hawaii and temporarily moved to Dallas.

In addition to defending Mr. Perot on television, Mr. Swindle holds daily
briefings for reporters in Dallas, plays cheerleader for the fledgling Perot
state organizations and consults frequently with Mr. Perot. He says he is having
the time of his life.

"I enjoy the mental combat," he said. "I enjoy pressure. I've always thrived on
it. I've had two ulcers in my life, and both times it was because I was bored to
tears with what I was doing."

20-Year Friendship

Like Mr. Perot's running mate, James B. Stockdale, Mr. Swindle is a former
fighter pilot who was shot down over Vietnam and spent six years and four months
as a prisoner of war. As a friend of Mr. Perot's for nearly 20 years, he
maintains a highly idealized view of his candidate.

Mr. Perot, he says flatly, joined the race for love of country, not massage of
ego. When asked at a news conference on Thursday what proof Mr. Perot had that
prisoners of war remained in Southeast Asia, Mr. Swindle replied: "If Mr. Perot
said it, it's true. Mr. Perot does not lie."

But Mr. Swindle also has a realist's understanding of the disillusionment caused
by Mr. Perot's alternating decisions about joining the race.

"I've told him you cannot believe the damage that's been done to these people,"
Mr. Swindle said in an interview. "In the conversations I've had with Ross, I'm
convinced that in July he did not fully comprehend how deep their feelings
were."

Despite his relative inexperience in electoral politics, or perhaps because of
it, Mr. Swindle is not afraid to speak his mind. But he often has little
knowledge about what Mr. Perot is thinking or even any awareness of what has
been reported about either the Perot campaign or those of its rivals. As a
result, his statements usually reflect his own opinions, not necessarily Mr.
Perot's.

This week, for instance, he referred to White House spokesman Marlin Fitzwater,
who has taken to wearing safari hats, as "Indiana Fitzwater." With little
prompting, he said Treasury Secretary Nicholas F. Brady was a man "the business
world would like to see just slowly disappear."

Mr. Swindle's extraordinary loyalty to Mr. Perot clearly stems from Mr. Perot's
work on behalf of prisoners of war.

After growing up in Camilla, Ga., Mr. Swindle joined the Marines in 1959. In
1966, while flying what was supposed to be his last combat mission in Vietnam,
the 205th of his tour, Mr. Swindle's plane was hit by antiaircraft fire. He
parachuted into the hands of the North Vietnamese.

While in prison, he was repeatedly and brutally tortured. He occasionally
communicated through whispers and a tapped code with his fellow inmate, Mr.
Stockdale.

After Mr. Swindle came home, he was invited to a reunion of prisoners of war in
San Francisco by Mr. Perot, whom he had never heard of. They struck up a
friendship.

Conservative by nature but generally apolitical, Mr. Swindle was lured into
politics by his outrage at former President Jimmy Carter's declaration of
amnesty for Vietnam draft dodgers. He ran Ronald Reagan's 1980 campaign against
Mr. Carter in his southwest Georgia Congressional District, an unpopular mission
so close to Mr. Carter's home town.

As a reward, he won a patronage appointment as the Georgia director of the
Farmers Home Administration, the lending arm of the Department of Agriculture.
The agency was drowning in delinquent loans and Mr. Swindle set out at
Washington's behest to toughen credit policies and declare foreclosures.

Power of Constituents

That did not sit well with the state's Republican United States Senator, Mack
Mattingly, who began fielding irate calls from rural constituents.  The Senator
won a long battle for Mr. Swindle's removal by making it a condition for the
Senate's approval of a deputy agriculture secretary.

Former aides to Mr. Mattingly, who is now Ambassador to the Seychelles, said
their primary objection to Mr. Swindle was his imperious and uncompassionate
style.

"He's perfect for the Perot campaign," said Jay Morgan, who was executive
director of the Georgia Republican Party at the time. "He's one of those guys
who is smarter than anybody he's ever met."

Mr. Swindle says he was deposed because he refused to play pork-barrel politics.
He had the same problem in his next job, as assistant secretary of commerce in
charge of the Economic Development Agency.

The agency's mission was to funnel money to public works projects in
economically depressed areas. But it had become a clearinghouse for pork and Mr.
Swindle set out to publicize instances of abuse, including efforts by then House
Speaker Jim Wright to earmark agency grants for the Fort Worth Stockyards.

Mr. Swindle did not survive at the development agency for long after George
Bush's election as President. At the 1980 Republican National Convention, he had
committed the unpardonable political sin of voting for Jack F. Kemp for Vice
President.  And in his four years in Washington he had made enemies on both
sides of the aisle.

"They ran him out of town," said Daniel W. Caprio, a former aide to Mr. Swindle
at the Commerce Department. "Someone like Orson who was so confrontational
didn't fit into the Bush Administration. He wasn't kinder and gentler."

Mr. Swindle remains something of a Republican at heart. He says he would vote
for Mr. Bush over Gov. Bill Clinton in a two-way race and he concedes that he
has some difficulty with Mr. Perot's proposals for large tax increases.

But having seen the government from the inside, he has become convinced it needs
fixing from the outside. "Unfortunately we have a system in which the business
of government is totally corrupted by ineffectiveness and incompetence," he
said. "And the people who are running it give themselves a pay raise for having
it that way."

NAME: Orson G. Swindle 3d

LOAD-DATE: October 11, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Orson G. Swindle 3d, who has emerged as the Perot campaign's
most public presence, particularly with Ross Perot out of sight. (Edward
Keating/The New York Times)

Chart: "Orson George Swindle 3d"

Birthdate: March 8, 1937

Hometown: Camilla, Ga.


Current Residence: Honolulu

Education: Georgia Institute of Technology, B.S. in Industrial Management, 1959;
Florida State University, M.B.A., 1973.

Career Highlights: United States Marine Corps, 1959-79 (fighter pilot, prisoner
of war in North Vietnam, awarded two Silver Stars, two Bronze Stars, two Purple
Hearts, and two Legions of Merit, retired as a lieutenant colonel); director of
U.S. Farmers Home Administration in Georgia, 1981-85; assistant secretary of
commerce and director of the Economic Development Agency, 1985-89; executive
director, Kindergarten and Children's Aid Association Pre-Schools of Hawaii,
1992; executive director, United We Stand, America, 1992.

Family: Married to Angela Williams; one son by a previous marriage, Kevin, 30.

Interests: Tennis, golf, spectator sports.

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              58 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 11, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

398 Vietnam Hill People Leave Cambodia

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Page 6; Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 196 words

DATELINE: ORWEI, Cambodia, Oct. 10


A band of tribal guerrillas who spent decades battling the Vietnamese, even
after they were driven into Cambodia with the fall of South Vietnam, laid down
their weapons here today, news reports said.

The hill fighters and their families -- 398 people in all -- were shuttled from
Mondol Kiri province aboard six military transport helicopters. They were headed
for Phnom Penh and eventual resettlement in the West.

The United Nations-supervised Cambodian peace process gave the rebels an
opportunity to leave their remote hideout, and United Nations troops assisted
the withdrawal today. About half those leaving were found to be suffering from
malaria, dengue fever, infected cuts and other ailments.

The guerrillas, who formally called themselves the United Front for the
Liberation of Oppressed Races, belonged to ethnic hill tribes in Vietnam who
resisted the lowland Vietnamese for hundreds of years. Relegated to second-class
status, these largely Christianized minorities welcomed American intervention in
Vietnam.

When the war ended in 1975, Hanoi launched a major offensive against them, and
the hill fighters were driven across the border into Cambodia.

LOAD-DATE: October 11, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              59 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 11, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Polls;
LEAD FOR CLINTON IN TWO KEY STATES

BYLINE: By Reuters

SECTION: Section 1; Page 25; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 651 words


President Bush trails Gov. Bill Clinton in Georgia and Michigan, two states
considered crucial to a Republican victory, according to new opinion polls.

Another new poll found the Arkansas Governor in the lead nationwide as well,
despite Mr. Bush's recent criticism of Mr. Clinton's anti-Vietnam War
activities. The poll, taken for Newsweek on Thursday and Friday, found the
Democrat leading with 44 percent to 35 percent for Mr. Bush and 12 percent for
Ross Perot. Those percentages were virtually unchanged from a Newsweek poll
taken the week before.

When asked whether Mr. Clinton's antiwar activities and his trip to the Soviet
Union at the time he was a student at Oxford University should be an important
issue in the campaign, 72 percent of the respondents said no. And 63 percent of
the respondents agreed that Mr. Bush's remarks amounted to "an unfair
criticism."

The telephone survey of 755 registered voters was taken by the Gallup
Organization and had a margin of sampling error of plus or minus four percentage
points.

Close Results in Georgia

In the new survey of Georgia voters, 44 percent said they would vote for Mr.
Clinton, 38 percent for Mr. Bush and 7 percent for Mr. Perot, a lead for Mr.
Clinton that is within the margin of error of the poll.

The poll found that Mr. Perot was apparently attracting most of his support from
the Republicans.

The survey of 567 registered likely voters taken Oct. 6-7 by the Marketing
Workshop Inc. and WSB-TV for The Atlanta Journal-Constitution found that 11
percent of the sample said they were undecided. It had a margin of error of four
percentage points.

Must-Win State for Bush

Georgia, which Mr. Bush carried by a 59-40 margin over Gov. Michael S. Dukakis
in 1988, is considered a must-win state for the President by most political
analysts.

A primary problem for the President, the poll found, is that 32 percent of "core
Republican" voters said they rated him unfavorably versus only 6 percent of
"core Democrats" who gave Mr. Clinton negative ratings. Over all, Mr. Bush had a
disapproval rating of 54 percent, Mr. Perot 53 percent and Mr. Clinton 36
percent.

Among black voters, the Democrats' most loyal constituency, the survey found Mr.
Clinton ahead by 72 percent to 6 percent, with Mr. Perot at 1 percent and 20
percent undecided.

The Democrat's lead was even wider in a Detroit Free Press/WXYZ-TV poll of
Michigan voters that was published Saturday.

About 50 percent of the 627 likely voters statewide who were polled Oct. 3-7
said they would vote for Mr. Clinton if the election were held that day, versus
31 percent for Mr. Bush and 8 percent for Mr. Perot. Eleven percent were
undecided. The margin of sampling error was plus or minus four percentage points
in the poll, conducted by the Center of Urban Studies at Wayne State University.

Michigan has supported Republicans for President in every election since 1968.
But the poll says voters are upset with Mr. Bush's handling of the economy,
health care, education and the environment.

Who Is More Trusted

When asked whom they trust more to run the country, 40 percent of the voters
said Mr. Clinton, compared with 34 percent for Mr. Bush and 5 percent for Mr.
Perot.

The poll also showed Mr. Clinton with an overwhelming lead with black voters.
"Clearly, there's a key role that the city of Detroit's electorate can play in
this election," a senior research analyst at Wayne State University, Bob Kahle,
told The Free Press.

Among vice-presidential candidates, 61 percent of the voters said Senator Al
Gore was more qualified to serve as Vice President, as against 25 percent for
Vice President Dan Quayle.

And 51 percent of those polled said military service was not an important
qualification for the White House, while 33 percent said military experience was
somewhat important and 14 percent said it was very important.

LOAD-DATE: October 11, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              60 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 11, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Political Memo;
Baker Re-emerges as Bush's Campaign Chief, Only to Be Hit With Criticism

BYLINE: By MAUREEN DOWD with THOMAS L. FRIEDMAN,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 24; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1696 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 10


Once the Bush Administration was proud of its collegiality. Now Bush aides and
friends paint a picture of a White House awash with scalding leaks and ruthless
back-stabbing, with even the President as a target. The intrigue resembles a
campaign version of the classic murder-mystery board game Clue.

The White House game board based on accounts of Administration players might
look like this: Richard Darman in the West Wing with a noose. James Baker hiding
in the conference room with a candlestick. Nicholas Brady in the Treasury with a
revolver. (Aimed at Mr. Darman.) The conservatives in the Cabinet room with
wrenches. (Looking for Mr. Darman and Mr. Baker.) Mrs. Bush in the library with
a lead pipe. (Also looking for Mr. Darman.) President Bush in the Oval Office
with a knife. (Gripped in self-defense.)

"If this President is done in, and many of us are still hoping and working to
see that he is not, then he will have been done worse by those he trusted most,"
said William J. Bennett, the former Bush Administration official and
conservative leader. "This is Shakespearean: Woe is England for here are
cynicism, betrayal and treachery, to talk about their President, their friend,
their sponsor as the doddering old fool in the attic."

Focus Quickly Blurred

On the eve of the debates, six weeks after James A. Baker 3d came from the State
Department to take control of a roiling White House and campaign, things are
roiling as much as ever. Campaign officials are upset that while Mr. Baker and
his team initially brought a focus on economic issues and a disciplined message,
the clarity dissipated soon after Mr. Bush's Sept. 11 speech on his economic
vision failed to produce a bump in the polls.

The debate blitz that begins Sunday night could change everything. While the
Bush campaign seems to be churning, more interested in strafing attacks on Gov.
Bill Clinton's patriotism than in keeping the focus on the economy, the Clinton
campaign seems strangely skittish. Mr. Clinton once again finds himself
struggling to fit together the pieces of his past -- this time the extent of his
involvement in Vietnam War protests while a student at Oxford. Strategists in
both parties say they have noticed that the Arkansas Governor's jumpy demeanor
seems oddly out of sync with his commanding lead in the polls.

"Clearly, Clinton seems rattled, scared, nervous, elusive and evasive," said
James Pinkerton, a Bush campaign official.

At this point, the President's aides are praying for heavenly intervention in
the shape of a Clinton debate gaffe or smoking gun out of his past. Until then,
the portrait of Mr. Bush has been more poignant than rousing, with the President
appearing at lessthan buoyant fund-raising events and on talk shows that he once
dismissed as beneath the dignity of his office. While Mr. Bush tried to "go the
extra mile," as he puts it, his aides were sarcastically recalling to reporters
his claim that he'd gained the momentum in the 1980 primary race against Ronald
Reagan: "We've got the Big Mo now." Incumbent Senators have made themselves
scarce at Bush rallies.

Criticism From Within

Political circles were consumed with talk of recent articles in The Washington
Post by Bob Woodward that offered a highly negative look at the troubled
economic policies of the President's first term, compliments of Bush insiders.

President Bush has long considered it a mortal sin for any aide of his to
whisper negative comments about him to the press, and he and his family were
said to be furious about what they saw as the betrayals of senior aides who were
willing to criticize Mr. Bush in articles published only a month before the
election. Among other things, Mr. Darman, the budget chief who is still arguing
that the 1990 budget deal that broke Mr. Bush's "no new taxes" pledge was the
right thing to do, was quoted as saying that the President's repudiation of the
deal was "sheer idiocy."

Because the Post articles strongly reflected the point of view of Mr. Darman,
and because Mr. Darman and Mr. Woodward are good friends, many in the
Administration assumed that the budget director was the source of the biting
commentary about Mr. Bush, Mr. Baker and Treasury Secretary Nicholas F. Brady.

In an editorial, The Wall Street Journal called the series "transparently Dick
Darman's attempt to set the tone of all future histories of economic policy
during the Bush years." And a syndicated column by Rowland Evans and Robert
Novak acidly noted that "many argue that Darman has used the nation's most
renowned investigative reporter to relate his version of the budget deal at a
moment of maximum political peril for the President."

'Peculiar Timing'

Asked on a morning television news show whether the budget chief might resign,
Mr. Bush once more defended Mr. Darman, who has been playing Mr. Clinton in
debate preparations. But Mr. Bush allowed that the series was "peculiar timing,
I will admit."

While some Bush aides were leaving their footprints all too visibly, Mr. Baker
remained largely invisible. He has stayed so far in the shadows that some
campaign officials who are based at the Bush-Quayle headquarters a block away
from the White House complain that they have yet to lay eyes on him; his aides
insist that in his six weeks in the White House that he has given no interviews.

Reporters are now humorously tracking "Baker sightings" and comparing him to the
elusive cartoon character Waldo.

"Baker's been M.I.A.," said one White House official. "Maybe Ross Perot will
find him."

Mr. Baker's team spent the first three weeks putting Mr. Bush's disparate
economic proposals into a single package for reviving the economy, entitled
"Agenda for American Renewal," which the President presented Sept. 10 at the
Economic Club of Detroit. The idea was to provide a basis to compare Mr. Bush's
economic ideas and philosophy of governing with those of Mr. Clinton.

Mr. Baker was scheduled to appear on some talk shows on the weekend after Mr.
Bush's presentation, but at the last minute he decided not to go on, a move that
annoyed and puzzled several White House officials and Bush family members.

"Baker is our best salesman with the press," said one White House official. "If
he would have gone out and sold it, the press would have taken it more
seriously."

Some inside and outside the campaign mutter that Mr. Baker is keeping a
distance, as he has been known to do in the past when disaster looms. But aides
say otherwise. Mr. Baker is obsessed with not sullying his statesman's
credentials and appears to believe that the less he is seen in public as chief
of staff, the more people will remember him as Secretary of State.

On the back of Mr. Baker's chair in the cabinet room are four brass plaques,
with the dates of his service. They read Chief of Staff, Secretary of the
Treasury, Secretary of State, Chief of Staff.

"He would not like that to be his last plaque," said one aide. "His attitude is
that 'I am here to help my friend, but my friend has not asked me, and I did not
sign up, to be a political hack.' "

A Baker aide cites another factor for his low profile: "It was a no-win
situation for him. If he had leapt in with both feet, you all would have been
screaming 'Deputy President,' 'Bush can't think for himself; he sends Baker out
to do all the heavy lifting.' Then when he doesn't jump out there, you ask why
he's hiding."

Nevertheless, Mr. Baker is keenly aware that he does not have Lee Atwater and
Roger Ailes, the bare-knuckled strategists of the 1988 campaign, to absorb the
criticism of any slashing tactics. Mr. Baker is now in the gun sight for
mistakes and for negative campaigning, and he felt the sting of that last week
over the meeting he and Mr. Bush had with a group of conservative Congressmen,
led by Robert K. Dornan, Republican of California.

Several campaign officials privately fretted afterward that the meeting would be
seen as emblematic of a campaign that seemed reduced to personal accusations
that even Mr. Dornan and Mr. Bush admitted they did not have all the facts for.

Murky Accusations

For almost two weeks, the far-right Congressional group had been using speeches
on the House floor to float murky accusations about Mr. Clinton's visit to
Moscow when he was a student at Oxford.

"Who would go to Moscow on a vacation in the dead of winter?" Representative Sam
Johnson, the Texas Republican, asked a reporter.

Representative Duncan Hunter, a California Republican who also attended the
meeting with Mr. Bush and Mr. Baker, said: "We went to the Oval Office because
Bush wanted to thank us for standing up for him. He said, 'Thanks for sticking
up for me; I appreciate that.' The President said it was not right for him to
use his office to get information on who Clinton met with on his Moscow trip.
Dornan said, 'If you were L.B.J., you would already have the information.' And
the President said, 'Well, I'm not L.B.J. and I'm not going to do it.'

"One thing the President did say was that he could not understand why the
American media was not forcing Clinton to answer the question of who he met with
in Moscow."

As for Mr. Baker's role, Mr. Hunter said, "The only thing I recall is that Baker
just listened politely and was nice to us."

Senator Joseph R. Biden Jr., the Delaware Democrat, said: "The irony is that
James Baker's greatest contribution would have been to remain at State. Bush's
re-election depended on his image as a statesman striving to build a new world
order. By abandoning that concept, he and Baker squandered Bush's one potential
strength. With a sagging economy and a foreign policy without values or goals,
they were left with only their worst instincts."

The debates are known around the White House as "Svengali's last shot,"
referring to Mr. Baker's image.

As one White House official noted: "If it's clear we have not gotten momentum
from the three debates, half the White House will turn to 'Jim Baker wasn't so
great after all' spinning and the Baker team will turn to 'Everything was such
an unbelievable mess before we got here that even Baker couldn't win it.' "

LOAD-DATE: October 11, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Six weeks after James A. Baker 3d took control of the Bush
campaign, the focus on economic issues and a disciplined message seems to have
got muddled and has failed to produce a rise in the polls. Mr. Baker glanced at
President Bush during a dinner on Thursday night in Houston. (Stephen
Crowley/The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              61 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 11, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Rev. James D. Watson, a Leader In Civil Rights Causes, Dies at 67

BYLINE: By BRUCE LAMBERT

SECTION: Section 1; Page 50; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 449 words


The Rev. James D. Watson, an leader in housing, civil rights and peace causes as
a pastor and New York regional head of the United Presbyterian Church, died on
Thursday at Lenox Hill Hospital in Manhattan. He was 67 years old and lived in
Manhattan.

He died of complications from Parkinson's disease, his family said.

Mr. Watson called himself a political and social radical and a Christian
humanist "more concerned about man than about God." "I see the ministry in terms
of social action," he said in 1970.

He served as the moderator of the Presbyterian Synod of New York State in 1971,
interim executive head of the New York City Presbytery in 1972 and 73 and its
moderator and policy chairman in 1970. He worked to shift the denomination from
a centralized bureaucracy to more community control and local programs at its
116 churches in the city.

Mr. Watson participated in civil rights demonstrations in Washington and in the
South. He was a leader of a Queens chapter of the National Committee for a Sane
Nuclear Policy. He ran unsuccessfully as an anti-Vietnam War candidate for
Congress in a 1967 Queens Democratic primary and as an Eugene McCarthy delegate
in 1968.

Social-Service Agencies

He founded the Laurelton-Springfield Day Care Center in Queens and was president
of the Presbyterian Housing Development Fund Corporation of Queens and the
tenants' association at the Presbyterian-affiliated James Lenox House in
Manhattan. He also served on the boards of the Presbytery Senior Services,
Alberta L. Alston House in Queens, Fort Schuyler House in the Bronx and United
Presbyterian Home in Syosset, L.I.

Mr. Watson was born in Kearny, N.J. During World War II, he served three years
in the Navy in the Pacific.

After graduating from Shelton College in 1951, he earned a bachelor of divinity
degree at Faith Theological Seminary in 1954, a master of divinity at Bloomfield
Theological Seminary in 1959 and a master's in American history at New York
University in 1960.

He served as the pastor of the United Presbyterian Church of Flanders, N.J.,
from 1958 to 1962 and of the First Presbyterian Church of Springfield Gardens in
Queens from 1962 to 1976, then was the acting minister of the Jan Hus Church in
Manhattan for several years. Ten years ago he retired on disability but
continued as a volunteer.

Mr. Watson's wife of 25 years, the former Alice Arnold, died in 1983.

He is survived by three daughters, Gail Watson of Denver and Carol and Susan
Watson, both of Queens; three brothers, Daniel, John and William, all of Kearny,
and three sisters, Catherine McWilliam of Greenbrook, N.J., Ellen Sarvis of
Akron, Ohio, and Isabel Jocz of Freehold, N.J.

NAME: James D. Watson

LOAD-DATE: October 11, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: The Rev. James D. Watson (1970)

TYPE: Biography; Obituary (Obit)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              62 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 11, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Public & Private;
Rumor Has It

BYLINE: By ANNA QUINDLEN

SECTION: Section 4; Page 17; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 751 words


The rumor moved quickly, from newspaper reporter to magazine writer to
television correspondent and back again, in the whisper-down-the-lane world of
journalism. Someone had said that Bill Clinton considered applying for
citizenship in another country while trying to avoid the Vietnam draft.

But it had a smell about it, a tinny taste: no one had actually seen a letter
that was said to exist, but a friend of a friend knew someone who had. First one
newspaper was said to be preparing a page 1 story, then another. Some versions
said the approach was to the Swedes; others said it was to British officials.

I said Segretti.

Segretti is the word I mutter when my conscious mind refuses to accept the
gutter level of politics in America. Donald Segretti was a dirty trickster of
the Watergate era who, among other things, infiltrated the campaign of Edmund
Muskie to make sure the capable Maine Democrat would crash and burn during the
primary season.

There was the literature circulated during the Florida primary suggesting
Senator Muskie supported Castro and forced busing. There were the stink bombs at
appearances and the appearances mysteriously canceled.  The coup de grace was
the letter, on bogus Muskie campaign stationery, suggesting that Hubert Humphrey
and Henry Jackson had engaged in sexual misconduct.

Sure enough, in 1972 George McGovern was the Democratic nominee and Richard M.
Nixon, on whose behalf Mr. Segretti labored, won by a landslide.

This would all be history if the President had not revealed in the last few days
that he is living in the past, and the worst sort of past at that.

It is astounding that Mr. Bush says that demonstrating against the Vietnam War,
an honorable way for millions of us to register righteous dissent, was a
dishonorable undertaking.  It is astounding that he would suggest, with not a
shred of evidence, that a trip Mr. Clinton made as a student to Russia was
suspect.

When Representative Robert Dornan, a stalking horse for the Bush campaign, said
Mr. Clinton had gone to Moscow as a guest of the K.G.B., he didn't even bother
to concoct sources, as Mr. Segretti might have done in the old days. Mr. Dornan
said he had no proof; he just thought it was so.

Like most rumors, it is impossible to trace the one about Mr. Clinton's
citizenship to its source. The State Department certainly helped the rumor along
by referring questions about alleged tampering with Mr. Clinton's passport file
to the F.B.I., the ultimate red flag. No one has explained how the State
Department came to be looking at Mr. Clinton's file in the first place, since it
is protected by privacy laws and cannot be reviewed without his consent.

And no one has explained why a young man so ambitious that he wrote at 23 that
he could not resist the draft and "maintain my political viability" would
consider renouncing American citizenship. No one has to explain -- it's just a
rumor, right?  Nevertheless, Mr. Clinton has been placed in the position of
having to deny it on several talk shows. He has also had to deny that his
Russian trip included anything untoward. Thus does the rumor mill grind.

Mr. Bush miscalculates, and miscalculates again. With his attacks on Mr.
Clinton's dissent during the Vietnam era, he insults a huge group of Americans
who believed the policy in Southeast Asia was ill conceived. And he revives the
Silent Majority divide-and-conquer strategy of Mr. Nixon, a strategy that was
ultimately devalued by a growing body of opinion hostile to the war and the
historical record on the corruption within the Nixon Administration.

The innuendo campaign about the Clinton trip and the Clinton anti-war activity
makes it clear that the Bush campaign is both desperate, and desperately out of
touch. When the debates begin tonight, I hope the President remembers that most
of us are living in 1992.

Mr. Bush is stuck in a time warp, part "Best Years of Our Lives," part Joe
McCarthy. As he has done so often during this campaign, he has now backed off of
his criticism of the Moscow trip, not because it was dishonest, but because it
didn't play. And the F.B.I. announced Friday that it had ended its investigation
into Mr. Clinton's passport file without finding evidence of tampering. Thus
does the rumor mill run out. It all stinks to high heaven; it all smells of
desperation, but not of votes. Mr. Bush needs to get current and win friends. As
Mr. Nixon could tell him, fighting dirty can be a chancy way to make them.

LOAD-DATE: October 11, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              63 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 11, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Foreign Affairs;
If All Is Character

BYLINE: By LESLIE H. GELB

SECTION: Section 4; Page 17; Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 706 words


The central test of character for Bill Clinton has come down to whether he lied
about his conduct during the Vietnam War; and for George Bush, it is whether he
lied about his role in the arms-for-hostages swap with Iran.

Any fair reading of the record will find both men wanting. The voters will soon
have to decide who committed the greater sin.

Is it the young man in his early 20's who avoided his nation's call in wartime
for reasons of conviction or fright, and who now as a Presidential candidate
provides disturbingly conflicting accounts of his behavior in 1969-70?

Or is it the mature man in his 60's, who as Vice President denied knowing about
the Iran discussions but almost certainly knew about them, denied supporting the
swap although he almost certainly endorsed that fateful course -- and still
denies all as President?

The news media have besieged the Democratic candidate on the Vietnam draft and
protest stories, so let's begin there. Like most of his contemporaries in
college, Bill Clinton maneuvered to escape being sent to Vietnam. Who knows his
real motives? Americans, especially those who served, would be within reason to
judge him and, as Mr. Clinton accepts, hold his conduct against him.

Most, I believe, will not, for the very good reason given by Mr. Bush himself
four years ago. The Vietnam War, he said in his healing inaugural address,
"began in earnest a quarter of a century ago; and surely the statute of
limitations has been reached. This is a fact: the final lesson of Vietnam is
that no great nation can long afford to be sundered by a memory."

Mr. Bush now says that the issue is not Mr. Clinton's avoidance of service, but
his failure to offer consistent explanations and "level" with Americans. He has
a fair point against the Arkansas Governor here. He also scores fairly in
highlighting Mr. Clinton's inconsistencies about his role in organizing anti-war
demonstrations in 1969-70.

But President Bush broke all bounds of decency in his new charges about Mr.
Clinton's 1969 visit to the Soviet Union and Norway. Without a shred of
evidence, Mr. Bush accused the Democrat of unpatriotic behavior and even
treachery.

Because the President admitted, "I don't have the facts," the details of his
accusations warrant no repetition. Even lifelong Republicans and friends of Mr.
Bush shudder at his McCarthyite behavior.

The news media erred on this matter as well. They incessantly pressed Mr.
Clinton to defend himself against totally unsupported charges and gave the story
top billing. By contrast, journalists have allowed Mr. Bush to brush them off
regarding Iran.

The facts in this story are far less murky than in the Clinton Vietnam tale. The
Reagan Administration had a strict policy against paying ransom to Iran,
particularly in arms, for the release of Americans held hostage in Lebanon. It
was a sound policy. Paying off kidnappers would only encourage more kidnapping.
As Vice President, Mr. Bush chaired the group that formulated the policy.

President Reagan nonetheless authorized just such an arms-for-hostages trade.
The sordid deal became public in 1986, along with the fact that money from the
transaction was used illegally to fund Nicaraguan rebels. Asked about Iran by
reporters and Federal investigators, Mr. Bush admitted knowing generally about
the arms sales, but flatly denied knowing arms were swapped for hostages.

Now several credible officials directly contradict the Bush account. These
include a National Security Council staffer who says he briefed Mr. Bush on the
whole operation in 1986, Defense Secretary Caspar Weinberger and Secretary of
State George Shultz. The two Secretaries have also made it clear in notes taken
at the time that not only did the Vice President know about the swap, he heard
their arguments against it -- and backed it nonetheless.

Burdened by these facts, neither candidate emerges heroically. But their sins
and character flaws are plainly not of equal weight. Mr. Clinton's
inconsistencies about Vietnam suggest weakness and guilt. Mr. Bush's testimony
on Iran points to outright lying, and his nasty charges about his opponent's
visit to Moscow reek of venality.

One man seems flawed; the other Nixonesque.

LOAD-DATE: October 11, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              64 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 11, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

For a Doctor, Free Fall Is Fun and a Challenge

BYLINE: By MARJORIE KAUFMAN

SECTION: Section 13LI; Page 17; Column 1; Long Island Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1230 words


THE Professionals in Medicine Parachuting Society may be the only nonprofit
group in the state that refers to itself as pimps.

The sky divers' headquarters is in Melville, where its founder and chairman, Dr.
Stuart Selkin, an otolaryngologist, lives. But the Blue Sky Ranch in upstate
Gardiner is the principal drop zone.

"The idea of Pimps," Dr. Selkin said, "is to take the sport of sky diving, which
is already highly regulated, and make it more regulated, based on medical
awareness and prevention."

The group of health professionals includes physicians, psychologists and
laboratory technicians.

Dr. Selkin, who said he did not want to imply that sky diving did not have high
risks, added that the percentage of injuries and fatalities in the sport was
very small. According to the United States Parachute Association there were 30
deaths of a recorded 2.44 million jumps last year.

"It is safer per jump to sky dive than riding in your car, and certainly the
sport of skiing is more dangerous," said Dr. Selkin.

In the last 10 years the sport has attracted additional women, with many people
in the sport estimating that 12 to 20 percent of sky divers are women. A master
jumper, Claudia Roussos, was Dr. Selkin's first instructor. A laser and lab
technician as well as a premedical student, she is now president of the group.

"Today," Dr. Selkin said, "sky diving is a sport of finesse. It's becoming a
yuppie sport, with more serious career-oriented people of high intellect
involved."

Psychologists at the University of Toronto are studying divers' psychological
profiles. Early information indicates that a majority are relatively shy people
who are in highly competitive professions. Sky diving provides an unconventional
outlet for people bound by convention, said Dr. Selkin.

But with new equipment like zero-porosity fabric, which helps increase velocity,
comes the danger of additional midair collisions from the faster speed. "As a
physician," Dr. Selkin said, "I am used to dealing with gray areas and doing
investigative studies."

His group is conducting studies and experiments on ear and sinus problems,
cardiac risks and even Lyme disease.

"We are conducting long-term studies to measure noise levels in free fall and to
study one of the most common problems that faces sky divers, pressure problems
in the ear," said Dr. Selkin, an ear, nose and throat specialist with an
interest in voice problems.

As a surgeon for 19 years, Dr. Selkin subspecializes in intranasal laser
surgery. Since the 1970's he has been consulting laryngologist for the Westbury
Music Fair. "You'd be surprised how many people develop voice problems before
they have to go on stage," Dr. Selkin said.

In 1982, Dr. Selkin worked extensively on photographing vocal cords of opera
singers and presented his findings at the annual voice symposium at the
Juilliard School of music.  "By using a flexible fiberoptic device and
photodocumenting the vocal cords while singing, I disproved years of previous
thought on their capacity," he said. "No one else in the field is doing these
kinds of studies in relation to sky divers, and it is important to bring our
findings to the public."

The sky diving is over Gardiner because the ranch offers access to larger
aircraft, including a a DeHavilland Twin Otter, which can carry up to 21 divers.
The Otter also allows for jumps at 13,500 feet, gaining a few thousand feet over
other drops.

"That's five more seconds of free fall," Dr. Selkin said. "When it's all about
attitude and altitude, seconds matter." Free fall from 13,500 feet at 110 miles
an hour takes about 60 seconds.

Studies by the group on noise levels in the Twin Otter found the levels
acceptable under Federal standards.  "We determined that in regard to potential
hearing loss from exposure to in-plane noise levels, it is safer to sky dive
than to attend rock parties," Dr. Selkin said. Sky divers often wear earplugs in
the plane, but they should be removed for free fall, because serious damage to
the tympanic membrane could occur, he said.

The society is now examining free-fall sound levels and the balance mechanism of
the inner ear and how that leads to spatial disorientation. In January, Dr.
Selkin plans to address the board of the United States Parachute Association.
The physician says he hopes that the group becomes a national organization and
that its safety work will be centralized and standardized. "I envision a day in
which people won't jump at a site unless it is Pimp approved," he said.

At the Blue Sky Ranch, the short-term goal is to have all 150 members certified
by the Red Cross by next season. Traditionally, Halloween marks the end of the
upstate season.  Temperatures are 39 degrees cooler in flight.

The group publishes a newsletter, The Pimphlet, and offers seminars and training
for certification in first aid and cardiopulmonary resuscitation, as well as
life-support. Additional seminars focus on preventing injuries, disaster drills
and accidents.

The regional director of the United States Parachute Association, Edward
Cummings, said: "Pimps is certainly filling a void. The medical field is one
area we could certainly use contributions and advisement.

"There are probably 100,000 people making a first jump each year. But those who
pursue it as a sport and become active sky divers and join the U.S.P.A. number
approximately 1,000 in New York."

There are nine major drop zones in New York, and Mr. Cummings estimated that 250
sky divers were Long Islanders.

Dr. Selkin, 51, trained for his first sport civilian dive two years ago at Sky
Dive Long Island in Eastport, which Ray Maynard has directed since 1984. Dr.
Selkin compared his first sensations to meditation.

"It's another plane of consciousness," he said. "After you get away from the
noise of the aircraft, the freedom and the quiet is maddeningly beautiful. In
flight you become aware that you are in an environment that you were not meant
to be in. It requires self-reliance and extreme intense focus."

Of course, there is fear, every time. "If you lose that fear, you shouldn't
jump, because then you will take unnecessary chances," he said. "Anyone who
knows me was not surprised when I started jumping."

His first military parachute jump was at the Tuy Hoa Air Base in Vietnam in
1968. He was also an Air Force medical captain from 1967 to 1969, and his
citations include the Bronze Star, the Vietnamese Medal of Honor, the Service
Cross and the Cross of Gallantry, all of which hang in his office in Plainview.

Dr. Selkin also spends his free time hunting wild boar with a longbow and arrow
in Georgia and Louisiana.  While in the South, Dr. Selkin also buys the leather
cowboy boots that he wears for good luck in the operating suite. "I never wear
the boots when I jump," he said. "I prefer a lightweight wrestling shoe, so that
I can feel the wind beneath my feet."

In the past two years, Dr. Selkin has received a rating of "C" from the United
States Parachute Association, one level below master. He has completed more than
115 free falls that met specified times and completed the required group
maneuvers.

"Sky Doc doesn't want to work on weekends anymore," Dr. Selkin said. "I just
want to fly in formation or free fall and have a merry old time just living out
my fantasies in the sky."

LOAD-DATE: October 11, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              65 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 11, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Drum and Bugle Corps Stage Comeback

BYLINE: By TINA TRASTER-POLAK

SECTION: Section 13NJ; Page 8; Column 3; New Jersey Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 995 words


FOR three hours on a scorching Saturday afternoon, the 60 young members of the
Southern Knights Drum and Bugle Corps of Franklinville marched across a grassy
field at Bayonne High School's Veteran's Memorial Stadium. At 7:30 P.M. they
were to compete in the Garden State Circuit Championships.

In their routine called "Foreplay," percussionists formed a front line; buglers
and color guards gathered in a circle. The high-pitched bells reverberated, and
the snare, quad and bass drums joined in.

As if set in motion by the music, the corps members stepped out of theircircle
to form female and male symbols upon the grass before lining up in the shape of
a heart. The color guard, flags raised high, seemed to pierce the heart like an
arrow.

"The message is that sex comes out of the heart," said Kathy Marsden, the corps
director. "It is initiated because a man and a woman fall in love."

There was a time, two decades ago, when virtually every town had its drum and
bugle corps, homegrown marching bands usually sponsored by local veterans groups
or parishes. Then the corps went the way of doctors' house calls. Some
participants say it happened because young people had too many other outlets for
their energy, from video games to malls; others blame a decrease in patriotism.

But within the last two years, there have been signs that the local drum and
bugle corps is making a comeback. Five new amateur groups have sprouted up in
the state. Their style, complete with splashy spangled costumes and routines
like "Foreplay," is a far cry from the earlier community corps. The military
flavor is gone, and Sousa marches have been replaced by show tunes and
rock-and-roll numbers.

Budget cutbacks in school musical programs have encouraged some young musicians
to turn to the corps. The tight economy is also reflected in the finances of
some of the new corps, whose members' instruments are secondhand and whose
costumes are hand-sewn.

Feelings of Nostalgia

The corps directors, some of whom once belonged to community drum and bugle
corps, attribute the trend in part to nostalgia.

"People who marched in the early 1960's and 1970's watched it die and that
didn't feel too good," said Kirk Demarest, who founded the Spectra corps of
Dunellen. "We grew up and got married and then we realized that there was a
void. I decided to do this because I wanted to give these kids memories."

The five new corps, all of which competed in the circuit championships in
Bayonne, are Jersey Surf of Berlin, which took first place; the Newark Marching
100; the Raiders of Bayonne; Spectra and the Southern Knights.

The newcomers are classified as junior corps, with an age cap of 22, but they
are a far cry from such junior corps as the Cadettes of Bergen County, who
compete throughout the United States and abroad and have budgets that range up
to $800,000 a year.

But what the new bands may lack in skill, experience and bankroll, they make up
in enthusiasm. Winding down after his group's victory at Bayonne, Bob Jacobs,
director of the Jersey Surf, said he started with $20,000 but he anticipates
that the corps will need at least $75,000 this year.

"It's tough to get off the ground," Mr. Jacobs said. "We've tried to keep costs
down -- parents have sewn costumes from scratch. We have a lot of secondhand
instruments that need to be upgraded. Right now, there are a lot of Band-Aids
and duct tape holding us together."

Ms. Marsden, the Southern Knights' director, told how a group of her neighbors
in Franklinville -- all former corps members -- had gathered around her kitchen
table one night and decided to create a corps.  "We wanted to start something
for the youth here," she said.

Along the way, some of the volunteers have put in so many hours on the corps,
she said, that they have lost their jobs.

"It's like listening to somebody talk about an addiction," she said. "It doesn't
necessarily seem logical, but it's something they must do. We have no choice."

Grant From City Council

Jack Drury, a former Newark principal and former corps member, started the
Marching 100 with the help of a $90,000 grant from the Newark City Council.

"This is as grass-roots as it gets," he said of his corps. "No experience
needed. Just interest and a desire to be responsible." Members range in age from
9 to 14, which is considerably younger than most junior corps.

Devotees of drum corps say that they are not sure why local drum corps faded,
but they have their suspicions. "When I came home from Vietnam," Mr. Demarest
said, "there was an anti-military sentiment. We didn't want to wear military
gear; we didn't want to wear shakos." Shakos are the tall military caps still
worn by many corps.

Other corp leaders offered economic explanations. In the 1950's and 60's, they
said, youths had little spending money and were likely to stay around the
neighborhood. In the boomtime of the 1970's, they were apt to have cars. And
Dominick De Senzo Sr., vice president of the Garden State circuit, said that
teen-agers used to be able to find summer jobs, which have since turned scarce,
giving them more free time.

'Great Activity for Saturday'

Today's junior corps members offer a variety of reasons for taking part. "It's a
great activity for Saturday," said 9-year-old Ebony McAllister of the Marching
100 of Newark. "It's better than watching cartoons."

For Jose Caceres, 15, the Newark corps has been a "growing up" experience. "It
teaches you that you need to be responsible and pay attention, or it will cost
the corps and it will cost you," he said.

At the Bayonne competition, their director, Jack Drury, offered this rationale
as he watched the members march by, dressed in the simple yellow sweatsuits the
budget allows: "Our goal is to give urban kids more self-esteem, to make them
feel that they are part of a team, to make them more wholesome. If they also win
championships, well then that's just super."

LOAD-DATE: October 11, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: In the Garden State Circuit Championships at Bayonne High
School's Veterans Memorial Stadium, the Jersey Surf of Berlin, above, took first
place. The Musketeers of Delaware Company bugled by Newark Bay. (Norman Y. Lono
for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              66 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 11, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Millard Fillmore Was Right

BYLINE: By Simon Winchester;  Simon Winchester's most recent book is "Pacific
Rising: The Emergence of a New World Culture."

SECTION: Section 7; Page 21; Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 781 words



THE PACIFIC CENTURY
America and Asia in a Changing World.
By Frank Gibney.
Illustrated. 596 pp. New York:
Charles Scribner's Sons. $40.

SINCE the 1970's, when American shops and showrooms began to fill up with
Japanese goods, there has been an increasing awareness of the importance of the
countries across the Pacific. In the interim, scores of books about the region
have been written, and a number of ambitious films and television series have
appeared -- at least as ambitious as the 10-part PBS documentary, beginning this
week, on which Frank Gibney's thoughtful and discursive survey is based.

And yet America's understanding of the importance of the Pacific, while
undeniably growing, is only rudimentary. For there is a pervasive Eurocentricity
in the intellectual life of the United States, a prejudice that, not
surprisingly, reflects the continuing influence of the European tradition in
academic, political, journalistic and commercial institutions in this, as in
most other, Western nations. Those afflicted with such a prejudice believe that
Western attitudes still dominate the planet and will continue to do so for some
time to come.

Mr. Gibney rightly disputes this view. And he has the credentials to back up his
position: a journalist for Time, Newsweek and Life magazines, he first covered
East Asia in the postwar years, then spent a decade presiding over various Asian
editions of the Encyclopaedia Britannica, and since 1979 has directed the
Pacific Basin Institute in Santa Barbara, Calif. For him, all the evidence
insists that the commercial, scientific, economic and perhaps even spiritual
center of the world has shifted significantly. "We can learn much," Mr. Gibney
says, from the successes of the Pacific nations -- from Japan, Korea, Singapore,
China. Moreover, he insists, "we must."

In presenting this argument, "The Pacific Century: America and Asia in a
Changing World" is rather conventional in its approach. And, surprisingly
enough, rather circumscribed. It is not, for instance, truly about the Pacific
-- all the fine romantic epigraphs from Herman Melville and others
notwithstanding -- but is, as its subtitle indicates, about Asia. And more
particularly, about that quarter of Asia, from Malaya to Japan, that Mr. Gibney
knows well. It is not about Asian Russia, for example. There is precious little
about Australasia and virtually nothing of consequence about Oceania. In his
introduction, Mr. Gibney apologizes for omitting a discussion of the Latin
American Pacific shore.

But what Mr. Gibney does give us, as far as it goes, is fine, and the depth of
his knowledge, his half-century of experience in his chosen realm, is evident
and valuable. When, after a few early chapters that provide some historical
background, he turns to the postwar world, he is able to offer fascinating
reminiscences of meeting or observing at close quarters almost all of the
grandees of the region, from the anticolonialist heroes of the 1940's to the
creators of the present nation-states. His work for the Encyclopaedia Britannica
-- especially on the compilation of its Chinese editions -- allowed him
extraordinary insight into Chinese society. And his deep knowledge of Japan,
gained as a reporter and businessman, yields a multilayered view of this
challenger to American supremacy.

But there are gaps, and not merely geographical ones, that are a little trying.
Most important, Mr. Gibney gives somewhat less consideration than he might to
the Chinese, and in particular the overseas Chinese -- who are, after all, the
means by which, as some hysterics believe, the descendants of the Middle Kingdom
will one day subdue the whole planet. There could also have been more
speculation on the likely symbiosis between Asia's Confucian tradition on the
one side and America's technology and innovation on the other, a relationship
that will certainly link the countries of the Pacific rim for decades to come.
But this subject receives only perfunctory treatment, which is a shame.

Mr. Gibney rightly excoriates Presidents Reagan and Bush for their lack of
sympathy with and interest in the Pacific (and he properly applauds the
otherwise forgettable Millard Fillmore for his Pacific enthusiasm over a century
ago). His recommendations for the future of trans-Pacific relations -- such as
his trenchant demand for full American recognition of Vietnam -- are bold and
refreshing. But Mr. Gibney's book does not leave one properly sated. There is
still the gnawing feeling that this region must yet wait for a treatment that
its immensity and importance deserve -- though, for now, "The Pacific Century"
is a challenging beginning.

LOAD-DATE: October 11, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              67 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 11, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

The Executive Life;
The Driving, Diving Boys of Silicon Valley

BYLINE: By Michael S. Malone;  Michael S. Malone writes frequently about Silicon
Valley from Los Altos, Calif.

SECTION: Section 3; Page 27; Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 917 words


Upper-Crust executives in the San Francisco Bay area go to Bohemian Grove for
their retreat. The Silicon Valley technology crowd's idea of relaxation is the
Consumer Electronics Show. And the executives of the real estate- and
construction-related industries that support high technology in the valley get
their kicks courtesy of the Kitchen Pass Club.

Last week, for example, members of the club were diving in the Red Sea, just the
latest in a string of adventures that dates back more than a dozen years and has
included race-car driving, off-road motorcycling, fishing and a rodeo, as well
as diving.

These are businessmen who grew up in the area when it was still known as the
Santa Clara Valley. Their world is less that of lone-wolf entrepreneurs than of
social groups engaging in old-fashioned macho hobbies. Many of them are the kind
who express politically incorrect attitudes that no longer surface in the
boardrooms of their trend-setting clients. Indeed, the Kitchen Pass name, a
groaner for outsiders and even some club members nowadays, came from the idea
that each member of the all-male club needed permission from his wife to go.

The "club" was formed in the late 1970's, said Dennis Chambers, a partner in San
Jose's Commercial Property Services and a founder of the group. "We were just
coming out of a recession and five of us decided to celebrate by chartering a
bus and going to the Reno air races. We had so much fun, we did it a second
year."

Then Jerry Hodnefield, a member who is general manager of Renco Properties in
Sunnyvale, suggested the group try his favorite sport, scuba diving, and the
gang was off to the Cayman Islands. In subsequent years they would dive in the
Virgin Islands, off Truk Island in the Pacific and on the Great Barrier Reef off
Australia.

Most of the club's members come from the valley's tight community of developers
and those who work with them. By the late-1980's, it had grown to a core of
about a dozen, with about 50 occasional participants. Members included bankers,
real estate executives, an architect, an insurance executive and men who owned
glass and air-conditioning companies.

Then, as now, there were no dues, no newsletters -- nothing formal of any kind.
The closest thing to meetings took place when members ran into each other at
various social events.

P. Michael Hunt, an insurance executive who has become the de facto leader of
the group, said, "So many of the things we do are interrelated -- business
meetings, the opera, charity events -- that we constantly cross each other's
paths and make plans."

John Davis, owner of Air Systems Inc. of San Jose, a heating and
air-conditioning contractor with 125 employees, added: "It's sort of like one of
those clubs where you have to be invited. If you show up and they like you, you
get invited back."

If beyond their work there was any common characteristic among members of the
club, it was that all were about the same age (now about 45), former jocks with
a willingness (and the money) to try something new. For example, several of the
members had pilots' licenses (Mr. Chambers was an Air Force pilot in Vietnam),
and to support their hobby they created the San Jose Jet Center, at San Jose
International Airport, for their private jet planes.

One of the younger members, Ken Rodrigues, 39, a San Jose architect who is a
former race-car driver, persuaded many of the other members to attend racing
school and compete in Winston Cup races. This group often rents a famous track
-- like Sears Point and Laguna Seca in California -- for a weekend.

Another Kitchen Pass group has fished for salmon in Alaska, trout in Montana and
marlin off Cabo San Lucas in Mexico. Yet another rides motorcycles off-road. And
some have created a softball team for league play.

A year ago, Mr. Hodnefield, who owns a ranch in the Sierra foothills, flew in
members and their wives for a three-day rodeo that included barrel racing, pole
bending and goat tying. While few of the members had ridden a horse before, the
rodeo, like everything else the club does, was fiercely competitive.

"We compete in all areas of our life and enjoy it," Mr. Hunt said. "During the
car races, several guys crashed because they were trying so hard to win. We have
an appreciation for competition and don't give any slack."

As the core members of the Kitchen Pass Club have matured, so has the group.
Even the name is used less frequently now that wives participate in some of the
more elaborate dives (last week's Red Sea trip, for example, was for couples)
and some of the members have gone through a divorce.

Many of the members say the club is one of the most important things in their
lives. "I plan my year around the group," Mr. Chambers said. Mr. Davis added:
"We all own our own businesses and go our separate ways, so there's usually not
much time to build friendships. So this is the way we do it. You can think of it
as business relationships that became personal friendships."

And those friendships can be vital these days. The club, born of one recession,
is mired in another, the worst in memory.

"It's been a disaster for all of us the last four or five years," Mr. Chambers
said. "We're all in the same business and all good friends, so we can all sit
around with each other and lament. Frankly, I really think that's helped. And I
know that if I get a call from one of them, I'm there fast to help. So is
everyone else. That's what this group is all about."

LOAD-DATE: October 11, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              68 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 12, 1992, Monday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Debate;
BUSH STRESSES HIS EXPERIENCE BUT 2 RIVALS CITE ECONOMIC LAG

BYLINE: By R. W. APPLE Jr.

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 1955 words


In the long-awaited first debate of the 1992 Presidential campaign, with his
Presidency in jeopardy, George Bush asked the American people last night for
more time to right the economy, but his economic stewardship drew withering fire
from Bill Clinton and Ross Perot.

White House officials said later that if he was re-elected Mr. Bush planned to
dismiss his three top economic advisers, as demanded for months by Republican
conservatives outraged over tax increases. They are Nicholas F. Brady, the
Treasury Secretary; Richard G. Darman, the budget director, and Michael J.
Boskin, the top White House economist.

Trailing badly in the national polls and in most big states, the President
promised to make James A. Baker 3d, the former Secretary of State who now heads
his campaign, the overseer of all domestic programs once Election Day had
passed. It was an effort to suggest that he understood the urgency of American
economic problems, something many voters doubt, but it also suggested that Mr.
Baker, not Mr. Bush, was the man who gets things done.

Renews Attack on Clinton

"Jim Baker is going to put together the economic program for the President,"
said Marlin Fitzwater, the White House spokesman. "That means we'll be getting a
new economic team."

Focusing on foreign policy, the President depicted himself as the only candidate
with enough experience to handle the pressures of the Oval Office, and he
questioned the "judgment and character" of Mr. Clinton, his Democratic rival.
[Transcript, pages A14-A17.]

He renewed his attacks on Mr. Clinton's role in antiwar demonstrations abroad
during the Vietnam era, contending that the Democrat's actions raised grave
questions about his fitness to serve as Commander in Chief.

Mr. Clinton, mild-mannered in most exchanges, answered sharply, accusing Mr.
Bush of unfairly maligning his patriotism. He recalled the unsubstantiated
charges of the late Joseph R. McCarthy and pointedly reminded the President that
his father, the late Senator Prescott Bush of Connecticut, had been one of
McCarthy's early foes.

A Vivid Perot

During the debate, held at Washington University in the St. Louis suburb of
Clayton, Mo., and televised nationally, Mr. Bush sought to identify Governor
Clinton of Arkansas, his Democratic opponent, with the liberals whose economic
programs have proved unpopular with American voters in the past, like Walter F.
Mondale, Michael S. Dukakis and Jimmy Carter.

Both the major-party nominees did their best to ignore Mr. Perot, their
independent rival, but he was nevertheless a bright, sparky presence in the
90-minute debate, full of pithy one-liners and self-deprecation. He seemed to
have a good time, making fun of his big ears, telling the audience he was "not
playing Lawrence Welk music tonight" and responding, when Mr. Bush touted his
Presidential experience, that "I don't have any experience in running up a $4
trillion debt."

Mr. Perot may have gone some way toward regaining at least a bit of the
credibility he lost when he abruptly walked away from the race in July. His
vivid performance suggested what a power he might have been had he stayed in,
but he had little specific to say except on his plan to help reduce the deficit
by raising taxes on gasoline by 50 cents over five years.

President on Defensive

Mr. Bush was forced onto the defensive much of the time on economic questions,
but he fought back. He produced no new proposals other than still another job
for Mr. Baker, who was brought to the campaign when it faltered but has not yet
turned it around. Still, his answers were better focused than on many recent
questions, and he spoke with verve and authority at times.

For his part, Mr. Clinton managed to tame his tendency to sound like a
political-science professor with abstruse, over-detailed answers. He deftly
turned a question about family values, a phrase the Republicans have used to try
to split the Democratic coalition, into an indictment of the President's vetoes
of Democratic bills intended to help younger workers.

Mr. Bush defended the status quo on several subjects, from American troop
commitments in Europe to spending on AIDS research, while Mr. Clinton and Mr.
Perot consistently called for basic revisions in American policies. On the
economy especially, the President's insistent optimism left him open to the
others' charges that he was complacent and out of touch with the nation.

His intentions with regard to Mr. Brady, Mr. Darman and Mr. Boskin were revealed
after the debate, as Republican and Democratic officials emerged to provide
reporters with interpretation favorable to their candidates. Some saw the move
as a sign of desperation, others as an indication that the President realized he
had sounded too complacent about the economy.

No Big Gaffes

There appeared to be no major gaffes and no knockout punches. None of the three
participants lost his composure or appeared stumped by the questions posed by
Jim Lehrer, the moderator, and a panel of three other journalists. The
questioners were Ann Compton of ABC News, John Mashek of The Boston Globe, and
Sander Vanocur, a freelance television reporter.

If, on reflection, the American electorate decides that the debate was
essentially a draw, Mr. Clinton would presumably benefit most. His goal last
night was to enable his momentum to roll on, while Mr. Bush and Mr. Perot,
trailing, hoped to transform the last three weeks of the campaign.

Three more debates remain, all like the first sponsored by the Commission on
Presidential Debates. Mr. Bush, Mr. Perot and Mr. Clinton have agreed to square
off in Richmond, Va., on Thursday and in East Lansing, Mich., next Monday. Vice
President Dan Quayle and his rivals, Senator Al Gore and Adm. James B.
Stockdale, are to debate in Atlanta on Tuesday.

Each debate will have a different format, negotiated by the Bush and Clinton
campaigns after weeks of argument. Last night's allowed for no follow-up
questions and no questioning by the candidates of each other. It was, in fact,
not really a debate, but more a joint television interview, with the order of
candidates' response determined by lot.

The President's attack on Mr. Clinton's antiwar activities while he was a
student at Oxford University two decades ago was part of a concerted Republican
effort, so far unsuccessful, to demonstrate that the Arkansas Governor is too
slippery for the Presidency.

"It is wrong to demonstrate against your country on foreign soil," said Mr.
Bush, who contrasted his service as a carrier-based pilot during World War II
with Mr. Clinton's antiwar activities.  "It's a question of character and
judgment. I couldn't do that. I don't think most Americans could do that."

Mr. Clinton said with asperity, "We need a President to bring this country
together, not divide it."

Defining the Difference

In television commercials that were broadcast just before the debate, the
Republicans took the same tack in assailing the Democratic nominee's
explanations of his attempts to avoid service in Vietnam. In the spots, which
will run for several days, an announcer says: "The question then was avoiding
the draft. Now, for Bill Clinton, it's a question of avoiding the truth."

The debate opened with the candidates stating what set them apart from the
others. Mr. Perot said his was the only campaign initiated by the public. Mr.
Clinton said he alone represented change, and told Mr. Bush, "For 12 years,
you've had it your way, and it didn't work." Mr. Bush cited experience.

In closing statements, Mr. Perot and Mr. Clinton broke little ground. But Mr.
Bush talked of the difficulty of making decisions in the Oval Office and, in a
slap at Mr. Clinton, said a President could not oscillate between positions.
Not surprisingly, he dwelt on his foreign, not domestic, record.

Twice, with great emphasis, he said, 'I hope I've earned your trust," and added
that "a lot of being President is about trust and character."

On Taxing and Spending

A question about taxes to Governor Clinton afforded each candidate a chance to
present his broad economic themes in phrases that have become familiar
throughout the campaign.

The Governor said his program would increase taxes for families earning more
than $200,000. "These are the people who had their incomes go up while their
taxes went down" during two Republican Administrations, Mr. Clinton said.

"We've got to have no more trickle down," he said, "no more tax cuts for the
wealthy for nothing."

Mr. Perot said that as President he would make it clear that the United States
would have to enter "a period of shared sacrifice."

"We've created a mess, and we don't have much to show for it," he added.

Shrinking the Military

The candidates demonstrated contrasting approaches to shrinking the military
when asked how many American troops should be stationed in Europe.

Mr. Bush replied broadly, asserting that a sizable force is needed to keep the
peace, while Mr. Perot and Mr. Clinton said deeper cuts in troop levels were
needed to save money and because European countries were wealthy enough to pay a
bigger share of the bill.

Mr. Perot said the United States cannot afford heavy continued spending on
troops in Europe, with countries like Germany able to pay a much larger share.

Mr. Clinton was the only candidate to discuss numbers. He said a force of
100,000 troops would be adequate, not the 150,000-troop limit set by Mr. Bush.
He said new priorities would redirect military spending and planning in the
post-cold war world, with factors like mobility becoming more important than
large ground forces.

Asked about the fairness of his proposal to raise gasoline taxes by 50 cents a
gallon, Mr. Perot said it would not, as the questioner suggested, punish the
middle class. "I know it's not popular," Mr. Perot said. He said higher gas
taxes are needed because "it's time to pay the fiddler, and if we don't we'll be
spending our children's money."

Mr. Bush said, "I don't believe it's fair to slap a tax on people who have to
drive for a living, people who have to go long distances."

Bush Espouses Optimism

Throughout the debate, Mr. Bush repeatedly sought to strike an optimistic note
about the economy, a feel-good approach reminiscent of former President Ronald
Reagan.

"We've got big problems, but we are not coming apart at the seams," he said in
response to a question proposed by a retired worker from the McDonnell Douglas
Corporation about whether the United States should have an industrial plan to
convert from the cold war to a new era.

Governor Clinton, on the other hand, said the Administration was responsible for
not responding to the changing economy.

"There are 200,000 people unemployed in California alone," Mr. Clinton said,
adding that many of them had lost their jobs because there had been no plan to
compensate for declining military spending."

After the Cold War

Mr. Clinton and Mr. Perot offered similar visions of the nation's post- cold war
needs: to rebuild the country's financial strength, reduce the former
superpowers' nuclear arsenals and help promote democratic societies, especially
in the Soviet Union.

"If you're not rich, you're not a superpower," Mr. Perot said. "And you can't
convert from potato chips to airplanes in an emergency."

Mr. Bush seemed to bristle at the notion, implicit in his opponents' advocacy of
stern measures on the economy, that America was in decline.

"We are still the envy of the world," he said, "even in terms of our economy."
He added: "We've got the best military, and it's keeping the peace. We said
peace through strength and it worked. The cold war is over."


LOAD-DATE: October 12, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Ross Perot, Gov. Bill Clinton and President Bush greeting one
another before the debate last night. (Associated Press) (pg. A1); Jim Lehrer,
the moderator, John Mashek of The Boston Globe, Ann Compton of ABC News and
Sander Vanocur, a freelance journalist, posing questions last night to Ross
Perot, Gov. Bill Clinton and President Bush. (Stephen Crowley/The New York
Times); Barbara Bush, right, speaking with Hillary Clinton and her daughter,
Chelsea, before the Presidential debate last night in St. Louis. Chelsea
suffered a stress fracture during a dance class. (Reuters) (pg. A12)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              69 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 12, 1992, Monday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Assessment;
Bush Didn't Score the Needed Knockout

BYLINE: By ANDREW ROSENTHAL

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1308 words


One way to score a Presidential debate is to ask: What did each candidate need
to achieve and did he do it? Measured by that standard, the first of the three
Presidential debates was less than a triumph for President Bush and a fair night
for his two opponents.

Mr. Bush, still trying to revive his candidacy for re-election with just over
three weeks to go, needed a surprise, some reason for voters to change their
minds about a President who has become well defined for most Americans over the
last four years. He did not achieve it.

Gov. Bill Clinton needed to avoid a major gaffe that would slow his campaign,
and he did that. He also may have made progress toward another goal -- making
Americans more comfortable with the idea of his sitting in the Oval Office.

But Ross Perot definitely got what he wanted -- time on the same stage with the
major parties' candidates and an opportunity to offer his peculiar brand of
homespun prescriptions for what ails America while the other two attacked each
other and fell into a replay of the campaign: Mr. Bush's status-quo message
against Mr. Clinton's calls for change.

Mr. Perot re-established himself as a candidate following his on-again-off-again
bid for the White House and showed he can be comfortable in the rough-and-tumble
world of Presidential campaigning. But he went beyond that: while Mr. Clinton
played it safe and Mr. Bush seemed flat by comparison to the other two, Mr.
Perot looked like a man who was having a really good time.

Evading Attacks

He grinned over his lectern and made the most of his free air time, emerging the
clear winner in the warm-and-fuzzy sweepstakes.

Mr. Perot also showed himself to be the kind of candidate he might have been had
he stayed in the race, with his jokes and his direct, authoritative, if
fact-free, answers to questions that produced vague responses from his
opponents.

Mr. Perot probably made the biggest splash of the night, and it is conceivable
now that he can use this new burst of exposure to hurt one of the other two
candidates, depending on the state.

But he clearly benefited last night from the way the two major party candidates
saved most of their fire for each other. And he has yet to face any real attack
from the other two candidates on the obvious questions on which he is
vulnerable, including whether his decision to drop out when he was doing badly
and then re-enter the race when the dynamics changed made him a quitter.

For now, one of the most evident results of the first debate was that Mr. Bush's
insistence on including Mr. Perot in the three Presidential debates may have
backfired.

Instead of upstaging Mr. Clinton, as the Republicans had hoped, Mr. Perot joined
the Democratic nominee in a two-against-one attack on the President. For the
vast bulk of the 90 minutes of the debate, Mr. Bush looked as though he was on
the defensive -- when viewers got a look at him at all.

The most obvious result of Mr. Perot's addition to the debate was to cut into
the on-screen time that Mr. Bush needed so badly. He was was not even visible to
voters two-thirds of the time, while the nation looked at and listened to the
other two candidates. And they were using their time to chip away at Mr. Bush's
record and credibility.

The addition of Mr. Perot to the political mix enabled Mr. Clinton to etch a
strong contrast between his own policies and of those of Mr. Bush, to portray
himself as the major alternative for voters seeking a change in the White House.

It took only a few minutes for the debate to settle into the now-familiar
pattern of the campaign: Mr. Bush insisted that the economy was not as bad as
people think, relied heavily on getting credit for the end of the cold war and
campaigned against Democratic candidates of the past.

Mr. Clinton, meanwhile, tried to present himself as a man more in touch with the
concerns of average Americans, ready to make difficult decisions but clear-eyed
about the challenges. And Mr. Perot devoted most of his time to painting himself
as "the people's choice," a hard-charging businessman taking on a greater
challenge because Americans want him to.

2-on-1 Criticism

Mr. Perot's presence was evident from the very first question, as Mr. Bush
pulled out what his campaign considers his most powerful weapon: experience.

Mr. Perot acidly conceded that Mr. Bush had a point. "I don't have any
experience in running up a $4 trillion debt," he said.

A few minutes later, Mr. Perot virtually sprang to Mr. Clinton's defense and
turned the heat back on Mr. Bush as the President attacked the Arkansas Governor
on another favorite Republican campaign issue: Mr. Clinton's antiwar activities
during the Vietnam years.

"Certainly anyone in the White House should have the character to be there," he
said. "But I think it's very important to measure when and where things
occurred. Did they occur when you were a young person in your formative years?
Or did they occur when you were a senior official in the Federal Government?"

For Mr. Bush, the debate was the latest in a series of attempts at redefinition.
He has failed so far to shed the image of a detached President who was powerful
on issues of diplomacy and war that no longer seem so pressing, and who is
flaccid on more urgent domestic issues.

Tonight, Mr. Bush offered nothing essentially new, sticking to his insistence
that the economy is doing better than most Americans recognize. The White House
has conceded that this very position hurt Mr. Bush badly in 1991 as he refused
to recognize publicly the sluggishness of the economy, but it has nevertheless
remained at the heart of Mr. Bush's campaign.

Over and over, Mr. Bush offered the same answers: "We've got it," when asked
what he would do to insure a strong military, or "We did it," when Mr. Perot
talked about cutting back on long-range nuclear weapons. The President also
fogged his answers with esoteric, alphabet-soup bureaucratese.

He repeatedly mentioned the end of the cold war. "We've dramatically changed the
world," he said, several times offering this standard passage from his campaign
speeches: "Kids go to bed at night without fear of nuclear war."

Looking for ways to persuade Americans that he was committed now to domestic
problems after focusing on foreign affairs for much of his first term, Mr. Bush
even promised to keep James A. Baker 3d on at the White House after the
election, even though he said just a few days ago that he would like Mr. Baker
to resume his job as Secretary of State.

Mr. Clinton's challenge was the polar opposite of Mr. Bush's. He must still
convince voters that they not only want a change, but that they are comfortable
with him -- as a person and as a President.

After months of running an extraordinarily energetic campaign that gave him a
lead in the public-opinion polls, Mr. Clinton spent the weeks before the debate
engaged in an effort to sit on his lead and leave the fighting to the
Republicans.

Last night, Mr. Clinton's performance was more steady than spectacular. Buthe
stayed focused on dispelling concerns about his draft record, about his lack of
experience in foreign policy and domestic policy at the national level and even
about his family. At one point, Mr. Clinton used part of his time to wish his
wife, Hillary, a happy 17th wedding anniversary.

Mr. Clinton's desire to avoid any missteps was perhaps most evident in his
answer to a question about whether he would make members of the Federal Reserve
Board "more accountable." Any real answer -- yes or no -- would have affected
the markets and given the Bush campaign a free field of fire. So Mr. Clinton did
the only thing he could. He evaded the question.

"Frankly I don't think that's the problem today," Mr. Clinton said, turning to
an attack on Mr. Bush's economic policies.


LOAD-DATE: October 12, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH



GRAPHIC:  Live television coverage of the 90-minute debates will be provided by
ABC, CBS, NBC, Fox, C-Span, CNN and PBS. Times are Eastern.

Vice Presidential -- Tuesday, Oct. 13; Atlanta, 7 P.M.

Presidential -- Thursday, Oct. 15; Richmond, 9 P.M.

Presidential -- Monday, Oct. 19; East Lansing, Mich., 7 P.M. (pg. A12)
Chart: "Debates on the Air"

TYPE: News Analysis

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              70 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 12, 1992, Monday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Off the Trail -- Visits With Americans;
Have You Heard the One About the Presidential Race That Wasn't Funny?

BYLINE: By FRANCIS X. CLINES,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 13; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 928 words

DATELINE: PITTSBURGH


Driving through the hilly night shadows at the edge of the city, the cab driver
got lost in a joke, one he was telling about President Bush. "He was overseas
somewhere -- Iraq? -- and got sick to his stomach, and the really funny part was
why he got sick." He paused, groped. "But I can't remember that part."

Take my driver, please.

It had been another uneventful night in an occasional but ever more difficult
search for political humor in America. If other wanderers can debate the
tastiest sparerib cafes of the land, why then a professional witness lately
criss-crossing the nation ought to come up with some nasty, deserved laughs at
the Presidential campaigners' expense.

Not the homogenized sort rooted in the balanced nightly monologues of television
humor that reduces the nation to a vast collegiate sound stage. No, something
imbalanced and in person, a mean and lop-sided funniness of the sort Jonathan
Swift and Lenny Bruce might have applied to the vastly promising material of the
1992 campaign, all the evasions, squeaks and wheezes of its chief actors and the
hard times and gullibility of its groundlings.

'All Dead Horses'

"You got your Dan Quayle, your Murphy Brown, the not inhaling, Gennifer Flowers
-- these are all dead horses that none of the club comics want to flog,"
apologized Chris Drake, proprietor of The Funny Bone here. This is one of the
thousands of comedy clubs that dot the land where, professional comics and
booking agents on this tight circuit say, there is no room for political jokes
this year.

"The recession has hit our business, too," Chris Cipa, one of the comics,
explained. "Politics is risky. Most people come to the clubs and pay $20 or so
to forget their troubles, not to have a lecture jammed down their throat. A
Clinton joke will get a stare, not a laugh, ever since he became the front
runner and got respect. And Al Gore is just not funny -- the least funny person
in years," he insisted.

A recent night's fare of three stand-ups at The Funny Bone might have had Willy
Loman in the aisles grimacing: Hair-loss jokes. Relationship jokes. Homophobic
wisecracks. Panhandling jokes. Condom jokes. Airline jokes. Gynecology jokes.
Yet lots of laughs from a mixed crowd that stepped in from the madding world of
a surrounding shopping mall, a youngish group that seemed sadly preoccupied with
romance and mortality.

A Stand-Up Exception

Which is all the more reason to appreciate a stand-up exception to the pathetic
rule, Randy Credico. He is a comic who can name and mock a dozen now forgotten
friendly dictators of Latin America, a politics addict who would rather joke
about the S& L's than S and M. He is so fed up with the politically correct,
apolitical state of affairs in the clubs that he has rebelled and lately gathers
a few brave political satirists every Thursday night on Manhattan's West Side
(you thought Kennebunkport?) for some bootleg, thoroughly imbalanced trashing of
current politics.

In a basement hideaway at the West Gate Cafe on Broadway at West 114th Street,
working beneath a club booming with Columbia University students whose general
taste in humor he abhors, Mr. Credico only starts with the unfunniness of Al
Gore, postulating that he was chosen for the ticket as "the only man whiter than
Clinton" in a strategy of going for the Jefferson Davis vote. "A Clinton-Gore
button -- radical step these days, right? You know, like Fidel-Che?" he said.

On a recent Thursday, the laughter seemed eased by a sense of relief that it
could be so easy to mock, publicly and quite unfairly, assorted targets like
Senator Alfonse D'Amato's ethics, City Comptroller Elizabeth Holtzman's
humorlessness, Senator Edward Kennedy's obliviousness, the parallel vanities of
Henry Kissinger and William Kunstler, Patrick Buchanan's secret campaign for the
German elections of 1996, radical feminism's woodenness, and the pro-choice
lobby's insensitivity toward the Christian evangelical tobacco lobby's need for
fresh smokers. Plus the major candidates, rudely roughed up as hypocrites and
fools. And a nostalgic tribute to Ronald Reagan in retirement, engrossed in the
Reader's Digest condensed version of "Cat in the Hat."

As an average feminist, Lizz Winstead convulsed the place in pleading guilty to
the anti-abortion lobby's suspicions about her: "True, that's all we have on our
mind. I get up and say, 'Well, I've got to go to breakfast, have an abortion, go
to the sauna, have an abortion, wax my car, have an abortion.' "

Dropping Children, Not Bombs

John Stewart was worthy of Swift in positing a scene out of the fact that the
United States may be 15th in the world in child education but it is first in
weapons technology: "In the next war the bombs will be way too smart and
valuable. We'll just have to drop illiterate school children."

Mr. Credico updates by the news cycle, as in his latest tinny-voiced
impersonation of President Bush commenting, amid Operation Re-Election Storm, on
Governor Clinton's anti-Vietnam-War activities as a young student. "He's a, uh,
he's a RADical. Went to MOS-cow. Was there with Stalin, helped build those
five-year plans. He was part of the October Revolution."

Fairness? Balance? Well, Ross Perot was included, wavering on whether to vote
for himself. "Perot is a French word that means LaRouche," Mr. Credico
explained. "Or Reverend Moon, or L. Ron Hubbard, something of that nature.
Wonderful guy, isn't he? Makes a lot of sense till he starts talkin'," the comic
said, unafraid to wax pernicious about 1992.

LOAD-DATE: October 12, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              71 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 12, 1992, Monday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Ad Campaign;
Bush: A Risky Republican Attack

BYLINE: RICHARD L. BERKE

SECTION: Section A; Page 13; Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 369 words


Hours before last night's debate, the Bush organization began broadcasting its
first commercial devoted entirely to questioning Gov. Bill Clinton's credibility
on the draft. Bush aides said the 30-second ad would appear for several days in
select markets nationwide but would not specify which ones.

ON THE SCREEN -- Extreme close-up of a grainy black-and-white photograph of Bill
Clinton slowly enlarges to reveal it is the picture of Mr. Clinton on a recent
Time Magazine cover, with the headline, "Why Voters Don't Trust Clinton." The
camera zeros in on the words in quick succession, and finally shows the entire
cover, which is an ominous-looking photo-negative image of the face.

PRODUCER -- The November Company.

TELEVISION SCRIPT -- Announcer: "He said he was never drafted. Then he admitted
he was drafted. Then he said he forgot being drafted. He said he was never
deferred from the draft. Then he said he was.

"He said he never received special treatment. But, he did receive special
treatment. The question then was avoiding the draft.

"Now, for Bill Clinton, it's a question of avoiding the truth."

ACCURACY -- The ad greatly simplifies Mr. Clinton's sometimes-contorted
reasoning, but is not flatly inaccurate. The Bush camp has distributed several
quotations from Mr. Clinton over time to underscore how his explanations of his
actions during the Vietnam era have evolved.

SCORECARD -- The attack is in an area that many Republican believe may be Mr.
Clinton's most vulnerable: whether he shattered his credibility by offering
explanations that bobbed and weaved. But the ad is a risk because it comes at a
time of growing public reaction to Bush campaign attacks as too negative and
desperate. Some Republicans worry that about detracting from the President's
efforts to drive home his goals for the economy. The Time cover itself caused a
stir, some critics charging that it unfairly portrayed Mr. Clinton as
other-worldly. Clinton campaign officials said that they had already tested the
ad with a research group of citizens and that it bombed. But Bush aides
calculated that the ad would effectively complement the President's message
during the blitz of debates this week.

LOAD-DATE: October 12, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              72 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 12, 1992, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Abroad at Home;
No Knockouts

BYLINE: By ANTHONY LEWIS

SECTION: Section A; Page 19; Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 694 words


The bottom line of the first Presidential debate, as viewed from this corner, is
that it is unlikely to have any substantial effect on the course of the
campaign. Nobody scored a knockout.

Governor Clinton dealt powerfully with President Bush's main tactic in these
closing weeks: to attack Mr. Clinton's patriotism. The Governor invoked an act
of courage by Mr. Bush's father that in fact, though he did not say so, shamed
the son.

Senator Prescott Bush stood up to Joe McCarthy, Mr. Clinton said. He was
referring to Prescott Bush's vote to censure his Republican colleague, Senator
McCarthy. He did not need to draw the obvious contrast: with George Bush's
red-baiting effort to paint Mr. Clinton as some kind of crypto-Communist.

Last week Mr. Bush was spurred by Robert Dornan, a California Congressman so far
to the right that he makes Pat Robertson look sane, to suggest that there was
something unpatriotic about Mr. Clinton's behavior while he was a Rhodes Scholar
at Oxford during the Vietnam War.

The President returned to that slimy theme last night. He said he found it
"impossible to understand how an American can demonstrate against his own
country in a foreign land." Of course Mr. Clinton and millions of others who
protested were not against their country; they were against the policy that was
uselessly killing Americans, Vietnamese, Cambodians and Laotians.

In fact, like the young Bill Clinton, Senator Prescott Bush turned against the
Vietnam War. But no one pointed that out last night.

Mr. Bush's big surprise was his statement that if re-elected he would make James
Baker a domestic czar. Mr. Baker has been the invisible man in the campaign,
managing it behind closed doors. But no one who knows his part in the invention
of Willie Horton as an "issue" in 1988 doubts his authorship of the recent
red-baiting. Mr. Bush's effective admission of dependence on him was striking.

The most cynical answer Mr. Bush gave was about the tragedy going on in Bosnia,
the killings and "ethnic cleansing" by the attacking Serbs. "I am going to stand
by and use the moral persuasion of the United States," the President said last
night. To date he has done a lot of standing by and said or done nothing by way
of moral persuasion.

Vying with the comment on Bosnia for cynicism was Mr. Bush's attempt to claim
credit for civil rights legislation that he stubbornly opposed until his
embarrassment over the Clarence Thomas hearings forced him to sign the bill.

The Thomas nomination was the subject of a remarkable comment by Ross Perot. He
said an "all-time low in our country" was the confrontation between Justice
Thomas and Anita Hill in the confirmation hearings, and the senators on the
committee "should hang their heads in shame." He evidently meant the Republican
senators who attacked Professor Hill.

Mr. Perot was altogether a plus in the debate. He was folksy, and he was
effective. He kept bringing an air of reality to lofty discussions.

"We are sitting on a ticking bomb, folks," Mr. Perot said of the country's
financial situation. That won applause from the audience at Washington
University, St. Louis, and I imagine it scored with the television audience --
for a simple reason. It was true.

If a debating judge were scoring this one, I think he would make Mr. Perot the
winner. Even someone with knowledge of his darker side -- his paranoid
investigations of "enemies" and the rest -- cheered his direct statement about
racial divisions: "If you hate people, I don't want your vote."

But voters may get a kick out of Ross Perot and not vote for him for President.
Moreover, his brutally effective criticism of American policy over the last
dozen years -- the policy that has led us to economic disaster -- is likely to
hurt President Bush and help Governor Clinton.

Mr. Bush got nowhere in his efforts to shed his image of economic ineptitude.
"There's some fairly good news out there," he said flabbily. He was defensive
and whiny rather than Presidential.

Governor Clinton seemed in charge: careful, fair, controlled.  And in the end he
defined the real choice: "the choice between hope and fear."

LOAD-DATE: October 12, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              73 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 12, 1992, Monday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN;
Transcript of First TV Debate Among Bush, Clinton and Perot

SECTION: Section A; Page 14; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 14813 words

Following is text of last night's Presidential debate in St. Louis, as
transcribed by The New York Times.

Distinctive Points

Q: The first topic tonight is what separates each of you from the other. Mr.
Perot, what do you believe tonight is the single most important separating issue
of this campaign?

PEROT: I think the principal issue that separates me is that five-and-a-half
million people came together on their own and put me on the ballot. I was not
put on the ballot by either the two parties. I was not put on the ballot by any
PAC money, by any foreign lobbyist money, by any special interest money. This is
a movement that came from the people. This is the way the framers of the
Constitution intended our government to be, a government that comes from the
people.

Over time we have developed a government that comes at the people, that comes
from the top down, where the people are more or less treated as objects to be
programmed during the campaign with commercials and media events and fear
messages and personal attacks and things of that nature. The thing that
separates my candidacy and makes it unique is that this came from millions of
people in 50 states all over this country who wanted a candidate that worked and
belonged to nobody but them. I go into this race as their servant. And I belong
to them. So this comes from the people.

MODERATOR: Governor Clinton, one-minute response.

CLINTON: The most important distinction in this campaign is that I represent
real hope for change, a departure from trickle-down economics, a departure from
tax-and-spend economics to invest in growth. But before I can do that, I must
challenge the American people to change and they must decide. Tonight I have to
say to the President; Mr. Bush, for 12 years you've had it your way; you've had
your chance and it didn't work. It's time to change. I want to bring that change
to the American people. But we must all decide first: Do we have the courage to
change for hope in a better tomorrow?

MODERATOR: President Bush, one-minute response.

BUSH: Well, I think one thing that distinguishes is experience -- I think we've
dramatically changed the world. I'll talk about that a little bit later, but the
changes are mind-boggling for world peace. Kids go to bed at night without the
same fear of nuclear war.

And change for change sake isn't enough. We saw that message in the late 70's.
We heard a lot about change and what happened, that misery index went right
through the roof. But I've -- my economic program, I think, is the kind of
change we want.

And the way we're going to get it done is we're going to have a brand new
Congress. A lot of them were thrown because of all the scandals. I'll sit down
with them, Democrats and Republicans alike, and work for my agenda for American
renewal, which represents real change.

But I'd say if you had to separate out, I think it's experience at this level.

Value of Experience

Q: Governor Clinton, how do you respond to the President on the -- you have two
minutes -- on the question of experience. He says that is what distinguishes him
from the other two of you.

CLINTON: I believe experience counts but it's not everything. Values, judgment
and the record that I have amassed in my state also should count for something.
I've worked hard to create good jobs and to educate people. My state now ranks
first in the country in job growth this year, fourth in income growth, fourth in
the reduction of poverty, third in overall economic performance, according to a
major news magazine. That's because we believe in investing in education and in
jobs.

And we have to change in this country. You know, my wife, Hillary, gave me a
book about a year ago in which the author defined insanity as just doing the
same old thing over and over again and expecting a different result. We have got
to have the courage to change. Experience is important, yes. I've gotten a lot
of good experience in dealing with ordinary people over the last year, month.
I've touched more people's lives and seen more heartbreak and hope, more pain
and more promise than anybody else who's run for President this year. And I
think the American people deserve better than they're getting.

We have gone from first to 13th in the world in wages in the last 12 years,
since Mr. Bush and Mr. Reagan have been in. Personal income has dropped while
people have worked harder. In the last four years there have been twice as many
bankruptcies as new jobs created. We need a new approach. This same old
experience is not relevant. We're living in a new world after the cold war and
what works in this new world is not trickle-down, not government for the benefit
of the privileged few, not tax and spend, but a commitment to invest in American
jobs and American education, controlling American health-care costs and bringing
the American people together.

That is what works, and you can have the right kind of experience and the wrong
kind of experience. Mine is rooted in the real lives of real people, and it will
bring real results if we have the courage to change.

MODERATOR: President Bush, one minute to respond.

BUSH: I just thought of another, another big difference here between me -- I
don't believe Mr. Perot feels this way, but I know Governor Clinton did. I want
to accurately quote him. He thinks, I think he said that the country is coming
apart at the seams. Now, I know the only way he can win is to make everybody
believe the economy is worse than it is. But this country's not coming apart at
the seams, for heaven's sakes. We're the United States of America. We -- in
spite of the economic problems we are the most respected economy around the
world. Many would trade for it. We've been caught up in a global slow-down. We
can do much much better, but we ought not try to convince the American people
that America is a country that's coming apart at the seams. I would hate to be
running for President and think that the only way I could win would be to
convince everybody how horrible things are. Yes there are big problems. And yes
people are hurting. But I believe that this agenda for American renewal I have
is the answer to do it, and I believe we can get it done now whereas we didn't
in the past, because you're going to have a whole brand new bunch of people in
the Congress that are going to have to listen to the same American people I'm
listening to.

Q: Mr. Perot, a minute response, sir.

PEROT: Well, they got a point. I don't have any experience in running up a $4
trillion debt. I don't have any experience in gridlock government, where nobody
takes responsibility for anything and everybody blames everybody else. I don't
have any experience in creating the worst public school system in the
industrialized world, the most violent crime-ridden society in the
industrialized world. But I do have a lot of experience in getting things done.
So if we're at a point in history where we want to stop talking about it and do
it, I've got a lot of experience in figuring out how to solve problems, making
the solutions work and then moving on to the next. I've got a lot of experience
in not taking 10 years to solve a 10-minute problem. So if it's time for action,
I think I have experience that counts. If there's more time for gridlock and
talk and finger pointing, I'm the wrong man.

Character Issues

Q: President Bush, the question goes to you. You have two minutes. And the
question is this: Are there important issues of character separating you from
these other two men?

BUSH: I think the American people should be the judge of that. I think character
is a very important question.

I said something the other day where I was accused of being like Joe McCarthy,
because I questioned -- I put it this way: I think it's wrong to demonstrate
against your own country or organize demonstrations against your own country in
foreign soil. I just think it's wrong.

I -- maybe they say, well, it's a youthful indiscretion. I was 19 or 20 flying
off an aircraft carrier, and that shaped me to be Commander in Chief of the
armed forces.

And I'm sorry, but demonstrating -- it's not a question of patriotism. It's a
question of character and judgment. They get on me -- Bill's gotten on me about
"Read my lips" some. When I make a mistake I'll admit it.

But he has made -- made -- not admitted a mistake. And I just find it impossible
to understand how an American can demonstrate against his own country in a
foreign land, organizing demonstrations against it, when young men are held
prisoner in Hanoi or kids out of the ghetto were drafted.

Some say, well, you're a little old-fashioned. Maybe I am, but I just don't
think that's right.

Now whether it's character or judgment, whatever it is, I have a big difference
here on this issue. And so we'll just have to see how it plays out, but I -- I
couldn't do that. And I don't think most Americans could do that.

And they all say, well, it was a long time ago. Well, let's admit it then. Say I
made a terrible mistake. How could you be Commander in Chief of the armed forces
and have some kid say when you have to make a tough decision as I did in Panama
or in, in Kuwait, and then have some kid jump up and say, "Well, I'm not go
going to. The Commander in Chief was organizing demonstrations halfway around
the world during another era.

So there are differences. But that's about the main area where I think we have a
difference. I don't know about -- we'll talk about that a little with Ross here
in a bit.

MODERATOR: Mr. Perot, you have one minute.

PEROT: I think the American people will make their own decisions on character,
and at a time when we have work to do and we need action, I think they need to
clearly understand the backgrounds of each person. And I think the press can
play a huge role in making sure that the backgrounds are clearly presented in an
objective way. Then, make a decision. Certainly anyone in the White House should
have the character to be there. But, I think it's very important to measure when
and where things occurred. Did they occur when you were a young person in your
formative years? Or did they occur while you were a senior official in the
Federal Government? When you're a senior official in the Federal Government
spending billions of dollars of taxpayers' money and you're a mature individual
and you make a mistake, then that was on our ticket. If you make it as a young
man, time passes. So I would say, just, you know, look at all three of us.
Decide who you think will do the job, pick that person in November because
believe me, as I've said before, the party's over and it's time for the cleanup
crew. And we do have to have change and people who never take responsibility for
anything when it happens on their watch and people who are in charge --

MODERATOR: Your time is up.

PEROT: Your time is up.

MODERATOR: Time is up.

PEROT: Time is up.

MODERATOR: Governor Clinton, you have one minute.

CLINTON: Ross gave a good answer, but I've got to respond directly to Mr. Bush.
You have questioned my patriotism. You even brought some right-wing Congressmen
into the White House to plot how to attack me for going to Russia in 1969-1970
when over 50,000 other Americans did. Now I honor your service in World War II.
I honor Mr. Perot's service in uniform and the service of every man and woman
who ever served, including Admiral Crowe who was your Chairman of the Joint
Chiefs and who is supporting me. But when Joe McCarthy went around this country
attacking people's patriotism, he was wrong. He was wrong. And a Senator from
Connecticut stood up to him named Prescott Bush. Your father was right to stand
up to Joe McCarthy. You were wrong to attack my patriotism. I was opposed to the
war but I love my country and we need a President who will bring this country
together, not divide it. We've got enough division. I want to lead a unified
country.

MODERATOR: All right, we move now to the subject of taxes and spending. The
question goes to Governor Clinton for a two-minute answer. It will be asked by
Ann Compton.

Income and Taxes

Q: Governor Clinton, can you lock in a level here tonight on where middle-income
families can be guaranteed a tax cut, or at the very least, at what income level
they can be guaranteed no tax increase?

CLINTON: The tax increase I have proposed triggers in at family incomes of
$200,000 and above. Those are the people who in the 1980's had their incomes go
up while their taxes went down. Middle-class people, defined as people with
incomes of $52,000 and down, had their incomes go down while their taxes went up
in the Reagan-Bush years, because of six increases in the payroll taxes. So that
is where my income limit would trigger.

Q: So there would be no tax increases below $200,000?

CLINTON: That's right. My plan, notwithstanding my opponent's ad, my plan
triggers in at gross incomes -- family incomes -- of $200,000 and above. Then we
want to give modest middle-class tax relief to restore some fairness, especially
to middle-class people with families with incomes of under $60,000. In addition
to that, the money that I raise from upper-income people and from asking foreign
corporations just to pay the same income on their income earned in America that
American corporations do will be used to give incentives back to upper-income
people.

I want to give people permanent incentives, an investment-tax credit like
President Kennedy and the Congress inaugurated in the early 60's, to get
industry moving again; a research-and-development tax credit; a
low-income-housing tax credit, a long-term capital gains proposal for new
business and business expansions.

We've got to have no more trickle-down. We don't need across-the-board tax cuts
for the wealthy for nothing. We need to say, "Here's your tax incentive if you
create American jobs the old-fashioned way. I'd like to create more millionaires
than were created under Mr. Bush and Mr. Reagan, But I don't want to have four
years where we have no growth in the private sector, and that's what's happened
in the last four years. We're down 35,000 jobs in the private sector. We need to
invest and grow, and that's what I want to do.

MODERATOR: President Bush, one minute, sir.

BUSH: Well let me -- I have to correct one thing. I didn't question the man's
patriotism. I questioned his judgment and his character. If what he did in
Moscow, that's fine. Let him explain it. He did. I accept that. What I don't
accept is demonstrating and organizing demonstrations in a foreign country when
your country's at war. I'm sorry. I cannot accept that.

In terms of -- this one on taxes, spells out the biggest difference between us.
I do not believe we need to go back to the Mondale proposals or the Dukakis
proposals of tax and spend. Governor Clinton says 200,000 but he also says he
wants to raise 150 billion. The two -- taxing people over 200,000 will not get
you a 150 billion, and then when you add in his other spending proposals
regrettably you end up socking it to the working man. That old adage that they
use -- We're going to soak the rich, we're going to soak the rich -- it always
ends up being the poor cab driver or the working man that ends up paying the
bill. And so I just have a different approach. I believe the way to get the
deficit down is to control the growth of mandatory spending programs and not
raise taxes on the American people, you got a big difference there.

MODERATOR: Mr. Perot, one minute.

PEROT: We've got to have a growing, expanding job base to give us a growing,
expanded tax base. Right now we have a flat to deteriorating job base and where
it appears to be going is minimum wage jobs. So we've got to really rebuild our
job base. That's going to take money for infrastructure and investment to do
that. Our foreign competitors are doing it; we're not. We cannot pay off the $4
trillion debt, balance the budget and have -- the industry is the future and the
high-paying jobs in this country without having the revenue. We're going to go
through a period of shared sacrifice. There's one challenge; it's got to be
fair. We've created a mess; don't have much to show for it. And we have got to
fix it.

MODERATOR: Next question goes to President Bush for a two-minute answer, and it
will be asked by Sandy Vanocur.

Forces in Europe

Q: Mr. President, this past week your Secretary of the Army, Michael Stone, said
he had no plans to abide by a Congressional mandate to cut U.S. forces in Europe
from 150 to 100,000 by the end of September 1996.

Now why, almost 50 years after the end of World War II and with the total
collapse of the Soviet Union, should American taxpayers be taxed to support
armies in Europe when the Europeans have plenty of money to do it for
themselves?

BUSH: Well, Sander, that's a good question. And the answer is for 40 some years
we kept the peace. If you look at the cost of not keeping the peace in Europe it
would be exorbitant. We have reduced the number of troops that are deployed and
going to be deployed. I have cut defense spending.

And the reason we could do that is because of our fantastic success in winning
the cold war. We never would have got there if we'd gone for the nuclear-freeze
crowd; never would have got there for -- if we'd listened to those that wanted
to cut defense spending.

I think it is important that the United States stay in Europe and continue to
guarantee the peace. We simply cannot pull back.

Now, when anybody has a spending program they want to spend money on at home,
they say well let's cut money out of the Defense Department. I will accept, and
have accepted, the recommendations of two proven leaders -- Gen. Colin Powell
and Dick -- Secretary Dick Cheney. They feel that the levels we're operating at
and the reductions that I have proposed are proper.

And so I simply do not think we should go back to the isolation days and start
blaming foreigners. We are the sole remaining superpower, and we should be that.
And we have a certain disproportionate responsibility. But I would ask the
American people to understand that if we make imprudent cuts, if we go too far,
we risk the peace.

And I don't want to do that. I've seen what it is like to see a war, and I -- to
see the burdens of a war, I don't want to see us make reckless cuts. Because of
our programs we have been able to significantly cut defense spending.

But let's not cut into the muscle, and let's not cut down our insurance policy,
which is participation of American forces in NATO, the greatest peacekeeping
organization ever made.

Today, you got problems in Europe, still bubbling along even though Europe's
going democracy's route. But we -- we are there, and I think this insurance
policy is necessary, I think it goes with world leadership and I think the
levels we've come up with are just about right.

MODERATOR: Mr. Perot, one minute, sir.

PEROT: If I'm poor and you're rich, and I can get you to defend me, that's good.
But when the tables get turned, I ought to do my share. Right now we spend about
$300 billion a year on defense; the Japanese spend around $30 billion in Asia,
the Germans spend around $30 billion in Europe. For example, Germany'll spend a
trillion dollars building infrastructure over the next 10 years. It's kind of
easy to do if you only have to pick up a $30 billion tab to defend your country.

The European Community is in a position to pay a lot more than they have in the
past. I agree with the President; when they couldn't we should have. Now that
they can, they should. We sort of seem to have a desire to try to stay over
there and control it. They don't want us to control it, very candidly. So it's,
I think, very important for us to let them assume more and more of the burden
and for us to bring that money back here and rebuild our infrastructure because
we can only be a superpower if we're an economic superpower, and we can only be
an economic superpower if we have a growing, expanding job base.

MODERATOR: Governor Clinton. One minute sir.

CLINTON: I agree with the general statement Mr. Bush made. I disagree that we
need 150,000 troops to fulfill our role in Europe. We certainly must maintain an
engagement there. There is certainly dangers there. There is certainly other
trouble spots in the world which are closer to Europe than to the United States.
But two former Defense Secretaries recently issued a report saying that 100,000
or slightly fewer troops would be enough, including President Reagan's former
Defense Secretary, Mr. Carlucci. Many of the military experts whom I consulted
on this agreed. We're going to have to spend more money in the future on
military technology and on greater mobility, greater air lift, greater sea lift,
and the V-22 airplane. We're going to have to do some things that are quite
costly and I simply don't believe we can afford nor do we need to keep 150,000
troops in Europe given how much the Red Army, now under the control of Russia,
has been cut. The Army Control Agreement concluded between Mr. Bush and Mr.
Yeltsin is something I have applauded. I don't think we need 150,000 troops.

Let me make one other point; Mr. Bush talked about taxes. He didn't tell you
that he vetoed a middle-class tax cut because it would be paid for by raising
taxes on the wealthy and vetoed an investment tax credit paid for by raising
taxes on the wealthy.

MODERATOR: All right. We go now to Mr. Perot for a two-minute question and it
will be asked by John Machek.

Tax on Gasoline

Q: Mr. Perot you talked about fairness just a minute ago, I'm sharing the pain.
As part of your plan to reduce the ballooning Federal deficit you've suggested
that we raise gasoline taxes 50 cents a gallon over five years. Why punish the
middle-class consumer to such a degree?

PEROT: It's 10 cents a year accumulative. It finally gets to 50 cents at the end
of the fifth year. I think punish is the wrong word. Again, see I didn't create
this problem. We're trying to solve it. Now if you study our international
competitors, some of our international competitors collect up to $3.50 a gallon
in taxes and they use that money to build infrastructure and create jobs. We
collect 35 cents and we don't have it to spend. I know it's not popular and I
understand the nature of your question, but the people who will be helped the
most by it are the working people who will get the jobs created because of this
tax.

Why do we have to do it? Because we have so mismanaged our country over the
years and it is now time to pay the fiddler and if we don't, we will be spending
our children's money. We have spent $4 trillion worth. An incredible number of
young people are active in supporting my effort because they're deeply concerned
that we have taken the American dream from them. I think it's fitting that we're
on the campus of a university tonight. These young people, when they get out of
this wonderful university, will have difficulty finding a job. We've got to
clean this mess up, leave this country in good shape and pass on the American
dream to them. We've got to collect the taxes to do it. If there's a fairer way,
I'm all ears. Ahh.

But, but, see, let me make it very clear. If people don't have the stomach to
fix these problems, I think it's a good time to face it in November. If they do,
then they will have heard the harsh reality of what we have to do. I'm not
playing Lawrence Welk music tonight.

MODERATOR: All right. Governor Clinton, you have a minute, sir.

CLINTON: I think Mr. Perot has confronted this deficit issue but I think it's
important to point out that we really have two deficits in America, not one. We
have a budget deficit in the Federal Government, but we also have an investment
of jobs and income deficit. People are working harder for less money than they
were making 10 years ago, two-thirds of our people. A $1,600 drop in average
income in just the last two years. The problem I have with the Perot
prescription is that almost all economists who've looked at it say that if you
cut the deficit this much, this quick, it will increase unemployment, it will
slow down the economy. That's why I think we shouldn't do it that quickly. We
have a disciplined reduction in the deficit of 50 percent over the next four
years, but first, get incentives to invest in this economy, put the American
people back to work. We've got to invest in growth.

Nine Nobel Prize-winning economists and 500 others, including numerous
Republican and Democratic business executives, have endorsed this approach
because it offers the best hope to put American back to work and get our incomes
rising instead of falling.

MODERATOR: President Bush, one minute, Sir.

BUSH: The question was on fairness, and I, I just disagree with Mr. Perot. I
don't believe it is fair to slap a 50-cents-a-gallon tax over whatever many
years on the people that have to drive for a living. People that go long
distances. I don't think we need to do it.

You see I have a fundamental difference. I agree with what he's talking about in
trying to get this spending down and the discipline, although I think we ought
to totally exempt Social Security. But he's talking tough medicine, and I think
that's good.

I disagree with the tax-and-spend philosophy. You see, I don't think we need to
tax more and spend more and then say that's going to make the problem better.
And I'm afraid that's what I think I'm hearing from Governor Clinton.

I believe what you need to do is some of what Ross is talking about -- control
the growth of mandatory spending and get taxes down. He's mentioned some ways to
do it, and I agree with those.

I've been talking about getting a capital-gains cut forever, and his friends in
Congress have been telling me that's a tax break for the rich. It would
stimulate investment. I'm for an investment-tax allowance. I am for a first-time
tax break for first-time homebuyers, and with this new Congress coming in,
gridlock will be gone, and I'll sit down with them and say let's get this done.
But I do not want to go the tax-and-spend route.

MODERATOR: All right, let's move on now to the subject of jobs. And the first
question goes to President Bush for two minutes and John will ask that question.
John.

Converting the Economy

Q: Mr. President, last month you came to St. Louis to announce a very lucrative
contract for McDonnell-Douglas to build F-15's for Saudi Arabia. In today's Post
Dispatch a retired saleswoman, a 75-year-old woman named Marjorie Roberts, asked
if she could ask a question of the candidates, said she wanted to register her
concern about the lack of a plan to convert our defense-oriented industries into
other purposes. How would you answer her?

BUSH: Well, I assume she was supportive of the decision on McDonnell-Douglas. I
assume she was supporting me on the decision to sell those airplanes. I think
it's a good decision -- took a little heat for it. But, I think it was the
correct, the correct decision to do, and we worked it out and, indeed, we're
moving forward all around the world in a much more peaceful way. So that one we
came away with which -- in creating jobs for the American people. I would simply
say to her look, take a look at what the President has proposed on job
retraining. When you cut back on defense, defense spending, some people are
going to be thrown out of work. If you throw another 50,000 kids on the street
because of cutting recklessly in troop levels, you're going to put a lot more
out of work. I would say to him, look at the job retraining programs that we're
proposing, therein is the best answer to her. And another one is stimulate
investment in savings. I mean, we've got big economic problems, but we are not
coming apart at the seams. We're ready for a recovery, with interest rates down
and inflation down, the cruelest tax of all, caught up in a global slowdown
right now, but that will change if you go with the programs I've talked about
and if you help with job retraining and education. I am a firm believer that our
America 2000 education problem is the answer. A little longer run -- it's going
to take a while to educate, but it is a good program.

So, her best hope for short term is job retraining if she was thrown out of work
at a defense plant, but tell her it's not all that gloomy. We're the United
States. We got -- we've faced tough problems before. Look at the misery index
when the Democrats had both the White House and the -- and the Congress. It was
just right through the roof. Now, we can do better and the way to do better is
not to tax and spend but to retrain, get that control of the mandatory spending
programs. I -- I am much more optimistic about this country than some.

MODERATOR: Mr. Perot, you have one minute, Sir.

PEROT: Well, your defense industries are going to have to convert to civilian
industries. Many of them are. And the sooner they start, the sooner they'll
finish. And there will be a significant transition. And it's very important that
we not continue to let our industrial base deteriorate. We have someone who I'm
sure regrets said it, in the President's staff, said he didn't care whether we
made potato chips or computer chips. Well, anybody who thinks about it cares a
great deal.

No. 1, you make more making computer chips than you do potato chips. No. 2, 19
out of 20 computer chips we have in this country now come from Japan. We've
given away whole industries. So as we phase these industries over, there's a lot
of intellectual talent in these industries. A lot of these people and industries
can be converted to the industries of tomorrow. And that's where the high-paying
jobs are. We need to have a very carefully thought-through phase-over.

See, we practice 19th-century capitalism. The rest of the world practices
21st-century capitalism. We've got -- I can't handle that in a minute, but I
hope we can get back into it later. In the rest of the world the countries and
the businesses would be working together to make this transition in an
intelligent way.

MODERATOR: Governor Clinton, you have one minute, Sir.

CLINTON: We must have a transition plan, to plan to convert from a defense to a
domestic economy. No other nation would have cut defense as much as we already
have without that. There are 200,000 people unemployed in California alone
because we have cut defense without planning to retrain them, and to reinvest in
the technologies of the future here at home. That is what I want to do. This
Administration may say they have a plan, but the truth is they have not even
released all the money -- the paltry sum of money -- that Congress appropriated.

I want to take every dollar by which we reduce defense and reinvest it in
technologies for the 21st century -- in new transportation, in communication and
environmental-cleanup technologies. Let's put the American people to work and
let's build the kind of high-tech high-wage high-growth economy that the
American people deserve.

MODERATOR: The next question goes to Mr. Perot for a two-minute answer. It will
be asked by Ann.

Producing Jobs

Q: Mr. Perot, you talked a minute ago about rebuilding the job base. Is it true
what Governor Clinton just said, that that means that unemployment will
increase, that it will slow the economy? And how would you specifically use the
powers of the Presidency to get more people back into good jobs immediately?

PEROT: Step 1, the American people send me up there. The day after election, I
get with the Congressional -- we won't even wait until inauguration. And I'll
ask the President to help me. And I'll ask his staff to help me. And we will
start putting together teams to put together, to take all the plans that exist
and do something with them.

Please understand, there are great plans lying all over Washington nobody ever
executes. It's like having a blueprint for a house you never built, and don't
have anywhere to sleep. Now, the challenge is to take these things and do
something with them.

Step 1, you want to put America back to work? Clean up the small-business
problem. Have one task force work on that.

The second, you've got your big companies that are in trouble, including the
defense industries. Have another one on that.

Have a third task force on new industries of the future, to make sure we nail
those for our country, and they don't wind up in Europe and Asia.

Convert from 19th-century capitalism. See, we have an adversarial relationship
between Government and business, international competitors that are cleaning our
plate. Have an intelligent relationship between Government and business and a
supported relationship.

Then have another task force on crime, because next to jobs the people are
concerned about their safety, health care, school. One on the debt and deficit.

In fact in that 90-day period before the inauguration, put together the
framework for the Town Hall and give the American people a Christmas present.
Show them by Christmas the first cut of these plans. By the time Congress comes
into session, go to work. Have those plans ready to go in front of Congress.
Then get off to a flying start in '93 to execute these plans.

There are people in this room and people on this stage who've been in meetings
when I would sit there and say: is this one we're going to talk about or do
something about? Well, obviously my orientation is let's go do it. Now put
together your plans by Christmas. Be ready to go when Congress goes. Nail these
things. Small business -- you've got to have capital. You've got to have credit.
Many of them need mentors or coaches. And we can create more jobs there in a
hurry than any other place.

MODERATOR: Governor Clinton, one minute.

CLINTON: This country desperately needs a jobs program. And my first priority
would be to pass a jobs program, to introduce it on the first day I was
inaugurated. I would meet with the leaders of the Congress, with all the newly
elected members of the Congress, and as many others with whom I could meet
between the time of the election and the inauguration. And we would present a
jobs program.

Then we would present a plan to control health-care costs and phase in
health-care coverage for all Americans. Until we control health-care costs,
we're not going to control the deficit. It is the No. 1 culprit. But first we
must have an aggressive jobs program.

I live in a state where the manufacturing-job growth has far outpaced the
nation's in the last few years, where we have created more private-sector jobs
since Mr. Bush has been President than have been created in the entire rest of
the country, where Mr. Bush's Labor Secretary said the job growth has been
enormous.

We've done it in Arkansas. Give me a chance to create these kind of jobs
America. We can do it. I know we can.

MODERATOR: President Bush, one minute.

BUSH: We've got the plan announced for what we can do for small business. I've
already put forward things that'll get this country working fast, some of which
have been echoed here tonight -- investment-tax allowance, capital-gains
reduction, more on research and development, a tax credit for first-time home
buyers.

What I'm going to do is say to Jim Baker when this campaign is over: "All right,
let's sit down now. You do in domestic affairs what you've done in foreign
affairs. Be the kind of economic coordinator of all the domestic side of the
house, and that includes all the economic side, all the training side, and bring
this program together."

We're going to have a new Congress. And we're going to say to them: "You've
listened to the voters the way we have, nobody wants gridlock anymore. And so
let's get the program through."

And I believe it'll work, because, as Ross said, we got the plans. The plans are
all over Washington. And I've put ours together in something called the Agenda
for American Renewal, and it makes sense. It's sensible. It creates jobs. It
gets to the base of the kind of jobs we need. And so I'll just be asking for
support to get that put into effect.

The Federal Reserve

MODERATOR: All right, the next question goes to Governor Clinton, for two
minutes. It will be asked by Sandy.

Q: Governor Clinton, when a President running for the first time gets into the
office and wants to do something about the economy, he finds in Washington
there's a person who has much more power over the economy than he does, the
chairman of the Federal Reserve Board, accountable to no one. That being the
case, would you go along with proposals made by Treasury Secretary James Brady
and Congressman Lee Hamilton to make the Federal Reserve Board chairman somehow
more accountable to elected officials?

CLINTON: Well, let me say that I think that we might ought to review the terms
and the way it works. But frankly I don't think that's the problem today. We
have low interest rates today. At least we have low interest rates that the Fed
can control. Our long-term interest rates are still pretty high because of our
deficit and because of our economic performance. And there was a terrible
reaction internationally to Mr. Bush's saying he was going to give us four more
years of trickle-down economics, other across-the-board tax cuts, and most of it
going to the wealthy with no real guarantee of investment.

But I think the important thing is to use the powers the President does have, on
the assumption that given the condition of this economy, we're going to keep
interest rates down if we have the discipline to increase investment and reduce
the debt at the same time. That is my commitment. I think the American people
are hungry for action. I think Congress is hungry for someone who will work with
them instead of manipulate them, someone who will not veto a bill that has an
investment-tax credit, middle-class tax relief, research-and-development tax
credits, as Mr. Bush has done. Give me a chance to do that. I don't have to
worry, I don't think, in the near term about the Federal Reserve. Their policies
so far, it seems to me, are pretty sound.

MODERATOR: President Bush, you have one minute.

BUSH: I don't think the Fed ought to be put under the Executive Branch. There is
separation there. I think that's fine. Alan Greenspan is respected. I've had
some arguments with him about the speed in which we might have lowered rates,
but Governor Clinton -- he talks about the reaction to the markets.

There was a momentary fear that he might win and that the markets went phweee,
down like that. So I don't think we can judge on -- the stock market has been
strong. It's been very strong since I've been President. And they recognize we
got great difficulties, but they're also much more optimistic than the
pessimists we have up here tonight.

In terms of vetoing tax bills, you're darn right. I am going to protect the
American taxpayer against the spend-and-tax Congress. And I'm going to keep on
vetoing them, because I don't think we're taxed too little.

I think the Government's spending too much.

So Governor Clinton can label it tax for the rich or anything he wants; I'm
going to protect the working man by continuing to veto and to threaten to veto
until we get this new Congress, and then we're going to move forward on our
plan.

MODERATOR: Mr. Perot, one minute.

PEROT: Keep the Federal Reserve independent, but let's live in a world of
reality. We live in a global economy, not a national economy. These interest
rates we have now don't make any sense. We have a $4 trillion debt, and only in
America would you finance 70 percent of it five years or less. So 70 percent of
our debt is five years or less. It's very interest sensitive. We have a 4
percent gap between what we pay for Treasuries and what Germany pays for
one-to-five-year Treasuries.

That gap is going to close, because the Arabs, the Japanese and folks in this
country are going to start buying German Treasuries because they can get more
money. Every time our interest rates go up 1 percent, that adds $28 billion to
the deficit or to the debt, whichever place you want to put it. We are sitting
on a ticking bomb, folks, because we have totally mismanaged our country and we
had better get it back under control. Just think, in your own business, if you
had all of your long-term problems financed short term, you'd go broke in a
hurry.

MODERATOR: We're going to move to foreign affairs. The first question goes to
Mr. Perot for a two-minute answer, and Sandy will ask.

After the Cold War

Q: Mr. Perot in the postwar cold war environment what should be the overriding
U.S. national interest? And what can the United States do -- and what can it
afford to do -- to defend that national interest?

PEROT: Again, if you're not rich, you're not a superpower. So we have two that
I'd put as No. 1. I have 1 and 1A. One is we've got to have the money to be able
to pay for defense. And we've got to manufacture here. Believe it or not folks,
you can't ship it all overseas. You've got to make it here. And you can't
convert from potato chips to airplanes in an emergency. See Willow Run could be
converted from cars to airplanes in World War II because it was here. We've got
to make things here. You just can't ship them overseas anymore. I hope we talk
more about that.

Second thing, on priorities, we've got to help Russia succeed in its revolution
and all of its republics. When we think of Russia, remember we're thinking of
many countries now. We've got to help them. That's pennies on the dollar
compared to renewing the cold war.

Third, we've got all kinds of agreements on paper and some that are being
executed on getting rid of nuclear warheads. Russia and its republics are out of
control or at best in weak control right now. It's a very unstable situation.

You've got every rich Middle Eastern country over there trying to buy nuclear
weapons, as you well know. And that will lead to another five-star migraine
headache down the road. We really need to nail down the intercontinental
ballistic missiles, the ones that can hit us from Russia. And we've focused on
the tactical. We've made real progress there. We've got some agreement on the
nuclear, but we don't have those things put away yet. The sooner the better. So
in terms or priorities, we've got to be financially strong.

No. 2, we've got to take care of this missile situation and try to get the
nuclear war behind us and give that a very high priority.  And No. 3, we need to
help and support Russia and the republics in every possible way to become
democratic capitalistic societies and not just sit back and let those countries
continue in turmoil because they could go back worse than things used to be. And
believe me there are a lot of old boys in the K.G.B. and the military that liked
it better the way it used to be.

MODERATOR: Governor Clinton, one minute.

CLINTON: In order to keep America the strongest nation in the world, we need
some continuity and some change. There are three fundamental challenges. First
of all, the world is still a dangerous and uncertain place. We need a new
military and a new national security policy equal to the challenges of the
post-cold-war era, a smaller permanent military force, but one that is more
mobile, well trained with high-technology equipment. We need to continue the
negotiations to reduce the nuclear arsenals in the Soviet Union, the former
Soviet Union and the United States. We need to stop this proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction.

Second, we have to face that in this world economic security is a whole lot of
national security. Our dollar's at an all-time low against some foreign
currencies. We're weak in the world. We must rebuild America's strength at home.

And finally, we ought to be promoting the democratic impulses around the world.
Democracies are our partners. They don't go to war with each other. They're
reliable friends in the future. National security, economic strength, democracy.

MODERATOR: President Bush, one minute.

BUSH: Well, we still are the envy of the world in terms of our military, there's
no question about that. We're the envy of the world in terms of our economy,
despite of the difficulties we're having, there's no question about that. Our
exports are dramatically up. I might say to Mr. Perot, "I can understand why you
might have missed it because there's so much fascination by trivia, but I worked
out a deal with Boris Yeltsin to eliminate -- get rid of entirely -- the most
destabilizing weapons of all, the SS-18, the big intercontinental ballistic
missile." I mean, that's been done. And thank God, it has, because the parents
of these young people around here go to bed at night without the same fear of
nuclear war. We made dramatic progress.

And so, we've got a good military. The question, to sort of get a new military,
get the best in the world, we got it -- and they're keeping the peace and
they're respected around the world. And we're more respected because of the way
we have conducted ourselves. We didn't listen to the nuclear freeze crowd; we
said "peace through strength," and it worked and the cold war is over. And
America understands that.

But we're so -- turned so inward we don't understand the global picture, and we
are helping democracy, Ross. The Freedom Support Act is something that I got
through the Congress, and it's a very good thing because it does exactly what
you say, and I think you agree with that, to help Russian democracy. And we're
going to keep on doing that.

MODERATOR: Next question is for Governor Clinton and John will ask it.

Relations With China

Q: Governor Clinton, you accused the President of coddling tyrants, including
those in Beijing. As President, how would you exert U.S. power to influence
affairs in China?

CLINTON: I think our relationships with China are important and I don't think we
want to isolate China, but I think it is a mistake for us to do what this
Administration did when all those kids went out there carrying the Statue of
Liberty in Tiananmen Square. Mr. Bush sent two people in secret to toast the
Chinese leaders and basically tell them not to worry about it. They rewarded him
by opening negotiations with Iran to transfer nuclear technology. That was their
response to that sort of action. Now that voices in the Congress and throughout
the country have insisted that we do something about China, look what has
happened. China has finally agreed to stop sending us products made with prison
labor, not because we coddled them but because the Administration was pushed
into doing something about it. And recently the Chinese have announced that they
are going to lower some barriers to our products, which they ought to do since
they have a $15 billion trade surplus with the United States under Mr. Bush, the
second-biggest surplus of all, second to Japan. So I would be firm. I would say
if you want to continue Most-Favored Nations status for your government-owned
industries as well as your private ones, observe human rights in the future.
Open your society. Recognize the legitimacy of those kids that were carrying the
Statue of Liberty. If we can stand up for our economics we ought to be able to
preserve the democratic interests of the people in China, and over the long run
they will be more reliable partners.

MODERATOR: President Bush, you have one minute.

BUSH: Well, the Administration is the first major country to stand up against
the abuse in Tiananmen Square. We are the one that worked out the prison labor
deal. We are the ones that have lowered the barrier to products with Carla
Hill's negotiation.

I am the one that said let's keep the M.F.N., because you see China moving
towards a free market economy. To do what the Congress and Governor Clinton is
suggesting, you'd isolate and ruin Hong Kong. They are making some progress, not
enough for us.

We were the first ones to put sanctions on. We still have them on on some
things.

But Governor Clinton's philosophy is isolate them. He says don't do it, but the
policies he's expounding of putting conditions on M.F.N. and kind of humiliating
them is not the way you make the kind of progress we are getting.

And I've stood up with these people, and I understand what you have to do to be
strong in this situation, and it's moving, not as fast as we'd like. But you
isolate China and turn them inward, and then we've made a tremendous mistake.

And I'm not going to do it, and I've had to fight a lot of people that were
saying human rights, and we are the ones that put the sanctions on and stood for
it.

And he can insult General Scowcroft if he wants to. They didn't go over to
coddle; he went over to say we must make the very changes they're making now.

MODERATOR: One minute, Mr. Perot.

PEROT: It's huge. China's a huge country, broken into many provinces. It has
some very elderly leaders that will not be around too much longer. Capitalism is
growing and thriving across big portions of China. Asia will be our largest
trading partner in the future. It will be a growing and a closer relationship.
We have a delicate tightwire walk that we must go through at the present time to
make sure that we do not cozy up to tyrants, to make sure that they don't get
the impression that they can suppress their people.

But time is our friend there, because their leaders will change in not too many
years, worst case, and their country is making great progress.

One last point on the missiles. I don't want the American people to be confused.
We have written agreements, and we have some missiles that have been destroyed.
But we have a huge number of intercontinental ballistic missiles that are still
in place in Russia. The fact that you have an agreement is one thing. Till
they're destroyed, some crazy person can either sell them or use them.

MODERATOR: All right, the next question goes to President Bush for a two-minute
answer, and Ann will ask it.

Role of the Military

Q: Mr. President, how can you watch the killing in Bosnia and the "ethnic
cleansing," or the starvation and anarchy in Somalia, and not want to use
America's might, if not America's military to try to end that kind of suffering?

BUSH: Ann, both of them are very complicated situations. And I vowed something,
because I learned something from Vietnam, I am not going to commit U.S. forces
until I know what the mission is, till the military tell me that it can be
completed, until I know how they can come out. We are helping, American
airplanes are helping today on humanitarian relief for Sarajevo. It is America
that's in the lead in helping with humanitary relief for Somalia. But when you
go to put somebody else's son or daughter into war, I think you've got to be a
little bit careful and you have to have -- be sure that there's a military plan
that can do this. You have ancient ethnic rivalries that have cropped up as
Yugoslavia has dissolved, or getting dissolved, and it isn't going to be solved
by sending in the 82d Airborne. And I'm not going to do that as Commander in
Chief.

I am going to stand by and use the moral persuasion of the United States to get
satisfaction in terms of prison camps -- and we're making some progress there --
and in terms of getting humanitarian relief in there. And right now, as you
know, the United States took the lead in a no-fly operation up there in -- a
no-fly order up in the United Nations. We're working through the international
organizations. That's one thing I learned by forging that tremendous and highly
successful coalition against Saddam Hussein, the dictator. Use -- work
internationally to do it. I'm very concerned about, I'm concerned about ethnic
cleansing. I'm concerned about attacks on Muslims, for example, over there. But
I must stop short of using American force until I know how those young men and
women are going to get out of there, as well as get in -- know what the mission
is and define it.

BUSH: And I think I'm on the right track.

Q: Are you designing a mission ----

MODERATOR: Ms., Ann, sorry, time is up. We have to go to Mr. Perot for a
one-minute response.

PEROT: I think, if we learned anything in Vietnam it's you first commit this
nation before you commit the troops to the battlefield. We cannot send our
people all over the world to solve every problem that comes up. This is
basically a problem that is a primary concern to the European Community.
Certainly we care about the people, we care about the children, we care about
the tragedy. But it is inappropriate for us, just because there's a problem
somewhere around the world, to take the sons and daughters of working people and
make no mistake about it, our all-volunteer armed force is not made up of the
sons and daughters of the beautiful people, it's the working folks who send
their sons and daughters to war, with a few exceptions. It's very unlike World
War II when F.D.R.'s sons flew missions, everybody went. It's a different world
now and very important that we not just, without thinking it through, just rush
to every problem in the world and have our people torn to pieces.

MODERATOR: Governor Clinton, one minute.

CLINTON: I agree that we cannot commit ground forces to become involved in the
quagmire of Bosnia or in the tribal wars of Somalia. But I think that it's
important to recognize that there are things that can be done short of that and
that we do have interest there. There are, after all, two million refugees now
because of the problems in what was Yugoslavia, the largest number since World
War II. And there may be hundreds of thousands of people who will starve or
freeze to death in this winter. The United States should try to work with its
allies and stop it. I urged the President to support this air cover and he did
and I applaud that. I applaud the no-fly zone and I know that he's going back to
the United Nations to try to get authority to enforce it. I think we should
stiffen the embargo on the Belgrade Government and I think we have to consider
whether or not we should lift the arms embargo now on the Bosnians since they
are in no way in a fair fight with a heavily armed opponent bent on ethnic
cleansing. We can't get involved in the quagmire but we must do what we can.

MODERATOR: Moving on now to divisions in our country. First question goes to
Governor Clinton for two minutes and Ann will ask it.

Family Values

Q: Governor Clinton, can you tell us what your definition of the word family is?

CLINTON: A family involved at least one parent, whether natural or adopted, or
foster, and children. A good family is a place where love and discipline and
good values are transmuted from the elders to the children. A place where people
turn for refuge and where they know they're the most important people in the
world. America has a lot of families that are in trouble today. There's been a
lot of talk about family values in this campaign. I know a lot about that. I was
born to a widowed mother who gave me family values and grandparents. I've seen
the family values in my people in Arkansas. I've seen the family values of all
these people in America who are out there killing themselves working harder for
less, in a country that's had the worst economic years in 50 years -- the first
decline in industrial production ever. I think the President owes it to family
values to show that he values America's families. Whether they are people on
welfare you're trying to move from welfare to work, the working poor who I think
deserve a tax break to lift them above poverty if they've got a child in the
house and working 40 hours a week. Working families who deserve a fair tax
system and the opportunity for constant retraining. They deserve a strong
economy, and I think they deserve a family-and-medical-leave act. Seventy-two
other nations have been able to do it. Mr. Bush vetoed it twice because he says
we can't do something 72 other countries do even though it was a small business
exemption. So with all the talk about family values, I know about family values.
I wouldn't be here without them. The best expression of my family values is that
tonight's my 17th wedding anniversary and I'd like to close my question by just
wishing my wife a happy anniversary and thanking my daughter for being here.

MODERATOR: President Bush, one minute.

BUSH: Well, I'd say that one meeting that made a profound impression on me was
when the mayors of the big cities, including the Mayor of Los Angeles, a
Democrat, came to see me and they unanimously said the decline in urban America
stems from the decline in the American family. So I do think we need to
strengthen family. When Barbara holds an AIDS baby she's showing a certain
compassion for family; when she reads to children, the same thing. I believe
that discipline and respect for the law, all of these things should be taught to
children -- not in our schools, but families have to do that.

I'm appalled at the highest -- outrageous numbers of divorces; it happens in
families, it's happened in ours, but it's gotten too much. And I just think we
ought to do everything we can to respect the American family. It can be a
single-parent family -- those mothers need help, and one way to do it is to get
these deadbeat fathers to pay their obligations to these mothers; that'll help
strengthen the American family. And there's a whole bunch of other things that I
can't click off in this short period of time.

MODERATOR: All right, Mr. Perot, you have one minute.

PEROT: If I had to solve all the problems that face this country and I could be
granted one wish as we started down the trail to rebuild the job base, the
schools and so on and so forth, I would say a strong family unit in every home,
where every child is loved, nurtured and encouraged. A little child before
they're 18 months learns to think well of himself or herself, or poorly. They
develop a positive or negative self-image. At a very early age they learn how to
learn.

If we have children who are not surrounded with love and affection -- see, I
look at my grandchildren and wonder if they'll ever learn to walk because
they're always in someone's arms. And I think, my gosh, wouldn't it be wonderful
if every child had that love and support. But they don't.

We will not be a great country unless we have a strong family unit in every
home. And I think you can use the White House as a bully pulpit to stress the
importance of these little children, particularly in their young and formative
years, to mold these little precious pieces of clay so that they, too, can live
rich full lives when they're grown.

MODERATOR: New question, two-minute answer, goes to President Bush. Sandy will
ask it.

Drugs and Crime

Q: Mr. President, there's been a lot of talk about Harry Truman in this
campaign, so much so that I think tomorrow I'll wake up and see him named as the
next Commissioner of Baseball.

BUSH: They could use one.

Q: But the thing that Mr. Truman didn't have to deal with was drugs. Americans
are increasingly alarmed about drug-related crimes in cities and suburbs, and
your Administration is not the first to have grappled with this. And are you at
all of a mind that maybe it ought to go to another level? If not to what's
advocated by William F. Buckley Jr. and Milton Friedman -- legalization,
somewhere between there and where we are now?

BUSH: No, I don't think that's the right answer. I don't believe legalizing
narcotics is the answer. I just don't believe that's the answer. I do believe
that there's some fairly good news out there. The use of cocaine, for example,
by teen-agers is dramatically down.

But we've got to keep fighting on this war against drugs. We're doing a little
better in interdiction. Many of the countries below that used to say, "Well,
this is a United States problem -- if you get the demand down, then we wouldn't
have the problem," are working cooperatively with the D.E.A. and other, the
military. We're using the military more now in terms of interdiction. Our
funding for recovering is up, recovering the addicts.

Where we're not making the progress, Sander, is -- we're making it in
teen-agers, and thank God, because I thought what Ross said was most appropriate
about these families and these children. But where we're not making it is with
the confirmed addicts.

I'll tell you one place that's working well, and that is the private sector, Jim
Burke and his task force that he has. You may know about it. I'll tell the
American people, but this man said, "I'll get you $1 million a day in pro bono
advertising," something that's very hard for the Government to do, and he went
out and he did it. And people are beginning to educate through this program,
teaching these kids you shouldn't use drugs.

So we're still in the fight. But I must tell you I think legalization of
narcotics or something of that nature in the face of the medical evidence would
be totally counterproductive. And I oppose it and I'm going to stand up and
continue to oppose it.

MODERATOR: Mr. Perot -- Mr. Perot, one minute.

PEROT: Anytime you think you want to legalize drugs go to a neonatal unit, if
you can get in. They're between 100 and 200 percent capacity uyp and down the
East Coast. And the reason is crack babies being born. The baby's in the
hospital 42 days, the typical cost to you and me is $125,000. Again and agina
and again the mother disappears in three days and the child becomes a ward of
the state because he's permanently and genetically damaged. Just look at those
little children and if anybody can even think about legalizing drugs, they've
lost me.

Now let's look at priorities. You know, we went on the Libyan raid. You remember
that one? Becuase we were worried to death that Qaddafi might be building up
chemical weapons. We've got chemical warfare being conducted against our
children on the streets in this country all day, every day and we don't have the
will to stamp it out. And again, if I get up there, if you send me, we're going
to have some blunt talks about this. And we're reallygoing to get down to the
trenches and say is this one you want to talk about or fix, because talk won't
do it, folks. There are guys that couldn't get a job, third shift in a Dairy
Queen, driving BMW's and Mercedes selling drugs. And these old boys are not
goint to quit easy.

MODERATOR: Governor Clinton, one minute.

CLINTON: Like Mr. Perot I have held crack babies in my arms, but In know more
about this, I think, than anybody else up here because I have a brother who is a
recovering drug addict. I'm very proud of him, but I can tell you this: If drugs
were legal I don't think he'd be alive today. I am adamantlyoposed to legalizing
drugs. He is alive today because of the criminal justice system. That's a
mistake.

What shoud we do? First we ought to prevent more of this on the street. Thirty
years ago there were three policemen for every crime, now there are three crimes
for every policeman. We need 100,000 more police on the street. I have a plan
for that. Secondly, we ought to have treatment on demand. Thirdly, we ought to
have boot amp for first-time nonviolent offenders so they can get discipline and
treatment and education and get re-connected to the community before they are
severed and sent to prison where they can learn how to be first-class criminals.
There is a crime bill that lamentably was blocked from passage once again,
mostly by Republicans in the United States Senate which would have addressed
some of these problems. That crime bill is going to be one of my highest
priorities next Januray, if I become President.

MODERATOR: Next question is to you, Mr. Perot; you have two minutes to answer
it, and John will ask it.


Racial Division

Q. Mr. Perot, racial division continues to tear apart our great cities, the last
episode being this thing in Los Angeles. Why is this still happening in America,
and what would you do to end it?

PEROT: This is a relevant question here tonight. First thing I'd do is, during
political campaigns I would urge everybody to stop trying to split this country
into fragments and appeal to the differences between us, and then wonder why the
melting pot all broke into pieces after November 3. We are all inthis together.
We ought to love one another because united teams win and divided teams lose. If
we can't love one another. And if you can't get fair, just recognize we're all
stuckwith one another because nobody's going anywhere, right? Now, that ought to
get everybody back up to let's get along together and make it work.

Our diversity is a strenght; we've turned it into a weakness. Now again the
White House is a bully pulpit.I think whoever is in the White House should just
make it absolutely unconscionable and inexcussable, and if anybody's in the
middle of a speech at a you know, one of these conventions, I would expect the
candidate to go out and lift him off the stage if he starte preaching hate.
Because we don't have time for it. See, our differences are our strengths. We
have got to pull togehter. In athletics we know it. See, divided teams lose;
united teams win. We have got to unite and pull together, and there's nothing we
cant' do, but if we sit around blowing all this energy out the window, on a
racial strife and hatred, we are stuck with a sure loser because we have been a
melting pot; we're becoming more and more of a melting pot; let's make it a
strength, not a weakness.

MODERATOR: Governor Clinton, one minute.

CLINTON: I grew up in the segregated South, thankfully raised by a grandfather
with almost no formal education, but with a heart of gold who taught me early
that all people were equal in the eyes of God. I saw the winds of hatred divide
people and keep the people of my state poorer than they would have been,
spiritually and economically. And I've done everything I could in my public life
to overcome racial divisions. We don't have a person to waste in this country.
We are being murdered economically because we have too many dropouts, we have
too many low-birthweight babies, we have too many drug addicts as kids, we have
too much violence, we are too divided by race, by income, by region. And I have
devoted a major portion of this campaign to going across this country and
looking for opportunities to go to white groups and African-American groups and
Latino groups and Asian-American groups and say the same thing. If the American
people cannot be brought together, we can't turn this country around. If we can
come together, nothing, nothing, can stop us.

MODERATOR: Mr. President, one minute.

BUSH: Well, I think Governor Clinton is committed. I do think it's fair to note
- he can rebut it - that Arkansas is one of the few states that doesn't have any
civil rights legislation. I've tried to use the White House as the bully pulpit,
speaking out against discrimination. We've passed two very forward-looking civil
rights bills. It's not going to be all done by legislation but I do think that
you need to make an appeal every time you can to eliminate racial divisions and
discrimination. And I'll keep on doing that and pointing to some legislative
accomplishment to back it up.

I have to take 10 seconds here at the end - the red light isn't on yet - to say
to Ross Perot, please don't say to the D.E.A. agents on the street that we don't
have the will to fight drugs. Please - I have watched these people. The same for
our local law-enforcement people. We're backing them up at every way we possibly
can. But maybe you meant that some inthe country don't have the will to fight
it. But those that are out there on the front line, as you know - you've been a
strong backer of law enforcement - really I just want to clear that up, have the
will to fight it and, frankly, some of them are giving their lives.

MODERATOR: Time, Mr. President. All right, let's go now to another subject, the
subject of health. The first question, for two minutes is to President Bush, and
John will ask it.


Fighting AIDS

Q. Mr. President, yesterday tens of thousands of people paraded past the White
House to demonstrate their concern about the disease AIDS; a celebrated member
of your commission, Magic Johnson, quit, saying that there was too much
inaction. Where is this widespread feeling coming from that your Administration
is not doing enough about AIDS?

BUSH: It's coming from the political process. We have increased funding for
AIDS, we've doubled it, on research and on every other aspect of it. My request
for this year was $4.9 billion for AIDS, 10 times as much per AIDS victims as
per cancer victim. I think that we're showing the proper compassion and concern,
so I can't tell you where it's coming from but I am very much concerned about
AIDS and I believe that we've got the best researchers in the world out there at
N.I.H. working the problem. We're funding them. I wish there was more money, but
we're funding them far more than any time in the past, and we're going to keep
on doing that.

I don't know, I was a little disappointed in Magic because he came to me and I
said, "Now, if you see something we're not doing, get a hold of me, call me, let
me know." He went to one meeting and then we heard that he was stepping down. So
he's been replaced by Mary Fisher, who electrified the Republican convention by
talking about the compassion and the concern that we feel. It was a beautiful
moment and I think she'll do a first-class job on that commission.

So I think the appeal is yes, we care. And the other thing is part of AIDS -
it's one of the few diseases where behavior matters. And I once called on
somebody, "Well, change your behavior; if the behavior you're using is prone to
cause AIDS, change the behavior." Next thing I know, one of these Act-Up groups
is out saying, "Bush ought to change his behavior." You can't talk about it
rationally; the extremes are hurting the AIDS cause. To go into a Catholic mass,
in a beautiful cathedral in New York, under the cause of helping in AIDS and
start throwing condoms around in the mass, I'm sorry, I think it sets back the
cause. We cannot move to the extrteme. We've got to care, we've got to continue
everything we can at the Federal and the local level. Barbara, I think, is doing
a superb job in destroying the myth about AIDS. And all of us are in this fight
together, all of us care. Do not go to the extreme.

MODERATOR: One minute, Mr. Perot.

PEROT: First I think Mary Fisher was a great choice; we're lucky to have her
heading the Commission. Secondly, I think one thing - if we're set to do the
job, I would sit down with F.D.A., look exactly where we are. Then I would
really focus on let's get these things out. If you're going to die, you don't
have to go through this 10-year cycle the F.D.A. goes through on new drugs. I
believe the people with AIDS are more than willing to take that risk, and we
could be moving out to the human population a whole lot faster than we are on
some of these new drugs. So I would think we could expedite the problem there.
Let me go back a minute to racial decisiveness. All-time low in our country was
the Judge Thomas-Anita Hill hearings and those Senators ought to be hanging
their heads in shame for what they did ther. The second thing, how many times in
your life do you get to talk to a whole country? Let me just say this to all of
America. If you hate people, I don't want your vote. That's how strongly I feel
about it.

MODERATOR Governor Clinton, one minute.

CLINTON Over 150,000 Americans have died of AIDS, well over a million and a
quarter of Americans are H.I.V. positive. We need to put one person in charge of
the battle against AIDS, to cut across all the agencies that deal with it.

We need to accelerate the drug approval process. We need to fully fund the act
named for that wonderful boy Ryan White to make sure we're doing everything we
can on research and treatment.

And the President should lead a national effort to change behavior, to keep our
children alive in the schools. Responsible behavior to keep people alive. This
is a matter of life and death. I've worked in my state to reduce teen pregnancy
and illness among children, and I know it's tough.

The reason Magic Johnson resigned from the AIDS Commission is because the
statement you heard tonight from Mr. Bush is the longest and best statement he's
made about it in public.

I'm proud about - I'm proud of what we did at the Democratic convention, putting
two H.I.V. positive people on the platform, and I'm proud of the leadership that
I'm going to bring to this country in dealing with the AIDS crisis.

MODERATOR: New question for Mr. Perot. You have two minutes to answer and Ann
will ask it.

Working in Washington

Q. Mr. Perot, even if you've got what people say are the guts to take on changes
in the most popular and the most sacred of the entitlements, Medicare, people
say you haven't a prayer of actually getting anything passed in Washington.
Since a President isn't a Lone Ranger how in the world can you make some of
those unpopular changes?

PEROT: Two ways: No. 1, if I get there it will be a very unusual and historical
event because the people, not the special interests, put me there. I will have a
unique mandate. I have said again and again, and this really upsets the
establishment in Washington, that we're going to inform the people in detail on
the issues through an electronic town hall so that they really know what's going
on. They will want to do what's good for our county. Now all these fellows with
$1,000 suits and alligator shoes, running up and down the halls of Congress,
that make policy now - the lobbyists and what have you - they'll be over there
in the Smithsonian, you know, because we're going to get rid of them, and the
Congress will be listening to the people and the American people are willing to
have fair, shared sacrifice.

They're not as stupid as Washington thinks they are. The American people are
bright, intelligent, caring, loving people who want a great country for thei
children and grandchildren and they will make those sacrifices. So I welcome
that challenge and, just watch, because if the American people send me there,
we'll get it done. Now everybody will faint in Washington - they've never seen
anything happen in that town. This is a town where the White House says,
"Congress did it." Congress says, "The White House did it." And I'm sitting
there, too. Well, who else could be around, you know. Then when they get off by
themselves they said. "Nobody did it." And yet the cash register's empty and it
used to have our money - the taxpayer's money - int it, and we didn't get the
results. No, we'll get it done. We'll have to -

MODERATOR: Governor, one minute.

CLINTON: Ross, that's a great speech but it's not quite that simple. I mean,
look at the facts. Both parties in Washington, the President and the Congress,
have cut Medicare. The average senior citizen is spending a higher percentage of
income on health care today than they were in 1965 before Medicare came in. The
President's got another proposal that will require them to pay $400 a yar more
for the next five years, but if you don't have the guts to control costs by
changing the insurance system, in taking on the bureaucracies and the regulation
of health care in the private and public sector, you can't fix this problem.
Costs will continue to spiral and just remember this folks, a lot of folks on
Medicare are out there every day making the choice between food and medicine -
not poor enough for Medicare, Medicaid, not wealthy enough to buy their
medicine. I've met them, people like Mary Annie and Edward Davis in Nashua,
N.H., all over this country - they cannot even buy medicine, so let's be
careful. When we talk about cutting health care costs, let's start with the
insurance companies and the people that are making a killing instead of making
our people healthy.

MODERATOR: One Minute President Bush.

BUSH: Well, in the first place I'd like to clear up something, because every
four years the Democrats go around and say, hey, Republicans are going to cut
Social Security and Medicare. They started it again. I'm the President that
stood up and said don't mess with Social Security. And I'm not going to and we
haven't, and we are not going to go after the Social Security recipient. I have
one difference with Mr. Perot on that, because I don't think we need to touch
Social Security. What we do need to do, though, is control the growth of these
mandatory programs and Ross properly says, O.K., there's some pain in that. But
Governor Clinton refuses to touch that. Simply refuses. So what we've go to do
is control it - the growth, let it grow for inflation, let it grow for the
amount of new people added, population, and then hold the line. And I believe
that is the way you get the deficit down, not by the tax-and-spend program that
we hear every four years whether it's Mondale, Dukakis, whoever else it is. I
just don't believe we ought to do that, so hold the line on these - on Social
Security and put a cap on the growth of the mandatory program.

MODERATOR: New question. It is for Governor Clinton, two-minute answer. Sandy
will ask it.

Costs of Health Care

Q. Governor Clinton, Ann Compton has brought up Medicare. I remember in 1965
when Wilbur Mills of Arkansas, the chairman of Ways and Means, was pushing it
through the Congress. The charge against it was it socialized medicine. One, You
never -

CLINTON: Mr. Bush made that charge.

Q. Well, he served with him two years later in 1967 where I first met him. The
second point though is that it is now skyrocketing out of control. People want
it; we say it's going bonkers. Is not the Oregon plan applied to Medicaid
rationing the proper way to go, even though the Federal Government last August
ruled that violated the Americans With Disabilities Act of 1990?

CLINTON: I thought the Oregon plan should at least have been allowed to be tried
because at least the people in Oregon were trying to do something. But let me go
back to the main point, Sander. Mr. Bush is trying to run against Lyndon Johnson
and Jimmy Carter and everybody in the world but me in this race. I have proposed
a managed-competition plan for health care.

I will say again you cannot control health-care costs simply by cutting
Medicare. Look what's happened. The Federal Government has cut Medicare and
Medicaid in the last few years. States have cut Medicaid. We've done it in
Arkansas under budget pressures. But what happens? More and more people get on
the rolls as poverty increases. If you don't control the health-care costs tied
to inflation and population growth set by health-care providers, not by the
Government. We provide for managed competition, not Government models, in every
state. And we control private and public health-care costs. Now, just a few days
ago a bipartisan commission of Republicans and Democrats - more Republicans than
Democrats - said my plan will save the average family $1,200 a year more than
the Bush plan will by the year 2000; $2.2 trillion in the next 12 years; $400
billion a year by the end of this decade. I've got a plan to control health-care
costs. But you can't just do it by cutting Medicare. You have to take on the
insurance companies, the bureaucracies and you have to have cost controls, yes.
But keep in mind we are spending 30 percent more on health care than any country
in the world, any other county. And yet we have 35 million people uninsured. We
have no preventive and primary care. The Oregon plan is a good start, if the
Federal Government's going to continue to abandon its responsibilities. I say if
Germany can cover everybody and keep costs under inflation, if Hawaii can cover
98 percent of their people at lower-health care costs than the rest of us,
America can do it, too. I'm tired of being told we can't. I say we can. We can
do better and we must.

MODERATOR: President Bush, one minute.

BUSH: Well I don't have time in 30 seconds of whatever - minute to talk -

MODERATOR: One minute.

BUSH: About our health care reform plan. Oregon plan made some good sense. But
it's easy to dismiss the concerns of the disabled. As President, I have to be
sure that those waivers which we're approving all over the place are covered
under the law. Maybe we can work it out.

But the Americans for Disabilities Act - speaking about sound and sensible civil
rights legislation - was the most - foremost piece of legislation passed in
modern times. And so we do have something more than a technical problem.

Governor Clinton clicked off the things - you've got to take on insurance
companies and bureaucracies - he failed to take on somebody else; the
malpractice-suit people. Those that bring these lawsuits - against these
frivolous trial-lawyer lawsuits that are running to cost of medical care up by
25 to 50 billion.

And he refuses to put anything, controls, on these crazy lawsuits. If you want
to help somebody, don't run the costs up by making doctors have to have five or
six tests where one would do for fear of being sued. Or have somebody along the
highway not stop to pick up a guy and help him because he's afraid a trial
lawyer will come along and - and sue him.

We're suing each other too much and caring for each other too little.

MODERATOR: Mr. Perot, one minute.

PEROT: We've got the most expensive health-care system in the world. It ranks
behind 15 other nations in - when we come to life expectancy, and 22 other
nations when we come to infant mortality. So we don't have the best.

Pretty simple, folks. If you're paying more and you don't have the best, if all
else fails, go copy the people who have the best who spend less, right? Well, we
can do better than that.

Again, we've got plans lying all over the place in Washington - nobody every
implements them. Now I'm back to square one if you want to stop talking about it
and do it, than I'll be glad to go up there and we'll get it done.

But if you just want to keep the music going, just stay traditional this next
time around, and this - four years from now you'll have everybody blaming
everybody else for a bad health-care system.

Talk is cheap, words are plentiful, deeds are precious. Let's get on with it.

MODERATOR: That was, in fact, the final question and answer. We're now going to
move to closing statements. Each candidate will have up to two minutes. The
order, remember, was determined by a drawing and Mr. Perot you were first.


Closing Statements

PEROT: Well, it's been a privilege to be able to talk to the American people
tonight. I make no bones about it, I love this country; I love the principle
it's founded on; I love the people here. I don't like to see the country's
principles violated. I don't like to see the people in a deteriorating economy,
in a deteriorating country because our Government has lost touch with the
people. The people in Washington are good people. We just have a bad system.
We've got to change the system. It's time to do it because we have run up so
much debt that time is no longer our friend. We've got to put our house in
order.

When you go to bed tonight, look at your children. Think of their dreams, think
of your dreams as a child, and ask yourself: "Isn't it time to stop talking
about it? Isn't it time to stop creating images? Isn't it time to do it?" Aren't
you sick of being treated like an unprogrammed robot? Every four years they send
you all kinds of messages to tell you how to vote and then go back to business
as usual. They told you at the tax and budget summit that if you agreed to a tax
increase, we could balance the budget. They didn't tell you that that same year
they increased spending $1.83 for every dollar we increased taxes. That's
Washington in a nutshell right there. In the final analysis, I'm doing this fro
your children, when you look at them tonight.

There's another group that I feel very close to, and these are the men and women
who fought on the battlefield; the children, the families of the ones who died;
the people who left parts of their bodies over there.

I'd never ask you to do anything for me, but I owe you this and I'm doing it for
you. I can't tell you what it means to me at these rallies when I see you and
you come up and the look in your eyes, and I know how you feel and you know how
I feel.

And then I think of the older people who are retired. They grew up in the
Depression. They fought and won World War II. We ow you a debt we can never
repay and the greatest repayment I can ever give is to create the American dream
for your children and grandchildren. I'll give it everything I have if you want
me to do it.

MODERATOR: Governor Clinton, your closing statement.

CLINTON: I'd like to thank the people of St. Louis and Washington University,
the Presidential Debate Commission and all those who made this night possible,
and I'd like to thank those of you who are watching. Most of all, I'd like to
thank all of you who have touched me in some way over this last year, all the
thousands of you whom I've seen. I'd like to thank the computer executives and
the electronics executives in Silicon Valley, two-thirds of whom are Republicans
who said they wanted to sign on to change to create a new America.

I'd like to thank the hundreds of executives who came to Chicago - a third of
them Republicans - who said they wanted a change. I'd like to thank the people
who started with Mr. Perot who've come on to help our campaign.

I'd like to thank all the folks around the American that no one ever knows
about. The woman who was holding the AIDS baby she adopted in Cedar Rapids,
Iowa, who asked me to do something more for adoption. The woman who stopped
along the road in Wisconsin and wept because her husband had lost his job after
27 years.

All of the people who are having a tough time and the people who are winning but
who know how desperately we need to change.

This debate tonight has made crystal clear a challenge that is as old as
American, the choice between hope and fear, change or more of the same, the
courage to move into a new tomorrow or to listen to the crowd who says things
could be worse.

Mr. Bush has said some very compelling things tonight that don't quite square
with the record. He was President for three years before he proposed a
health-care plan that still hasn't been sent to Congress in total, three years
before an economic plan, and he still hasn't been sent to Congress in total,
three years before an economic plan, and he still didn't say tonight that that
tax bill he vetoed raised taxes only on the rich and gave the rest of you a
break. But he vetoed it, anyway.

I offer a new direction. Invest in American jobs, American education, control
health-case costs, bring this country together again. I want the future of this
country to be as bright and brilliant as its past, and it can be if we have the
courage to change.

MODERATOR: President Bush, you closing statement.

BUSH: Let me tell you a little what it's like to be President. In the Oval
Office, you can't be predict what kind of crisis is going to come up. You have
to make tough calls, you can't be on one hand with this way and one hand
another. You can't take different positions on these difficult issues. And than
you need a philosophical - I'd call it a philosophical underpinning. Mine for
foreign affairs is democracy and freedom and look at the dramatic changes around
the world. The cold war is over, Soviet Union is no more and we're working with
a democratic country. Poland, Hungary, Czechoslovakia, the Baltics are free.
Take a look at the Middle East. We had to stand up against a tyrant. The United
States came together as we haven't in many, many years and we kicked this man
out of Kuwait. And in the process, as a result of that will and that decision
and that toughness, we now have ancient enemies talking peace in the Middle
East. Nobodywould have dreamed it possible.

And I think the biggest dividend of making these tough calls is the fact that we
are less afraid of nuclear war. Every parent out there has much less worry that
their kids are going to be faced with nuclear holocaust. All this is good.

On the domestic side, what we must do is have change that empowers people, not
change for the sake of change, tax and spend. We don't need to do that anymore.
What we need to do is empower people. We need to invest and save. We need to do
better in education. We need to expand our exports and they're going very, very
well indeed and we need to strenghten the American family.

I hope as President that I've earned your trust. I've admitted it whan I make a
mistake, but then I go on and help try to solve the problems. I hope I've earned
your trust because a lot of being President is about trust and character. And I
ask for your support for four more years to finish this job.

Thank you very, very much.

LOAD-DATE: October 20, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Text

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              74 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 13, 1992, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Robert Trumbull Dies at 80; Reported on War for Times

BYLINE: By ERIC PACE

SECTION: Section B; Page 6; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1139 words


Robert Trumbull, who chronicled war, the birth of nations and sweeping economic
change in Asia and the Pacific region in more than three decades as a
correspondent for The New York Times, died on Sunday at a hospital in Honolulu.
He was 80 years old.

Mr. Trumbull had been suffering from cancer of the throat, his daughter Suzanne
said. He had been admitted to Queen's Medical Center in August for radiation
treatment.

Mr. Trumbull was in Karachi on the day Pakistan became independent in 1947 --
and in New Delhi that night to watch India become independent. He went on to
report on rioting in Punjab, war in Kashmir and the assassination of Mohandas K.
Gandhi.

The leaders he interviewed ranged from King Norodom Sihanouk of Cambodia to
Jawaharlal Nehru of India to Ho Chi Minh of Vietnam, whom he visited in Hanoi in
1946, shortly before the war in Indochina began.

Traveler in the Pacific

He roamed from Truk, in the western Pacific, to Swat, a remote fastness in
Pakistan. He saw World War II in the Pacific from beginning to end, witnessing
amphibious landings as Allied forces pressed in on Japan and often going ashore
with United States forces.

While pinned down by Japanese gunfire on Iwo Jima, Mr. Trumbull reported by
radio: "The mortar bursts marched methodically back and forth along the
shoreline. Our advance is a matter of running 10 yards [on] the slithery footing
of dry volcanic cinder, dropping into a hole, and then up and 10 yards to
another hole."

At the war's end, he accompanied the first Marine contingent to land in Japan
and was on the deck of the battleship Missouri for the formal Japanese surrender
on Sept. 1, 1945.

He was able to write amicably about Japan a decade later, in describing a
reconstructed old castle in ravaged Hiroshima. "To many Japanese, and visitors
from other lands, the stately structure of five tiled roofs one above another is
a symbol of a people's ability to rise over any catastrophe," he said.

Violent Partition of India

Mr. Trumbull witnessed bitterness and hatred after the partition of India.
Riding a train from Delhi to Lahore, in Pakistan, he saw a group of Sikhs
attack, intent on killing Muslims.

The train, he wrote in The Times, was "halted in a lonely desert stretch by a
band of screaming Sikhs with homemade spears and battle axes."

"They attempted to break into the compartment of this correspondent and two
others," he wrote, "and, failing, they entered another compartment where they
speared and left for dead a fellow Indian whose crime lay in belonging to
another faith."

In 1948, Mr. Trumbull arrived on the scene as Gandhi lay dying in New Delhi, a
few minutes after a Hindu fanatic had shot the revered leader.

"Lying on a wooden cot in his bedroom, Mr. Gandhi said no word before his death
except once to ask for water," he wrote. "Most of the time he was unconscious.
When he was pronounced dead by his physician, weeping members of his staff
covered the lower half of his face with a sheet in the Hindu fashion and the
women present sat on the floor and chanted verses from the sacred scriptures of
the Hindus.

"Those who could see these ceremonies through the windows knew then that Mr.
Gandhi had expired."

A Start in Honolulu

Mr. Trumbull began his career at The Times in 1941, just after the bombing of
Pearl Harbor, as a part-time correspondent in Honolulu. He became a full-time
correspondent in 1943.

At the war's end, he was named the Times correspondent for Southeast Asia. In
1947, he began seven years' service in India. Later he wrote fondly, "If you
stay in India long enough, a part of you never leaves."

Mr. Trumbull went on to serve as chief of the Tokyo bureau (1954-61), chief
correspondent for China and Southeast Asia, based in Hong Kong (1961-63), and
head of the Tokyo bureau again (1964-68).

He was chief of the South Pacific bureau, covering Australia, New Zealand and
the Pacific islands (1968-73); chief correspondent in Canada (1974-78), and,
beginning in 1978, Pacific correspondent, based in Honolulu.

He retired in 1979, when he was the senior Times foreign correspondent.

Over the years, Mr. Trumbull wrote several books about Asia and the Pacific.
"The Raft," a best-seller published in 1942, was the tale of three United States
Navy fliers who survived 34 days on a life raft in the Pacific. "The Scrutable
East" (1964) won an award from the Overseas Press Club of America as the year's
best book on foreign affairs.

His other books included "Sol Pluvius's Hawaiian Communiques" (1942),
"Silversides" (1945), "India Since Independence" (1954), "As I See India" (1956)
and "Nine Who Survived Hiroshima and Nagasaki" (1957).

"Paradise in Trust" (1959) analyzed the United States administration in
Micronesia, and "Tin Roofs and Palm Trees" (1977) surveyed the South Pacific.
"Tin Roofs," as one reviewer put it, left "few coconuts unturned all the way
from Micronesia to New Caledonia, and Papua New Guinea to French Polynesia."

A Diplomatic Journalist

Mr. Trumbull was a compact figure, 5 feet 6 1/2 inches and 110 pounds, and he
had a knack for remaining unrumpled and engaging.

The Pacific Islands Monthly magazine wrote admiringly in 1978 that his
dispatches "went far beyond the superficial observations of the usual run of
hit-and-miss, once-only journalists."

Contradictions fascinated him. In 1960, during demonstrations in Tokyo against
President Dwight D. Eisenhower, he noticed that a student who had kicked in the
fenders of the Cadillac carrying James Hagerty, the President's press secretary,
stepped on the foot of a Secret Service man.

"He was careful to smile regretfully and say, 'Excuse me,' " he wrote.

A Native of the Midcontinent

Robert Trumbull was born in Chicago on May 26, 1912, to Oliver Morton Trumbull
and Sydney Hamilton Trumbull, theatrical troupers who were performing there. He
went to school in Kittanning, Pa., 35 miles northeast of Pittsburgh, then
studied journalism at the University of Washington in Seattle from 1930 to 1933.

He joined The Honolulu Advertiser as a reporter in 1933, rising to city editor
two years later, and stayed until 1943, when he became a full-time correspondent
for The Times.

Three decades later, in nominal retirement in Honolulu, he sallied forth on
other assignments with equanimity.

When Benigno S. Aquino Jr., the leader of the Philippines opposition, was
assassinated in 1983, The Times asked Mr. Trumbull to rush to Manila until a
correspondent could be assigned. He stayed for weeks, then moved on to Malaysia,
Brunei, Burma and Indonesia for eight months.

Mr. Trumbull was married to Jean Musson in 1934; she died in 1991.

He is survived by three daughters, Suzanne Trumbull of Tokyo, and Joan Trumbull
and Stephanie Norris, both of Sydney, Australia.


NAME: Robert Trumbull

LOAD-DATE: October 13, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Robert Trumbull speaking with Mohandas K. Gandhi and one of
Gandhi's grandnieces while in New Delhi in 1947. (The New York Times); Robert
Trumbull in 1978.

TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              75 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 13, 1992, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

The Biologist Who Saw a Pattern

BYLINE: By GINA KOLATA

SECTION: Section C; Page 9; Column 4; Science Desk

LENGTH: 520 words

DATELINE: CHICAGO


DR. JAMES SHAPIRO drags a well-worn film projector in front of his laboratory
refrigerator. He wants to show an astonishing film of myxobacteria. The
refrigerator door is his screen.

Like most scientists, Dr. Shapiro works with sometimes makeshift equipment in a
laboratory furnished largely in tones of gray. But, for him, the visual stimulus
comes from watching and pondering the striking patterns that bacteria make as
they grow on jelly-like agar in petri dishes.

Dr. Shapiro, frankly, is mesmerized. He tells of the first time he saw the way
bacteria swarmed and rearranged themselves when he forced them to push around a
glass fiber. "I first saw that behavior at 11 o'clock one night," he said. "I
was here until 2 in the morning watching it."

An Unconventional Career

It is an unconventional pastime for a man who has had an unconventional career.
Dr. Shapiro, who is 49 years old, studied English as an undergraduate at Harvard
University, but decided that he wanted to go to medical school. "I found English
was very arbitrary," he explained. "A lot of it was opinion, not like science
where you could actually demonstrate things and test your ideas."

He ended up getting a Ph.D., then made an immediate mark on science with his
discoveries and his politics.

In 1969, Dr. Shapiro and Dr. Jonathan Beckwith of Harvard Medical School
succeeded for the first time in isolating a gene, in this case from bacteria. It
was a time of turbulence, especially in Boston, where sentiments against the
Vietnam War ran high.

Dr. Shapiro, who said he "got caught up in the antiwar movement," left Harvard
and went to Havana, where he taught genetics for two years. It is a period that
he declines to discuss. "It was one of those things you do with youthful
abandon," he said. But in retrospect, he said, he would not do it again.

Upon returning from Cuba, Dr. Shapiro took a position as a postdoctoral fellow
with Dr. Harlyn Halvorson of Brandeis University. Dr. Halvorson, he said, "was
one of the few who had the courage at that time to take someone who had come
back from Cuba." From there, he went to Chicago, where he has remained.

Dr. Shapiro says he learned from the biologist Dr. Barbara McClintock to look
with naive eyes upon the natural world. Dr. McClintock, who won numerous awards
and a Nobel Prize for her work on the genetics of corn, discovered astonishing
truths about the nature of genetic interactions by looking at patterns of
kernels of corn.

"One of the things I learned from Barbara is that it is the job of the scientist
to identify the mysteries, to see the problems of science where there are no
solutions," he explained.

And part of that search for mystery goes beyond the story of bacteria and their
interactions, Dr. Shapiro said.

"Why does the universe have the structure it does?" he asked. "Why do crystals?"
With studies of pattern formation by bacteria, he added, "we are searching for
new principles." And when the microbiologists link up with physicists and
mathematicians to understand pattern formation, he said, "we will see a totally
new science."

NAME: James Shapiro

LOAD-DATE: October 13, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Dr. James Shapiro is often mesmerized by bacteria in his Chicago
lab. (Steve Kagan for The New York Times)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              76 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 13, 1992, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

On My Mind;
Mr. Bush Steps Aside

BYLINE: BY A. M. ROSENTHAL

SECTION: Section A; Page 23; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 712 words


Months ago, even before the embarrassing Republican Convention, a number of
important Republican politicians, thinkers and money-raisers began saying that
President Bush should step aside and let some other Republican get a crack at
the White House -- somebody who could win.

Usually they said it privately. But occasionally the idea was allowed to surface
-- as when William Bennett wondered out loud whether Mr. Bush really wanted the
job. You can't get much more blunt with a first-term President of your own party
without handing him his hat on TV.

On Sunday night the President did step aside -- not from the race, but from the
full responsibility of the Presidency. He said that if he won the election he
would turn to another man, James Baker, and say here, you handle the economy for
me and the country.

That statement, during the first debate, was the most startling political
judgment made by a President about himself since Lyndon Johnson announced that
he would not run for another term.

Politically, the Vietnam War and the way Johnson handled it had knocked him out
and he knew it. Politically, the economy and the way Mr. Bush has handled it has
just about knocked him out. He knows it.

But having missed his chance to step aside with dignity, he is grabbing at one
last gimmick -- to turn the economy over to Mr. Baker as "coordinator" of the
whole mess.

Perhaps if he had done it with candor he might have gained more respect -- if
not votes. Instead of saying look, I did the best I could but I need help to get
this thing off my back, he tried to be casual about it.

Asked specifically how he would get more people into good jobs immediately, he
said he had already announced a plan about that, news that should send the
unemployed singing into the streets.

Then, oh-by-the-way, he sashayed into his great idea: to make Mr. Baker the
"coordinator of all the domestic side of the house." That means "all the
economic side, all the training side, and bring this program together."

That's our house the man is talking about -- America. And here all along, the
silly old American people were thinking that the biggest job they were paying a
President to do was to deal with our house.

Mr. Baker never was elected to a blessed thing before Mr. Bush offered to share
the Presidency with him. The plain import for voters is if you don't trust me,
how about Jim and me?

Even that crafty Perot is back asking for election as President, not anointment.

If Mr. Baker is such a genius at economy handling, we did not catch much of a
glimpse of it all those years he was Secretary of the Treasury and White House
chief of staff.

In those jobs, did he know anything at all that might have led him to smell the
savings and loan scandal that was about to befoul the country? Not one thing?
Did he ever alert Presidents Reagan or Bush? Or anybody?

"Coordinate"? Mr. Baker would be the boss of the Secretary of the Treasury, the
budget director, the White House economists. Mr. Bush cleared the way by
informing the eminences holding those jobs that they are gone.

Joint President Baker would decide on their successors. But he could be expected
to consult Mr. Bush, who would continue to be known simply as President.

And all dealing with Congress, all cabinet budgets, all decisions on military or
foreign expenditure, would have to be approved by Acting President Baker.
Without those powers, coordination is clerical work. Mr. Baker is nobody's
clerk.

Here too Co-President Baker would likely consult Mr. Bush. Constitutionally, Mr.
Bush could override the Partner President. Of course, if he did that he would be
admitting that the idea of Economic President Baker is an act of desperation by
a man who wants to hold onto a job he cannot handle.

All this must be quite a blow to the current official Vice President. How come
Mr. Quayle was not handed this plainly intended boost to the 1996 Presidential
nomination?

Bit of an insult, that. And one thing we can be sure of, Deputy President Baker
would do his best to coordinate the hell out of Mr. Quayle.

So now we know. If we pull down the Republican lever, we will be voting not for
Bush-Quayle but Bush-Baker, to be polite.

Now there's an October surprise for you.

LOAD-DATE: October 13, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              77 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 13, 1992, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Clinton's Vietnam Era Compatriots at Oxford

SECTION: Section A; Page 22; Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 533 words


To the Editor:

As a Vietnam veteran I have followed the debate over the war records of
Presidential and Vice-Presidential candidates with interest. News accounts tell
us that Gov. Bill Clinton's uncle may have interceded with his draft board to
allow him to accept a Rhodes scholarship for graduate study at Oxford
University. The Bush campaign implies that if Mr. Clinton were a true patriot he
would have forgone the Rhodes scholarship and volunteered for Vietnam.

While that line may help President Bush deflect concerns about the economy, it
flies in the face of what senior military officials encouraged their own
military school graduates to do throughout the Vietnam War years.

I was a cadet at the Air Force Academy between 1963 and 1967, and my remembrance
is that every year a number of our top graduates competed for Rhodes
scholarships. These are among the most highly regarded academic prizes for
college graduates and are seen to reflect favorably on both those chosen and the
schools they attended. All the service academies put forward their top graduates
for consideration. The year I graduated, our top graduate (straight A's and top
military ranking) received a Rhodes scholarship. He was a man characterized by
high intelligence, hard work and strong character, all factors in his selection.

While many of my classmates and I went on to pilot training, followed by a tour
in Vietnam, the academy's top graduate that year went to Oxford, England,
avoiding Vietnam for a time. He went with the encouragement of his superior
officers at the academy and the blessings of the Pentagon. It was not only an
honorable choice, but was also seen as in the best interests of the country.

Through the Vietnam War years, some of the most distinguished service academy
graduates avoided Vietnam by going to Oxford. Others, also top graduates,
avoided Vietnam by pursuing graduate education through other programs -- medical
school, economic or foreign policy studies, aeronautical engineering. Graduate
study is seen as an important asset by the Pentagon, and officers are encouraged
to further their education during their military careers.

So Mr. Clinton was among an elite group during his stay at Oxford, a group that
included at least a few highly distinguished military academy graduates. All, by
the Bush campaign's implication, were avoiding service in Vietnam and had
received special dispensation to be there.

Would George Bush have chosen Vietnam over Oxford had he been of a different
generation and had the kind of academic and character record that could have
secured a Rhodes scholarship? We can only look to the choices made by other
younger men around Mr. Bush for clues about what he might have done. It is my
understanding that Vice President Quayle, Secretary of Defense Dick Cheney and
Mr. Bush's own sons avoided Vietnam service in the Vietnam era.

George Bush can be proud of his own military service during World War II. But he
and his campaign have no business impugning the legitimate and honorable choices
made by Bill Clinton and distinguished service academy graduates during the
Vietnam War era.

JOHN HARKEY
Nashville, Sept. 22, 1992

LOAD-DATE: October 13, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              78 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 13, 1992, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Clinton's Vietnam Era Compatriots at Oxford;
Divisive and Peripheral

SECTION: Section A; Page 22; Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 539 words


To the Editor:

Following my endorsement of Gov. Bill Clinton for President, I have heard from a
lot of people, both supportive and otherwise. I even heard from a Republican
questioning if it was appropriate for retired military officers to be involved
in politics. I replied that he obviously hadn't heard about Dwight Eisenhower or
Alexander Haig.

The questions center mostly on my reasons for backing the Governor.

My decision marks the first time in my life that I endorsed a political
candidate. I did it after considerable soul-searching and strictly as a private
citizen. I believe the stakes in this election are considerable, both for the
security of this nation and for international stability. This campaign is about
change -- how we shake off the inertia of cold-war habits and meet the
challenges of a vastly different world. I believe Governor Clinton is the most
qualified man to set us on a successful course.

I was honored to serve both Presidents Reagan and Bush as chairman of the Joint
Chiefs of Staff. I was particularly indebted to President Bush for his kindness
in asking me to extend my tenure as chairman. My endorsement of Governor Clinton
is in no way meant to denigrate the substantial accomplishments of these two
Presidents in national security affairs. America owes a great debt of gratitude
to the steadfastness of purpose of the Reagan Administration in dealing with the
Soviets. I am convinced that it was a major factor in the demise of the Soviet
Union.

Similarly, the Bush Administration deserves great credit for organizing the
allied coalition against Iraq, which eventually forced Saddam Hussein's troops
out of Kuwait.

But America needs new leadership, which will imaginatively and boldly address
the problems facing our citizens and threatening our prosperity. There is no
doubt in my mind that our national security depends, first, on our domestic
strength -- a strong economy, a stable industrial base, social unity and
educational excellence. The Administration has been slow to recognize this and
is having difficulty adjusting to the new realities. Governor Clinton's
approaches to these issues make sense to me.

Inordinate attention has been paid in this campaign to Governor Clinton's lack
of military service. I served in uniform for 47 years, and I treasure my
association with the young men and women who served their country in the armed
services. They inspired me every day.

As a Vietnam veteran, I was particularly proud of my comrades in that conflict.
But I know many others who didn't serve in uniform, including key national
security figures in the Bush Administration. That fact never affected my ability
to work with them or my high regard for them.

The important thing is that divisive and peripheral issues not be allowed to
detract attention from the fundamental concerns that beset our citizens today or
threaten the nation's unity. We are all Americans, and I strongly object to any
political campaign based on a policy of exclusion.

As an American citizen who served his country for more than four decades, I
believe that I have earned the right to express my opinion on this election.

WILLIAM J. CROWE JR.
Washington, Sept. 29, 1992

LOAD-DATE: October 13, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing.

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              79 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 13, 1992, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Clinton's Vietnam Era Compatriots at Oxford;
What of Bush's Sons?

SECTION: Section A; Page 22; Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 228 words


To the Editor:

It is time President Bush stops calling Gov. Bill Clinton a "draft dodger" and
explains the advice he gave his own sons concerning military service during the
Vietnam War.

Like Dan Quayle, George W. Bush (born 1946) enlisted in the Texas Air National
Guard, rather than the national military. Jeb Bush (born 1953) drew No. 26 in
the 1972 lottery but, according to a White House spokeswoman who answered my
inquiry this week, was "never drafted" because he was attending the University
of Texas. Neil Bush (born 1955) and Marvin Bush (born 1956) came of age, she
said, "after the draft ended and were not eligible."

The youngest three Bush sons are exactly the ages of myself and my older
brothers, and our father is a retired Marine Reserve officer and deeply
patriotic. During my teen-age years I was very concerned about approaching
draftable age, and like the Bush sons, my brothers and I did not enlist in the
military.

However, unlike the Bush family, my parents were ardent and vocal opponents of
the Vietnam War, at great risk to their own careers and standing in their
community. The concern they had for the welfare of their sons was matched by
their political activity to end the war. While Representative Bush supported the
war, his own sons did not enlist in the military.

JOHN BURROWS
Rockland, Mass., Sept. 26, 1992

LOAD-DATE: October 13, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              80 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 14, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN;
New Forum for Bush On Character Issue

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 130 words


President Bush used a moment of political theater on a breakfast program to
renew questions about Bill Clinton's antiwar activities during the Vietnam era
and whether those efforts reflected on the Governor's ability to serve as
President.

The President surprised morning audiences by suddenly appearing at a White House
interview that Katie Couric of the NBC News program "Today" was conducting with
Barbara Bush. And then he stayed and stayed, answering one question after
another, and vigorously pressing his anti-Clinton themes, at far greater length
than usual.

The Clinton campaign responded to the renewed attack by turning to Mr. Bush's
own past, saying he should issue transcripts of testimony that he gave about the
Iran-contra affair.

Article, page A22.

LOAD-DATE: October 14, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              81 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 14, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Debate;
Quayle and Gore Exchange Sharp Attacks in Debate

BYLINE: By ROBIN TONER

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 1909 words


In a debate marked by intensely personal exchanges, Senator Al Gore and Vice
President Dan Quayle delivered some of the campaign's strongest blasts last
night, each asserting that the opposing Presidential candidate did not deserve
to lead the nation for the next four years.

Mr. Quayle assailed Gov. Bill Clinton, the Democratic Presidential candidate, as
a man who "has trouble telling the truth" and who had habitually waffled on the
issues of the day.

Mr. Gore accused the Bush Administration of presiding over a brutal recession,
blind to the suffering that it caused and unwilling to abandon the "trickle
down" economic policies of the past 12 years.

James B. Stockdale, the retired vice admiral and political novice who is running
with the independent candidate Ross Perot, at times seemed stunned by the
sharpness of the exchange and struggled to keep pace. But he tried to reach for
Mr. Perot's apolitical appeal, describing the debate as emblematic of the
"gridlock" in Washington. [Excerpts, pages A20-A21.]

Remarkable Aggression

From the beginning, the debate at the Georgia Institute of Technology in Atlanta
was remarkably aggressive, occasionally raucous and far more free-wheeling than
the Sunday night confrontation among the Presidential contenders. However, the
format of last night's encounter allowed the looser, one-on-one exchanges
between the candidates, while the debate on Sunday night did not.

The contest between Mr. Gore and Mr. Quayle looked like a battle between two
seasoned professionals. And the absence of major, readily apparent gaffes by
either probably assured that neither Mr. Quayle nor Mr. Gore will be considered
a drag on the ticket. In contrast, Mr. Stockdale's tentative performance will
probably not be seen as a plus for Mr. Perot, who was widely considered to have
gained from Sunday night's debate.

Mr. Quayle repeatedly cast Mr. Clinton as a man who lacked the character and
trustworthiness to be President, reiterating the Republican assertion that Mr.
Clinton had given ever-changing accounts of how he avoided military service in
the Vietnam War. More than once in the 90-minute confrontation, Mr. Quayle
accused Mr. Gore of "pulling a Clinton" by straddling one issue or another.

Probing a Vulnerability

Mr. Quayle used his closing remarks to probe that vulnerability, noting Mr. Gore
had never directly responded to the attacks on Mr. Clinton's fitness to be
President. Indeed, Mr. Gore did not mount a direct defense of Mr. Clinton's
credibility, instead using his time to argue that the Democratic nominee had
superior programs and cared more deeply for the welfare of the country.

In contrast, Mr. Gore asserted, a second Bush Administration would mean another
four years of failed Republican economic policies. He asserted that the Bush
Administration had responded to the recession like "a deer caught in the
headlights." And Mr. Gore scoffed at Administration officials for promising that
in a second Administration Mr. Bush would "target America."

Overshadowed Candidate

Mr. Stockdale, who entered the debate as a political unknown, acknowledged as
much in his opening remarks.  "Who am I?" he began. "Why am I here?" But Mr.
Stockdale often slipped into the background, overshadowed as his rivals attacked
each other and, more often, the tops of their tickets. At times Hal Bruno, the
political director of ABC News who moderated last night's debate, had to
encourage Mr. Stockdale to join in the fray.

The digs were sometimes subtle. Mr. Gore, in an apparent attempt to rattle Mr.
Quayle, reminded the national television audience of Mr. Quayle's lackluster
performance in the 1988 debate against Senator Lloyd Bentsen, when Mr. Quayle
compared himself to John F. Kennedy and Mr. Bentsen shot back, "You're no Jack
Kennedy."

Mr. Gore said to Mr. Quayle, "I'll make you a deal this evening; if you don't
try to compare George Bush to Harry Truman, I won't compare you to Jack
Kennedy."

But Mr. Quayle, who was widely seen as trying to redeem himself from that debate
and position himself for 1996, stayed on the offensive. And both men regularly
interrupted each other with putdowns and gibes. At one point, Mr. Quayle tried
to cut off Mr. Gore by declaring: "Take a breath, Al. Inhale."

Some of the sharpest policy exchanges came, not surprisingly, on the economy,
taxes, and the environment.  Mr. Quayle continued the Republican effort to cast
the Democratic ticket as one that will inevitably mean higher taxes: "Bill
Clinton's economic plan and his agenda will make things much, much worse," he
said. "He will raise your taxes, he will increase spending, he will make
Government bigger, jobs will be lost."

And to Mr. Quayle's delight, Mr. Stockdale strongly criticized Mr. Gore's
environmental proposals, saying that he wondered how they could be financed in
the current economic climate.

Finding Common Ground

Afterward, as the candidates shook hands, signed autographs and accepted
congratulations from their families, Mr. Gore and Mr. Quayle found some common
ground: each declared the debate an unusually substantive exchange of views on
important issue.

Each man also declared that he had kept the other pinned to the ropes.

Bush campaign officials, who were confronted with polls after Sunday night's
debate indicating the President still lagged well behind Mr. Clinton, said they
were pleased with Mr. Quayle's performance. The Vice President and his allies
clearly believed he had made strides toward new political respectability.

"I think the Vice President did a lot of damage to Bill Clinton tonight,
particularly in the way he distinguished our economic plan from theirs," said
Robert M. Teeter, campaign chairman for Mr. Bush.

George Stephanopoulos, deputy manager of the Clinton campaign, dismissed the
effectiveness of Mr. Quayle's attacks on the Democratic nominee's
trustworthiness. "I think people consider the messenger when they watch TV, and
I don't think they take much of what Dan Quayle says seriously," he said.

The themes of the campaigners were apparent from the start. Mr. Quayle warned
that "at some time during the next four years there will be a crisis."
Highlighting the question that Bush strategists hope will sway voters their way
in these final days, Mr. Quayle said, "You need to have a President you can
trust: can you really trust Bill Clinton?"

Mr. Gore, for his part, underscored the need for change, for an administration
that focused on domestic needs in health, education and employment.

And Mr. Stockdale seemed to be trying to introduce himself to the American
people, focusing on his personal saga -- 37 years in the Navy, 10 years in
Vietnam, 7 of them as a prisoner of war. "The centerpiece of my life is Vietnam,
" he said.

His years of imprisonment by the North Vietnamese, he said, were the "beginning
of wisdom," an experience that taught him "how American governments can be
courageous and how they can be callow."

Still, despite his occasional moments of rough eloquence, Mr. Stockdale was
clearly less at ease than his rivals.

Economic Proposals

The economy, not surprisingly, dominated much of this debate, with the Bush
record on employment under consistent attack. Mr. Gore said that Governor
Clinton's "top priority is putting Americans back to work" through investing in
infrastructure, training and tax incentives for creating jobs.

In contrast, Mr. Gore asserted, the Bush Administration was "using our tax
dollars to subsidize the recruitment of U.S. companies to move overseas and
throw Americans out of work."

Mr. Quayle dismissed the contention, countering that the Democrats would laden
American workers with $150 billion in new taxes. Mr. Gore shot back by saying,
"You can say it all you want but it doesn't make it true."

Military and the Cold War

Turning to military spending, Mr. Gore said that since the end of the cold war,
"the definition of a strong national defense has changed." He called for
reducing troop deployments in Europe and applying military spending to civil
programs.

Mr. Quayle retorted, "We won the cold war because we invested in national
security," and said cuts in military spending would cost jobs in California and
elsewhere. Like Mr. Bush, he tried to cast the collapse of communism as a
Republican triumph, which Mr. Gore quickly rebutted.

Mr. Gore said the "we" who won the cold war "was the people of the United States
of America. This wasn't a partisan effort that started a few weeks after you
took office."

On the environment, both Mr. Quayle and Mr. Stockdale criticized Mr. Gore's
advocacy of a range of new environmental policies, articulated in his book,
"Earth in the Balance." Mr. Quayle contended that the Democrats were blind to
their proposals' impact on jobs, in the automobile, coal and timber industries.

Mr. Stockdale joined in that attack, saying: "I read Mr. Gore's book, and I
don't see how he could possibly pay for his proposals. I love this planet, but I
don't want it to be the private property of fanatics" who would press
environmental regulation too hard.

Mr. Gore defended strong protection of the environment as a potential spur for
the economy, creating new jobs and new technologies. "We cannot stick our heads
in the sand and pretend that we do not face a global environmental crisis," he
said.

Stances on Abortion

Mr. Gore tried hard to sharpen the differences between the parties on the issue
of abortion. "Bill Clinton and I support the right of a woman to choose," he
said, and repeatedly challenged the Vice President to make a similar statement.

Mr. Quayle, by contrast, said he was "pro-life," although he did not call
attention to the Republican Party platform, which calls for a constitutional ban
on abortion.

For his part, Mr. Stockdale stated flatly, "I believe a woman owns her own body
and what she does with it is her own business, period."

In a subsequent exchange, Mr. Gore accused the Vice President of trying to hide
his support for a constitutional ban on abortion. "You want to waffle around,"
he said.

Mr. Quayle replied by contending that Mr. Gore had changed his position on
Government financing for abortion. "Talk about waffling around!" he said.

A question about how each ticket would control health-care costs produced a
testy exchange.

Mr. Gore criticized the Bush Administration for failing to introduce a health
plan in Congress. Mr. Quayle replied that Mr. Clinton had opposed limiting
malpractice suits, asserting the Democrat was obligated to the trial lawyers in
the country. Without such limits, the Vice President contended, controlling
medical costs is difficult.

Questions on Urban Aid



On aid to the cities, Mr. Quayle said that the Administration endorsed the
establishment of enterprise zones and that Democrats in Congress were reluctant
to approve of such action. In fact, the Democratic-controlled Congress passed a
$27 billion tax package that included such zones, but the White House has said
Mr. Bush will veto the measure because it includes what he calls unacceptable
tax increases.

Mr. Quayle also said that the "breakdown of the American family" was behind
urban decay.

Reminding the audience once again of the Administration's veto of family leave
legislation, Mr. Gore said, "If you don't support parents and you don't support
children, how can you say you support families?" he asked.

LOAD-DATE: October 14, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Vice President Dan Quayle and Senator Al Gore during the debate
last night in Atlanta (CNN) (pg. A1); Vice President Dan Quayle, left, making a
point with Senator Al Gore, right, as James B. Stockdale listened during the
Vice-Presidential debate last night in Atlanta. (Jim Estrin/The New York Times)
(pg. A18)

Chart: "Debates on the Air" -- Live coverage of the 90-minute debates will be
provicded on television by ABC, CBS, NBC, Fox, C-Span, CNN and PBS, and in the
New York City area by radio stations WCBS-AM, WINS and WNYC. Times are Eastern.


PRESIDENTIAL: Thursday, Oct. 15

The debate will begin at 7 P.M. if there is a seventh game in the American
League playoffs.


PRESIDENTIAL: Monday, Oct. 19

East Lansing, Mich., 7 P.M. (pg. A18)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              82 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 14, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1051 words



International     A3-15

SHUNNING 'GREATER SERBIA'

The euphoria many Serbs felt when a swath of territory was carved out in their
name in Croatia has evaporated. As lawlessness and hardships deepen, thousands
of Serbs are leaving Serbian-controlled Croatia.  A1

COMBAT PLANES TO U.N. FIELDS

Responding to a United Nations ban on combat flights over Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Bosnian Serbs agreed to send their military jets to airfields under
U.N. supervision.  A10

Washington is said to oppose a plan to shelter Bosnian refugees.  A10

QUAKE TOLL RISES IN CAIRO

Salvage workers shouted orders and families camped in cars as Cairo began to dig
its way out from an earthquake. Egyptian officials estimated that 450 people had
been killed and 4,000 hurt.  A14

Half the 450 who died seem to have been panicked children.  A14

INDIA'S HARRIED RIGHTS GROUP

As reports of abuses by India's army and police spill forth, the Government is
stepping up pressure on the South Asia Human Rights Documentation Center.
Recently it told the group it wanted to review all its financial records.  A3

U.N. AGAIN WARNS KHMER ROUGE

The United Nations Security Council threatened to press ahead with elections in
Cambodia without the Khmer Rouge unless their fighters cooperate with a peace
plan they have accepted.  A6

ROMANIAN TO BRAKE REFORM

Ion Iliescu, the former Communist who was re-elected President of Romania,
pledged to keep the country's economic reform on course -- but at a reduced
pace.  A6

U.N. SEEKS TO CALM ANGOLA

Alarmed by hints that Angola's main opposition group may renew the civil war, a
United Nations delegation warned that the world would condemn any fighting.  A8

POLITICS FOLLOWS THE POPE

Care has been taken to keep the Pope from wading into the quagmire surrounding
the celebration of Columbus's landing. But on almost every step of his visit to
the Dominican Republic, politics follows him.  A15

ITALIANS PROTEST AUSTERITY PLAN

Millions of workers marched in cities throughout Italy to protest a Government
austerity plan that includes spending cuts, tax increases and abolition of wage
indexing.  A5

Rome Journal: Itinerants with Eastern European accents.  A4

Court rules Gorbachev can leave Russia for Brandt's funeral.  A7
Kuwait's Emir defiantly reappoints his heir as Prime Minister.  A12

National     A16-23

THE UNDERSTUDIES CLASH

Vice President Quayle, Senator Gore and James Stockdale engaged in their only
debate, which frequently turned fiery.  A1

QUAYLE ON THE OFFENSIVE

News analysis: Vice President Quayle stated the Republican case at the debate
more succinctly than President Bush did on Sunday.  A1

Excerpts from the debate.  A20-21

The scene around the debate at Georgia Tech.  A19

Four crucial issues divided the candidates.  A19

BUSH RENEWS HIS ATTACK

Making an unscheduled appearance on the "Today" program, the President again
assailed Bill Clinton's antiwar activities during the Vietnam era.  A22

Perot is preparing a new TV advertising blitz.  A22

The phantom campaign of a Kentucky Congressman.  A22

INQUIRY ON F.B.I. CHIEF GROWS

The Justice Department's ethics review of the F.B.I. Director's travel practices
has escalated into a preliminary criminal inquiry, Administration officials
said. The timing of that inquiry led the Senate Intelligence chairman to wonder
if "an attempt is being made to pressure him not to conduct an independent
investigation" into whether the Justice Department or the C.I.A. misled a
Federal judge about how much the Government knew of a multibillion-dollar fraud
involving Iraq.  A1

NO SPECIAL INSLAW PROSECUTOR

The Attorney General turned down the House Judiciary Committee's request that he
appoint an independent prosecutor to investigate whether Justice Department
officials stole a computer company's software program to benefit their friends.
A23

SCIENCE AND JUSTICE

Opening the door to a far-reaching debate over the role of science in the
courtroom, the Supreme Court agreed to decide how widely accepted a scientific
process or theory must be for it to be admissible as evidence in Federal trials.
A16

The Court declined to take up the flag-desecration issue again.  A16

The recipient of a pig's liver died at a Los Angeles hospital.  A16
Denied full payment, a funeral home dumped a corpse's body.A16
A pregnant homecoming candidate is denied a crown.  A17

Education Page   B9
Why do Hispanic students drop out at a higher rate than other groups?
In Pennsylvania, state budget cuts hurt 11 health-related colleges.
Campus Journal: Students learn they are not shielded from AIDS.

Metro Digest     B1

CANDIDATES STILL SLINGING

Robert Abrams said that when he called Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato a "fascist,"
he had really meant to call him a "right-wing extremist." In either case, he did
not back down. He responded as if he might have found a way, after nearly a
month in which his opponent controlled the campaign with attacks, to make Mr.
D'Amato's tactics an issue.  A1

LIBERTY VS. CURING TB

As tuberculosis returns to a prominence unseen in the United States for decades,
public health officials, politicians, ethicists and advocates for the poor find
themselves revisiting a problem some find as disturbing as the medical facts of
the disease itself: protecting healthy members of society from those who are
not.  A1

Business Digest   D1

Living Section   C1-12
Mapping out ethnic foods, freeway by freeway.  C1
At work with Donny Deutsch: Portrait of adman on a hot streak.  C1
U.S. approves chicken treatment to cut salmonella.  C1

Health Page   C14

Arts/Entertainment C17-24

Sports   B11-17
Baseball: Pirates force a seventh game.  B11
Football: Giants rely on rookies.  B11
Hockey: Lindros faces off in Quebec.  B11

Obituaries   B10

Editorials/Op-Ed  A24-25
Editorials
A war of slogans.
No excuse for Mr. Barr's outrage.
The woolly bear weathermen.
Topics: Mr. Abrams gets surly.
Letters
Anna Quindlen: Oh say, can you say?
Henry M. Rowan: Left holding the bag in Iraq.
Robert S. McNamara: One minute to doomsday.

LOAD-DATE: October 14, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              83 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 14, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN;
Excerpts From the Debate Among Quayle, Gore and Stockdale

SECTION: Section A; Page 20; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 7582 words


Following are excerpts from the Vice-Presidential debate in Atlanta last night
between Vice President Dan Quayle, Senator Al Gore and James B. Stockdale, as
transcribed by The New York Times:



Opening Statements

GORE Good evening, it's great to be here in Atlanta for this debate, where
America will be show-cased to the world when the 1996 Olympics are put on right
here. It's appropriate because in a real sense our discussion this evening will
be about what kind of nation we want to be four years from now. It's also a
pleasure to be with my two opponents this evening -- Admiral Stockdale, may I
say it's a special honor to share this stage with you; those of us who served in
Vietnam looked at you as a national hero even before you were awarded the
Congressional Medal of Honor. And Mr. Vice President, Dan, if I may, it was 16
years ago that you and I went to the Congress on the very first day together.
I'll make you a deal this evening: If you don't try to compare George Bush to
Harry Truman I won't compare you to Jack Kennedy. Harry Truman ----

QUAYLE You remember the last time someone compared himself to Jack Kennedy? Do
you remember what they said?

GORE Harry Truman, it's worth remembering, assumed the Presidency when Franklin
Roosevelt died here in Georgia. Only one of many occasions when fate thrust a
Vice President into the Oval Office in a time of crisis. It's something to think
about during the debate this evening. But our real discussion is going to be
about change. Bill Clinton and I stand for change because we don't believe our
nation can stand four more years of what we've had under George Bush and Dan
Quayle. When the recession came they were like a deer caught in the headlights
-- paralyzed into inaction, blinded to the suffering and pain of bankruptcies
and people who were unemployed.

We have an environmental crisis, a health-insurance crisis, substandard
education -- it is time for a change. Bill Clinton and I want to get our country
moving forward again, put our people back to work and create a bright future for
the United States of America.

Q Thank you. O.K., the next statement will be from Vice President Quayle.

QUAYLE Well, thank you Senator Gore for reminding me about my performance in the
1988 Vice Presidential debate. This is 1992. Bill Clinton is running against
President George Bush. There are two things that I'm going to stress during this
debate.

One, Bill Clinton's economic plan and his agenda will make matters much, much
worse. He will raise your taxes. He will increase spending. He will make
government bigger. Jobs will be lost.

Second, Bill Clinton does not have the strength nor the character to be
President of the United States. Let us look ----

Q Let's watch the applause.

QUAYLE ---- let us look at the agendas. President Bush wants to hold the line on
taxes. Bill Clinton wants to raise taxes. President Bush is for a
balanced-budget amendment. Bill Clinton is opposed to it. We want to reform the
legal system because it's too costly. Bill Clinton wants the status quo. We want
to reform the health-care system. Bill Clinton wants to ration health care. Bill
Clinton wants to empower government. We want to empower people.

In St. Louis, Mo., in June of this year Bill Clinton said this, America is the
mockery of the world. He is wrong. At sometime during these next four years
there is going to be a crisis. There will be an international crisis. I can't
tell you where it's going to be. I can't even tell you the circumstances, but it
will happen. We need a President who has the experience, who has been tested,
who has the integrity and qualifications to handle the crisis. The President has
been tested. The President has the integrity and the character. The choice is
yours. You need to have a President you can trust. Can you really trust Bill
Clinton?

Q Admiral Stockdale, your opening statement, please, sir.

STOCKDALE Who am I? Why am I here? I'm not a politician; everybody knows that.
So don't expect me to use the language of the Washington insider. Thirty-seven
years in the Navy and only one of them up there in Washington. And now I'm an
academic. The centerpiece of my life was the Vietnam War. I was there the day it
started; I led the first bombing raid against North Vietnam. I was there the day
it ended, and I was there for everything in between. Ten years in Vietnam.
Aerial combat and torture. I know things about the Vietnam War better than
anybody in the world. I know some things about the Vietnam War better than
anybody in the world. And I know how governments -- how American governments --
can be courageous and how they can be callow, and that's important. That's one
thing I'm an insider on.

I was the leader of the underground of the American pilots who were shot down
and imprisoned in North Vietnam. You should know that the American character
displayed in those dungeons by those fine men was the thing of beauty. I look
back on those years as the beginning of wisdom, learning everything a man can
learn about the vulnerabilities and the strengths that are ours as Americans.
Why am I here tonight? I am here because I have in my brain and in my heart what
it takes to lead America through tough times.

Role of Vice President

Q I thought since you're running for Vice President that we ought to start off
by talking about the Vice Presidency itself. The Vice President presides over
the Senate, he casts the deciding vote in case of a tie, but his role really
depends on the assignments that are given to him by the President.

However, if a President should die in office or is unable to serve for any other
reason, the Vice President automatically becomes President. And that has
happened five times this century.

So the proposition I put on the table for you to discuss is this: What role
would each of you like to play as Vice President, what areas interest you and
what are your qualifications to serve as President if necessary?

In the case of Vice President Quayle, who we're starting with, suppose you tell
us the role that you did play in the first term and what you would like to do in
the second term. Go ahead, sir.

QUAYLE Well, then, I won't give you that answer. Qualifications: I've been
there, Hal. I've done the job. I've been tested; I've been Vice President for
four years. Senator Gore referred to us being elected to the Congress together
in 1976. I've done the job. I've done many things for the President.

But even as Vice President, you never know exactly what your role is going to be
from time to time. And let me just give you an example of where I was tested
under fire and in a crisis.

President Bush was flying to Malta in 1989 to meet with President Gorbachev. It
was the first meeting between President Bush and President Gorbachev; they had
known each other before.

A coup broke out in the Philippines. I had to go to the Situation Room. I had to
assemble the President's advisers. I talked to President Aquino. I made the
recommendation to the President. The President made the decision. The coup was
suppressed; democracy continued in the Philippines; the situation was ended.

I've been there. And I'll tell you one other thing that qualifies you for being
President. And it's this, Hal: You've got to stand up for what you believe in.
And nobody's ever criticized me for not having strong beliefs.

Q Admiral Stockdale.

STOCKDALE My association with Mr. Perot is a very personal one and as I have
stood in and finally taken his running-mate position, he has granted me total
autonomy. I don't take advantage of it but I am sure that he would make me a
partner in decisions, in making decisions about the way to handle health care,
the way to get this economy back on its feet again in every way. I have not had
the experience of these gentlemen but, to be any more specific -- but, I know I
have his trust and I intend to act in a way to keep that situation alive. Thank
you.

Q Senator Gore

GORE Bill Clinton understands the meaning of the words teamwork and partnership.
If we're successful in our efforts to gain your trust and lead this nation, we
will work together to put our country back on the right track again. The
experience that George Bush and Dan Quayle have been talking about includes the
worst economic performance since the Great Depression. Unemployment is up,
personal income is down, bankruptcies are up, housing starts are down. How long
can we continue with trickle-down economics when the record of failure is so
abundantly clear? Discussions of the Vice Presidency tend sometimes to focus on
the crisis during which a Vice President is thrust into the Oval Office and,
indeed, one third of the Vice Presidents who have served have been moved into
the White House, but the teamwork and partnership beforehand -- and hopefully
that situation never happens -- how you work together is critically important.
The way we've worked together in this campaign is one sample. Now I'd like to
say, in response to Vice President Quayle -- he talked about Malta and the
Philippines -- George Bush has concentrated on every other country in the world.
When are you guys going to start worrying about our people, here, in the United
States of America, and get our country moving again?

Q Again I will ask the audience please do not applaud. It takes time from the
candidates. All right. Now we have five minutes for discussion and go ahead Vice
President Quayle.

QUAYLE The answer to that is very simple that we are not going to raise taxes to
create new jobs. We have a plan to create jobs. But that wasn't the question.
The question dealt with qualifications. Teamwork and partnership may be fine in
the Congress, Senator Gore. That's what Congress is all about, compromise,
teamwork, working things out. But when you're President of the United States, or
when you're Vice President and you have to fill in like I did the night of the
crisis in the Philippines, you've got to make a decision. You've got to make up
your mind. Bill Clinton, running for President of the United States said this
about the Persian Gulf War. He said, Had I been in the Senate, I would have
voted with the majority. It was a close vote, but I agreed with the arguments of
the minority. You can't have it both ways. You have to make a decision. You
cannot sit there in an international crisis and sit there and say well, on one
hand it's -- this is O.K., and on the other hand this is O.K. You've got to make
the decision. President Bush has made the decisions. He's been tested. He's got
the experience. He's got the qualification. He's got the integrity to be our
President for the next four years.

Q Mr. Vice President. Admiral Stockdale, it's your turn to respond.

STOCKDALE O.K., I thought this was just an open session, this five-minute thing,
and I didn't have anything to add to his, but I will -- --

GORE Well, I'll jump in if -- if you don't want it.

QUAYLE I thought anyone could jump in whenever they wanted to.

Q O.K., whatever pleases you gentlemen is fine with me, you're the candidates.

QUAYLE But I want Admiral Stockdale's time!

Q This is not the Senate -- this is not the Senate where you can trade off time.
Go ahead, Senator Gore.

GORE I'll let you all figure out the rules. I've got some points that I want to
make here, and I still haven't gotten an answer to my question on when you guys
are going to start worrying about this country. But I want to elaborate on it
before ----

QUAYLE Why doesn't -- why doesn't the Democratic Congress ----

Q Let him talk, sir.

QUAYLE ---- pass the jobs bill?

Q Let him say his thoughts.

GORE I was very patient in letting you get off that string of attacks. We've
been listening to ----

QUAYLE They're good points.

GORE ---- to trickle-down economics for 12 years now and you all still support
trickle-down to the very last drop. And you, talking about this point of
concentrating on every other country in the world, as opposed to the people of
our country right here at home, when George Bush took former Secretary of State
Baker out of the State Department and put him in charge of the campaign and made
him chief of staff in the White House, Mr. Baker, who's quite a capable man,
said that for these last four years George Bush was working on the problems of
the rest of the world and in the next four years he would target America. Well,
I want you to know we really appreciate that, but Bill Clinton and I will target
America from Day 1. We won't wait four years before we concentrate on the
problems in this country.

He went on to say that it's really amazing what George Bush can do when he
concentrates. Well, it's time that we had a President like Bill Clinton who can
concentrate, and will concentrate, and work on the problems of real people in
this country. You know, our country is in trouble. We simply cannot continue
with this philosophy of giving huge tax cuts to the very wealthy, raising taxes
on middle-income families the way Bush and Quayle have done, and then waiting
for it to work.

How much longer will it take, Dan, for trickle-down economics to work, in your
theory?

QUAYLE Well, we're going to have plenty of time to talk about trickle down
government which you're for --

GORE Well, I'd like to hear the answer.

QUAYLE But the question is, the question is, which you have failed to address,
and that is: why is Bill Clinton qualified to be President of the United States?
You've talked about Jim --

GORE Oh, I'll be happy to answer that.

QUAYLE You've talked about Jim Baker. You've talked about trickle-down
economics.

Q Now wait a minute. The question was about ----

QUAYLE You've talked about the worst economy in 50 years.

GORE I'll be happy to answer.

QUAYLE You haven't told us one reason why Bill Clinton ----

GORE May I answer?

QUAYLE ---- is qualified to be President of the United States --

GORE I'll be happy to answer.

QUAYLE ---- and how -- I want to go back and make a point.

GORE Well, you've asked me a question, let -- if want an answer ----

QUAYLE I have not asked you a question. I've made a statement.

GORE And I will answer yours.

QUAYLE I have not asked a question, I've made a statement that you have not told
us why Bill Clinton is qualified to be President of the United States. I pointed
out what he said about the Persian Gulf War. But let me repeat it for you.
Here's what he said, Senator, you know full well what he said.

GORE May I answer your question?

QUAYLE I'm making a statement, then you can answer it.

Q Can, can we give Admiral Stockdale a chance to come in here please, and again
audience ----

QUAYLE But he said, Hal, here's what he said. If the -- I mean this is the
Persian Gulf War, the most important event in his political life, and here's
what Bill Clinton said: If it's a close vote, I'd vote with the majority ----

Q Let's give Admiral Stockdale a chance to come in.

QUAYLE -- but I agreed with the minority. That qualifies you for being President
of the United States? I hope America is listening very closely to this debate.

STOCKDALE And I think America is seeing right now the reason this nation is in
gridlock. The trickle-downs and the tax-and-spends, or whatever you want to call
them, are at swords' points; you can't get this economy going. Over here we've
got Dan, whose President is going to take eight years to balance the budget, and
on my left, the Senator, whose boss is going to get it halfway balanced in four
years. Ross Perot has got a plan to balance the budget five years in length from
start to finish. And we're people of the non-professional category who are just
sick of this terrible thing that happened to the country, and we've got a man
who knows how to fix it. And I'm working for him.

Cuts in Military Spending

Q I think it's time to move on to our next topic. All three of you gentlemen
have some expertise in defense and the armed forces. Vice President Quayle and
Senator Gore both served on the Senate Armed Services Committee. Admiral
Stockdale, of course, has a very distinguished military career. With the end of
the cold war, everyone agrees that there's going to be major cuts. They've
already started in the defense budget. But this country has a long history of
neglecting its military needs in peacetime, then paying for it with heavy
casualties when we're caught unprepared.

How much of a defense cut is safe? What happens to the people who are forced to
leave the military services, or if they lose their jobs because they're working
in defense industries? I think we start with Senator Gore this time.

GORE Bill Clinton and I support a strong national defense. He and I have both
fought for change within the Democratic Party as well as within the country.

In the aftermath of the cold war, the definition of strong national defense has
obviously changed somewhat. For example, George Bush wants to maintain at least
150,000 American soldiers in Europe even though World War II ended 50 years ago.

Bill Clinton and I agree with so many military experts who believe that it is
time for the Europeans, who are so much wealthier now and more powerful than
they were at the end of World War II, to start picking up a little more of that
tab themselves and not rely so exclusively on the United States taxpayers for
the defense of Europe.

We believe that we can make savings in our defense budget and at the same time
improve our national security. Now for those who are affected by the cutbacks,
whether they come from George Bush or Bill Clinton and me, the difference is
Bill Clinton and I have a defense conversion program, so that those who won the
cold war will not be left out in the cold.

We want to put them to work building an infrastructure and an economy here in
this country for the 90's and the next century.

Q Vice President Quayle.

QUAYLE We won the cold war because we invested in national security. We won the
cold war because we invested in our military. We won the cold war because
America had the political will and made the right decisions. Yes, we can make
the cuts in defense, and we have. Bill Clinton wants to cut defense another $60
billion. I'd say to the defense workers in California and elsewhere, a $60
billion defense cut's going to cut a lot of jobs out. Yes, we are making a
conversion and we go to a civil -- space rather than having defense -- the
defense industry.

But let me say this: We would not have won the cold war if we had listened to
Senator Gore and his crowd and had supported a nuclear freeze. If you would have
supported that attitude, we would not have won the cold war. We won the cold war
because we invested and we went forward.

Q O.K. Admiral Stockdale, please.

STOCKDALE The numbers, in terms of the dollar cuts, as they stand on our plans
now show us almost the same as the Vice President's. But we, we note that Mr. --
Governor Clinton's plan is almost twice as much a cut as either one of us. I,
I've been through the end of World War II and the surprise beginning of Korea to
see how we -- it cost us more money because we overcut the defense budget in the
first place. I don't say that -- so I think that should be eyed with great
suspicion. People that are really kicking the props out from under our grand
military establishment prematurely. Now there's other differences between the
Perot approach and what we see up here on either side of me, and that has to do
with -- we want to focus our interests economic and military more to the
Pacific. We figure that we are generally going along with any sort of a troop
removal from Europe. So that's still another face of this puzzle.

Q Senator Gore, would you like to start the discussion period on this topic?

GORE Yeah, I'd like to respond first to you, Admiral Stockdale. Under the
details of our five-year budget plan, we do propose more in defense cuts than
George Bush and Dan Quayle, but only 5 percent more. Admiral Crowe, who I think
was one of your classmates in Annapolis ----

STOCKDALE Oh yes, I know him.

GORE ---- has endorsed the military portions of our plan even though he was the
Chairman of the Joint Chiefs under George Bush, and John White has endorsed the
economic aspects of our plan even though I believe he was the architect of Ross
Perot's economic plan. Now when I heard George Bush say at the convention in
Houston that when he heard the phrase "We won the Cold War," it made him wonder
who the we was. Well, I want to tell you, President Bush, the we is the people
of the United States of America. This wasn't a partisan victory that came
suddenly a few months after you took the oath of office. This started with Harry
Truman, and it was a bipartisan effort from the very beginning. George Bush
taking credit for the Berlin Wall coming down is like the rooster taking credit
for the sunrise.

And I want, I want to add one other thing because in the debate a few nights ago
I think President Bush made a very serious misstatement of fact in response to
Ross Perot. It was kind of a little lecture he gave to Ross Perot when he said
"those SS18's are gone, Ross, that's done." He signed -- he reached a deal with
Boris Yeltsin to completely remove them so we can all sleep safely without any
fear tonight. But you know what? They thought they were gonna get that deal. But
when he took the person in charge of the negotiations out of the State
Department and put him in charge of the re-election campaign, the deal
unraveled, and now there is no Start II deal at all. In fact, there are serious
problems. Isn't it a fact, Dan, that every single one of those SS18's is still
there in the silos, and under the Start I treaty, only half of the silos are
supposed to be dismantled, and there is no deal to get rid of the other half?
Didn't the President make a mistake there?

Q Senator. Vice President Quayle, please.

QUAYLE The President does have a commitment from Boris Yeltsin to eliminate the
SS-18's; that is a commitment.

GORE Is it an agreement?

QUAYLE It is a commitment and ----

[All talking at once.]

---- lighten up here, Al.

Let's talk about getting agreements. You know, the President of the United
States doesn't just negotiate with your friends in Congress. The President of
the United States deals on the international scene. He's got to deal with the
President of Russia, he's got to deal with the Chancellor of Germany, Prime
Minister of Britain, President of France, Prime Minister of Japan; he's got to
deal with a whole host of leaders around the world. And the leaders sit down and
they will negotiate and they will come to agreements with people that they
trust. And this is a fundamental problem with Bill Clinton -- is trust and
character. It is not the issue of how he avoided military service 20 some years
ago; it's the fact, it's the fact that he does not tell the truth about it. He
first said he didn't get an induction notice, then we find out that he did. He
said he didn't have an R.O.T.C. slot, then we find out he did. He said he didn't
use Senator Fulbright's office for special influence; then we find out that he
did. These are inconsistencies. Bill Clinton has trouble telling the truth, and
he will have a very difficult time dealing with somebody like President Yeltsin
or Chancellor Kohl or Prime Minister Major or President Mitterand, because truth
and integrity are prerequisites to being President of the United States.

GORE I want to respond to that. I want to respond to that. George Bush, in case
you've forgotten, Dan, said, "Read my lips, no new taxes."

QUAYLE "Read my lips."

GORE And you know what he also said?

QUAYLE I didn't think I was going to hear that tonight.

GORE Hold on. Hold on, let me finish.

QUAYLE O.K.

GORE He also said he wanted to be the environmental President. Then he went on
to say he wanted to be the education President. Then he said that he wouldn't
raise taxes again, no, never, ever, ever. Then the next day his spokesman,
Marlin Fitzwater, came out and said, "That's not a pledge." Then two weeks ago
he said that after the election, if you win, then James Baker's going to go back
to be Secretary of State. Then a week later, in the debate a few nights ago, he
said, "No, after the election, if we win, James Baker is going to be in charge
of domestic policy." Which is it, Dan? Is he going to -- what's your role in
this going to be?

                                    .  .  .


Environment

Q Everyone wants a safe and clean environment, but there's an ongoing conflict
between environmental protection and the need for economic growth and jobs. So
the point I throw out on the table is: How do you resolve this conflict between
protection of the environment and growth in jobs, and why has it taken so long
to deal with basic problems such as toxic waste dumps, clean air and clean
water.

And Vice President Quayle, it's your turn to start first.

QUAYLE Hal, that is a false choice. You don't have to have a choice between the
environment and jobs. You can have both. Look at the President's record. Clean
air legislation passed the Democratic Congress because of the leadership of
George Bush. It is the most comprehensive Clean Air Act in our history. We are
firmly behind preserving our environment, and we have a good record with which
to stand. The question comes back: what is going to be their position when it
comes to the environment? I say it's a false choice. Their -- you want to ask
somebody in Michigan, a U.A.W. worker in Michigan, if they think increasing the
CAFE standards, the fuel economy standards, of 45 miles a gallon is a good idea.
300,000 people out of work. You ought to talk to the timber people in the
Northwest where they say that their -- well, we can only save the owl; forget
about jobs. You ought to talk to the coal miners -- talk about -- talking about
putting a coal tax on; they're talking of taxing utilities; a tax on gasoline,
home heating oil; all sorts of taxes. No, Hal, the choice isn't the environment
and jobs; with the right policies, prudent policies, we can have both.

STOCKDALE I read Senator Gore's book about the environment and I don't see how
he could possibly pay for his proposals in today's economic climate. You know,
the "Marshall Plan of the Environment" and so forth. And also, I'm told by some
experts that the things that he fears most may not be all that dangerous,
according to some scientists. You know, you can overdo, I'm told, environmental
cleaning up. If you purify the pond, the water lilies die. You know, I love this
planet and I want it to stay here, but I don't like to have it the private
property of fanatics that want to overdo this thing.

Q Senator Gore.

GORE Bill Clinton and I believe we can create millions of new jobs by leading
the environmental revolution instead of dragging our feet and bringing up the
rear. You know, Japan and Germany are both openly proclaiming to the world now
that the biggest new market in the history of world business is the market for
the new products and technologies that foster economic progress without
environmental destruction. Why is the Japanese business organization, the
largest one they have, the Keidanren, arguing for tougher environmental
standards than those embodied in U.S. law? Why is MITI, their trade
organization, calling on all Japanese corporations everywhere in the world to
exceed by as much as possible the environmental standards of every country in
which they're operating?

Well, maybe they're just dumb about business competition, but maybe they know
something that George Bush and Dan Quayle don't know: that the future will call
for greater efficiency and great environmental efficiency. This is an issue that
touches my basic values. I'm taught in my religious tradition that we are given
dominion over the earth, but we're required to be good stewards of the earth,
and that means to take care of it. We're not doing that now under the
Bush-Quayle policies. They have gutted the Clean Air Act. They have broken his
pledge to be the environmental President. Bill Clinton and I will change that.

QO.K., discussion period now. Again, leave time for each other, please. Vice
President Quayle, go ahead.

QUAYLE Well, I -- I might -- I'm tempted to yield to Admiral Stockdale on this,
but I -- you know, the fact of the matter is that one of the proposals that
Senator Gore has suggested is to have the taxpayers of America spend $100
billion a year on environmental projects in foreign countries.

GORE That's just not true.

QUAYLE Foreign aid.

GORE It's not true.

QUAYLE Senator, it's in your book, on page 304.

GORE No, it's not. No, it's not. No, it's not.

QUAYLE It is in your book. You know, Hal, I wanted to bring the Gore book
tonight because I figured he was going to pull a Bill Clinton on me, and he has,
because he's going to disavow what's in his book. It's in your book.

GORE No.

QUAYLE It's a high -- it comes out to $100 billion of foreign aid for
environmental projects. Now, how ----

Q Now let's give him a chance to answer.

QUAYLE ---- how will we pay for it?

QLet ----

QUAYLE How are we going to pay for an extra $100 billion of taxpayers' money for
this?

GORE Dan, I appreciate you reading my book very much. But you've got it wrong.

QUAYLE No, I've got it right.

GORE There's no such proposal. There is no such ----

QUAYLE O.K., O.K. Well, we'll find out afterwards.

Q Let him talk, Mr. Vice President. Let the Senator talk. Go ahead.

GORE There is no such proposal. What I have called upon is the cooperative
effort by the United States and Europe and Asia to work together in opening up
new markets throughout the world for the new technologies that are necessary in
order to reconcile the imperatives of economic progress with the imperatives of
environmental protection.

Take Mexico City for an example. They are shutting down factories right now, not
because of their economy but because they're choking to death on the air
pollution. They're banning automobiles some days of the week. Now what they want
is not new laser-guided missile systems. What they want are new engines and new
factories and new products that don't pollute the air and the water but
nevertheless allow them to have a decent standard of living for their people.

Last year 35 percent of our exports went to developing countries, countries
where the population is expanding worldwide by as much as one billion people
every 10 years. We cannot stick our heads in the sand and pretend that we don't
face a global environmental crisis. Nor should we assume that it's going to cost
jobs. Quite the contrary. We are going to be able to create jobs as Japan and
Germany are planning to do right now if we have the guts to leave.

Now, earlier we heard about the auto industry and the timber industry. There
have been 250,000 jobs lost in the automobile industry during the
Reagan-Bush-Quayle years. There have been tens of thousands of jobs lost in the
timber industry. What they like to do is to point the finger of blame with one
hand and hand out pink slips with the other hand. They've done a poor job both
with the economy and the environment. It's time for a change.

Q Admiral Stockdale, did you have something you wanted to say here?

STOCKDALE I know that I read where Senator Gore's mentor had disagreed with some
of the scientific data that is in his book. How do you respond to those
criticisms of that sort? Do you ----

QUAYLE -- deny it?

GORE Well, ----

STOCKDALE ---- take this into account?

GORE No, I -- let me respond. Thank you, Admiral, for saying that. You're
talking about Roger Revelle. His family wrote a lengthy letter saying how
terribly he had been misquoted and had his remarks taken completely out of
context just before he died. He believed up until the day he died -- no, it's
true --

Q I ask the audience to stop please.

GORE ---- he died last year and just before he died he co-authored an article
which had statements taken completely out of context. In fact, the vast majority
of the world's scientists -- and they have worked on this extensively -- believe
that we must have an effort to face up to the problems we face with the
environment. And if we just stick our heads in the sand and pretend that it's
not real, we're not doing ourselves a favor. Even worse than that, we're telling
our children and all future generations that we weren't willing to face up to
this obligation. I believe that we have a mandate to try to solve this problem,
particularly when we can do it while we create jobs in the process.

Q Go ahead, Mr. Vice President.

QUAYLE We've got to have a little equal time here now, Hal.

In the book you also suggest taxes on gasoline, taxes on utilities, taxes on
carbon, taxes on timber. There's a whole host of taxes, and I don't just believe
raising taxes is the way to solve our environmental problems. And you talk about
the bad situation in the auto industry. You seem to say that the answer is,
Well, I'll just make it that much worse by increasing the CAFE standards. Yes,
the auto industry is hurting -- it's been hurting a long time -- and increasing
the CAFE standards to 45 miles per gallon like you and Bill Clinton are
suggesting will put, as I said, 300,000 people out of work.

Health Care

Q Let's move on now. I would like to remind the audience of one thing. Trying to
stop you from applauding may be a lost cause. I didn't say anything about
hissing but I do think it is discourteous. There's no call for that and it
reflects badly on the candidate you're supporting. Let's knock that off. Let's
go on to health care. Health care protection has become a necessity of life in
our society, yet millions of Americans are not insured and the cost of medical
treatment is practically out of control. How do you propose to control these
costs, and how are you going to provide access to health care for every
American? Let's see, whose turn is it to go now?I think it's Admiral Stockdale's
turn. Go ahead, sir.

STOCKDALE Well, we have excellent technical health care but we don't administer
it very well. And the escalating costs top any other budget danger in the -- on
the horizon I think. And what Mr. Perot has suggested is that we try to -- look
at the incentives, the incentives that are in our current way of doing business
are what are killing us. There's no incentive for a hypochondriac not to go to
the -- to Medicare every day. There is no incentive for a doctor to curtail the
expensive tests because he's under threat of malpractice lawyers. And so we, we
just have a web of wrong-way incentives that has to be changed by some people
who are in the medical profession and some other crafty people who know how to
write contracts to change incentives, or get the incentive situation under
control.

Q Senator Gore.

GORE Bill Clinton and I believe that if a criminal has the right to a lawyer,
every American family ought to have the right to see a doctor of their own
choosing when they need to see a doctor. There are almost 40 million Americans
who work fulltime today and yet have no health insurance whatsoever. We are
proposing to change that. Not with a Government-run plan, not with new taxes,
but with a new approach called managed competition. We are going to provide a
standard health insurance package provided by private insurance companies and
eliminate the duplication and red tape and overlap, and we're going to have cost
controls to eliminate the unnecessary procedures that are costing so much money
today. There was a bipartisan commission evenly divided between Republicans and
Democrats who looked at our plan and the Bush-Quayle proposal. They said ours
will save tens of billions of dollars and cover every American. The Bush
proposal by contrast will cost us tens of billions and still leave Americans
uninsured. But what I want to know is, why has George Bush waited for three and
a half years during this health insurance crisis before finally coming out with
a proposal just before the election, and he still hasn't introduced it in
Congress. Why the long wait, Dan?

Q Mr. Vice President?

QUAYLE Al, President Bush has had his health care reform agenda on Capitol Hill
for eight months. He's had parts up there for years -- you talk about increasing
costs -- the President has had on Capitol Hill medical malpractice reform
legislation for several years. Defensive medicine and health care today cost
$20.7 billion -- defensive medicine defined as testing and treatment that is
only necessary in case of a law suit. Wouldn't that be nice, to take $20.7
billion that we're putting into our legal system and put it to preventive health
care, or women's health care, or something else besides trial lawyers?

But, no, you don't want to reform the health care system to drive down costs
through medical malpractice. What you're doing -- you are talking about a
government program, your program is to ration health care. You said in your
statement, "to see a doctor when you want to see a doctor." When you start
rationing halth care, there's going to be a waiting line to see a doctor unless
it's an emergency. Remember when we rationed energy in this country? Waiting
lines at the gasoline stations. The same thing would happen when you ration
health care. The President's proposal deals with tax credits, deductions in
purchasing health care in the private sector, and making health care affordable
and available to every single American.

Q Admiral Stockdale, would you like to start the discussion period?

STOCKDALE Well, I'm out of ammunition on this.

GORE Well, let me talk then. I've got a couple of things that I want to say.

Q Go ahead, Senator.

GORE We still didn't get an answer to the question of why George Bush waited for
three and a half years during the --

QUAYLE We didn't wait three and a half years. I did answer the question.

GORE -- national health insurance crisis before he even made a proposal. And it
still hasn't been submitted to Congress in the form of legislation.

QUAYLE It certainly has.

GORE I also want to respond to the question about malpractice. Do you know which
state has the lowest malpractice premiums in the entire country? Bill Clinton's
Arkansas does, partly because he has passed reform measures limiting the time
during which malpractice suits can be filed. In fact, tort claims generally have
fallen 10 percent under Bill Clinton there. But you, that's not the reason for
this health insurance crisis. The reason is we've had absolutely no leadership.

Let me tell you about a friend of mine named Mitch Philpott, from Marietta, Ga.,
not far from here, who Tipper and I met with his family in Johns Hopkins
Hospital. Their son Brett was in the bed next to our son and they couldn't pay
their medical bills. They used to live in Atlanta, but they lost their house.
And while they were there, both Mitch and his wife lost their jobs because they
could not get unpaid leave. We passed legislation to give family leave under
circumstances like that exempting small business. How can you talk about family
values, Dan, and twice veto the Family Medical Leave Act?

Q Mr. Vice President.

QUAYLE Pass, pass our Family Leave Act and because it goes to small businesses
where the major problem is -- your proposal excluded small business. That's the
problem. Now let me talk about health care --

GORE Did you ----

QUAYLE My turn----

GORE Did you require----

QUAYLE Lighten up, Al. My turn.

GORE It's a free discussion----

QUAYLE Take a breath, Al. Inhale.

GORE It's a free discussion. Did you require family leave in that legislation,
yes or no?

QUAYLE We offered incentives to small businesses.

GORE Yes or no.

QUAYLE Were small businesses exempted under your proposal?

GORE Yes.

QUAYLE Yes, and that's where the ----

GORE Did you require ----

QUAYLE I'm going to get back to the topic at hand----

GORE Did you require----

QUAYLE He obviously doesn't want to talk about health insurance or health care
which you addressed. It was absolutely -- I guess I shouldn't say that --
another Clinton. You pulled another Clinton on me because here you go again.

Medical malpractice legislation has been before the Congress of the United
States and you try to convince the American people that Bill Clinton is for
total reform? The biggest campaign contributors to your campaign are the trial
lawyers of America. We have a letter and we're going to release it again to the
media if the media is interested where the head of the Trial Lawyers of Arkansas
said that Bill Clinton was basically in their back pocket, that Bill Clinton has
always opposed full reform of any kind -- it's in the letter, we have it, we'll
make it available. Because Bill Clinton is not for court reform. I'd like to
know where Bill Clinton stands on health insurance. When he was campaigning in
New Hampshire he says I am for the pay-or-play health insurance. Pay or play?
That's a 7 to 9 percent payroll tax on every worker in America that participates
in this program.

GORE Can I respond?

QUAYLE And then all of a sudden, this summer he says oh, I'm not for pay or
play. Here we go again. Bill Clinton -- one day he's for pay or play, the next
day he's against pay or play. He does it in education. He says -- writes Polly
Williams, a Democrat state legislator in Milwaukee, Wis., saying "I'm for choice
and education." Then he goes to the N.E.A. Teachers Union and says, "Sorry, I'm
not for choice in education because you won't let me be for choice and
education." One time Bill Clinton says term limits, we've got to limit terms,
it's ridiculous that a member of Congress can serve for 30, 40, 50 years and you
limit the terms of the President, but that's another subject.

GORE We're fixing to limit one.

QUAYLE It's not going to be mine; it's going to be people like you and Kennedy
and Metzenbaum and George Mitchell and the rest of that Democratic Congress on
Capitol Hill. That's who we're talking about. And that's who the American people
impeach. As you well know, you've got term limits for a President, you don't
have term limits for Congress. And I think it's absolutely ridiculous that we
don't.

                                    .  .  .


The Issue of Abortion

Q Abortion rights has been a bitter controversy in this country for almost 20
years. It's been heightened by the recent Supreme Court decisions. So I'll make
it very simple in this question: Where do each of you stand on the issue; what
action will your President's Adminstration take on any abortion question; will
it be a factor in the appointment in the Federal judges, especially to the
Supreme Court. And I believe that Senator Gore goes first.

GORE Bill Clinton and I support the right of a woman to choose. That doesn't
mean we're pro-abortion; in fact, we believe there are way too many abortions in
this country, and the way to reduce them is by reducing the number of unwanted
pregnancies, not vetoing family planning legislation the way George Bush has
consistently done. The reason we are pro-choice and in favor of a woman's right
to privacy is because we believe that during the early stages of a pregnancy,
the Government has no business coming in and ordering a woman to do what the
Government thinks is best.

What Dan Quayle and George Bush and Jerry Falwell and Pat Robertson think is the
right decision in a given set of circumstances is their privilege, but don't
have the Government order a woman to do what they think is the right thing to
do. We ought to be able to build more common ground among those who describe
themselves as pro-choice and pro-life in efforts to reduce the number of
unwanted pregnancies.

But, Dan, you can clear this up very simply by repeating after me: I support the
right of a woman to choose. Can you say that?

Q Vice President Quayle, your turn.

QUAYLE This issue is an issue that divides Americans deeply. I happen to be
pro-life, I have been pro-life for my 16 years in public life. My objective and
the President's objective is to try to reduce abortions in this country. We have
1.6 million abortions. We have more abortions in Washington, D.C., than we do
live births. Why shouldn't we have more reflection upon the issue before
abortion -- the decision of abortion is made? I would hope that we would agree
upon that, something like a 24-hour waiting period, parental notification.

I was in Los Angeles recently and I talked to a woman who told me that she had
an abortion when she was 17 years of age. And looking back on that, she said it
was a mistake. And she said -- she said, "I wish at that time that I was going
through the difficult time that I had counseling to talk about the post-abortion
trauma and talk about adoption rather than abortion. Because if I had had that
discussion I would have had the child." Let's not forget that every abortion
stops a beating heart. I think we have far too many abortions in this country --
in this country of ours.

Q Admiral Stockdale.

STOCKDALE I believe that a woman owns her body and what she does with it is her
own business -- period. Period.

Q That's it?

STOCKDALE I don't -- I, too, abhor abortions but I don't think they should be
made illegal and I don't think it's a political issue. I think it's a privacy
issue.

LOAD-DATE: October 14, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: At the conclusion of last night's debate in Atlanta, Vice
President Dan Quayle and his wife, Marilyn, embraced as Senator Al Gore and his
wife, Tipper, went to greet the moderator, Hal Bruno. James B. Stockdale, upper
left, walked away from his podium (Jim Estrin/The New York Times) (pg. A20);
Sharon Holman, left, Ross Perot's press secretary and Karen O'Leary, James B.
Stockdale's press secretary watching the debate last night in their office in
Atlanta. (Alan S. Weiner for The New York Times) (pg. A21)

TYPE: Text

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              84 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 14, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Media;
Perot Campaign Planning Flurry Of Commercials

BYLINE: By STEVEN A. HOLMES,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 22; Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 575 words

DATELINE: DALLAS, Oct. 13


Fresh from his strong showing in Sunday night's debate, Ross Perot is preparing
a television advertising blitz that will include at least two long programs
promoting his candidacy and his ideas, plus a flurry of commercials to be shown
on all three major networks.

The Dallas billionaire's office said today that Mr. Perot had purchased one and
a half hours of network television time this Friday and Saturday night to lay
out his ideas for eliminating the Federal budget deficit and stimulating the
economy. Mr. Perot's aides said he had bought a 30-minute time slot on NBC for
Friday at 10:30 P.M., Eastern time, and a one-hour spot on Saturday night on
ABC, starting at 8 P.M.

In addition, Mr. Perot has spent at least $8.4 million for advertisements on the
three networks. A number of these commercials will run during heavily viewed
sporting events like National Football League games, the major league baseball
playoffs and the World Series.

Focus on National Debt

On Monday, Mr. Perot's office unveiled four new advertisements, two for
television and two for radio, that began appearing today.

David Lyon, an official with the 270 Group, a group of Dallas advertising
executives who are producing Mr. Perot's commercials, say the new television
advertisements will supplement three Perot commercials that are already on the
air.

In one of the new television commercials, dark clouds roil ominously across the
screen. Against a backdrop of jagged lightning bolts and thunderclaps, a
narrator speaks of the national debt as "a massive storm that is clouding
America's future, an ill wind that is destroying jobs."

The other new television commercial features a close-up of a Purple Heart medal
sent to Mr. Perot by a Delaware veteran while a narrator reads excerpts from a
letter that accompanied it. "I believe that it can serve as a compelling
reminder that the hard battle ahead can and must be won," say the words from the
letter written by Dennis Skirvin, a 45-year-old Vietnam veteran.

Various Airing Times

Janice Gretemeyer, vice president for public relations, for the ABC Television
Network, said that in addition to the one-hour time slot on Saturday, which cost
Mr. Perot $540,000, the candidate had bought $3.2 million for a series of
15-second and 60-second advertisements.

The commercials will be broadcast during prime time, sports programs and "Good
Morning America," Ms. Gretemeyer said.

Officials at CBS said Mr. Perot had bought at least $2.6 million in advertising
time on their network between now and Election Day. That includes time slots for
19 commercials in the next three weeks. All are 60-second spots and all are
scheduled to run during major sporting events like the National Football League
games and post-season baseball games, according to Ann Morfogen, a vice
president at CBS.

NBC executives say Mr. Perot paid $150,000 to buy his 30-minute time slot on
Friday night.

In order to accommodate the Texan, NBC has canceled the episode of the comedy
series "What Happened?" and moved two other shows, "The Round Table" and "I'll
Fly Away" to new time periods.

In addition to the half-hour on NBC, Mr. Perot has also bought 15 one-minute
time slots, all but one in prime time between now and Nov. 3, and eight
15-second spots during the "Tonight" show. An official with the network said the
total amount for those purchases would be from $2.1 million to $2.6 million.

LOAD-DATE: October 14, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              85 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 14, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Surrounding Scene;
Did Not, Did So: Debate Offers Proof Young Are Better Seen Than Heard

BYLINE: By MAUREEN DOWD,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 19; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1408 words

DATELINE: ATLANTA, Oct. 13


As Epictetus, the Greek Stoic philosopher cherished by Admiral James B.
Stockdale, once noted: "There are some faults which men readily admit, but
others not so readily."

And so it was that the craggy, white-haired hero of the Vietnam War made debate
history tonight with a startling admission on stage.

Asked by the moderator, Hal Bruno, to talk about the nasty attacks in the 1992
campaign, Admiral Stockdale replied: "I didn't have my hearing aid on. Tell me
again."

Given the level of discourse of the 1992 campaign and the "did too, did not"
schoolyard-spat tone of the exchanges between Al Gore and Dan Quayle, many
Americans must have envied his peace and quiet.

Although his lack of experience and policy knowledge was embarrassingly apparent
in his halting answers and moments of confusion, especially compared with his
hyper-rehearsed television-age yuppie rivals, Admiral Stockdale provided an
extraordinary interlude to programmed politics.

With an evidently overcaffeinated Mr. Quayle bouncing from rant to rant to his
right and with Mr. Gore relentlessly reeling off speech-chunks to his left, Mr.
Stockdale appeared in something of the role of a bewildered grandfather who has
wandered down to the rec room in search of his slippers to find himself in the
middle of an impassioned teen-age debate on the merits of Ice-T.

In the Heat of Battle

The great teen-age debate began with an opener by Mr. Gore that was Borgia-like
in the way it slipped silently between Mr. Quayle's fifth and sixth ribs.

In the course of less than a minute, Mr. Gore managed to allude to the
well-known image of Mr. Quayle as "a deer caught in the headlights," to remind
viewers that he and Mr. Stockdale had served in Vietnam while Mr. Quayle did
not, to conjure up memories of Mr. Quayle's humiliation in the 1988 debate when
Senator Lloyd Bentsen belittled him for comparing himself to John F. Kennedy.

"Well, thank you, Senator Gore, for reminding me about my performance," Mr.
Quayle said, snippily.

And that, as it turned out, set the tone for the rest of the evening. Mr. Gore
made a point of looking at Mr. Quayle condescendingly, and calling him "Dan."
While Mr. Quayle talked, Mr. Gore shook his head in a pantomime of disbelief,
and interrupted with an endless series of "nope's,' "no's" and "did not's."

Advised just before the debate to be cheerfully aggressive, Mr. Quayle went
after Mr. Gore with such terrier-like excitement that he sometimes seemed to be
actually barking the words "trust" and "character."

The effect on the audience in the hall was profound. When the debate began, the
several hundred people were sitting upright, bright-eyed with enthusiasm for the
historic moment.

Forty minutes later, as Mr. Gore and Mr. Quayle bickered on and on, Mr.
Stockdale had all but given up talking, and was pacing the stage, occasionally
shaking his head in disbelief, while the members of the audience sat in
slack-jawed astonishment.

During particularly lengthy bits of tit-tatting, a number of people could be
seen actually holding their heads in their hands and moaning. When Mr. Quayle
trotted out "trust" and "character," the collective groan in the hall was
bipartisan. "Oh, my God," muttered Paul Kazlowski, the president of GTE Mobile
Communications, shaking his head.

Afterwards, leaving the auditorium in a subdued state, Mr. Kazlowski summed up
his feelings on the Gore-Clinton show. "It's embarrassing to think either one of
these clowns -- no, don't say clowns -- these guys could end up being
President."

Meanwhile, up on the stage, the bickerfest continued, even though the debate was
over.

"You've got to go back and add up the time, Paul," Mr. Quayle was saying to the
former Republican Party chairman Frank J. Fahrenkopf Jr., who was one of the
organizers of the debate. "I mean, I'm not kidding. There were times --
especially on that abortion thing -- where I had time coming and I had a right
to it, and Gore just wouldn't let me come back."

Mr. Fahrenkopf said he would certainly look into it.

As Mr. Fahrenkopf walked away, Marilyn Quayle, a chief debate adviser to her
husband, walked up. "Hi, honey," the Vice-President said cheerfully. "I was just
telling Frank to go back and add up who got more time." Mrs. Quayle smiled.
"Absolutely," she said. "Absolutely."

Does He Get It?

As Mr. Quayle stood on the stage after the debate taking the congratulations of
well-wishing Republicans, a supporter raised a point.

"You did great, Dan, great," he said. "There's just one thing. This abortion
thing. You've got to realize that the Democratic position -- "

"Is extreme?" Mr. Quayle said, nodding in anticipation.

"No, is supported by 72 percent of the people in this country," the man said.
"You've got to drop it, Dan."

Mr. Quayle nodded politely and moved on.

Before the Curtain Rises

Everyone knows that Al Gore is not a spontaneous guy. The Vice President's aides
call him "Robo-Gore."

But he outdid himself today before the debate, when he showed up with his
entourage to check out the stage at the Georgia Institute of Technology.

He practiced how he would put his body in position to get the best angle for
himself, when the photographers took shots of the three candidates shaking hands
at the end of the debate.

He even rehearsed how he would greet his wife, Tipper, when she joined him on
stage to congratulate him.

By contrast, Dan Quayle breezed through without much fuss and Mr. Stockdale
spent his time learning the basics about cameras and lights.

The debate organizers found Mr. Stockdale, who seemed as dazed blinking into the
lights at the rehearsal as he did later at the debate, refreshingly unpolished.

Laughing at the contrast between the highly practiced Mr. Gore and the
television neophyte, Mr. Stockdale, one amused organizer noted: "They didn't
need to show him how to kiss his wife."

Good Luck Charms

Down on the farm: Al Gore's debate prep took place in a barn in Carthage, Tenn.
For luck's sake, his advance men brought the country with them to Atlanta,
setting up a facsimile of a barn in Mr. Gore's off-stage holding room.

Among the props was a saddle, a cow's skull, a scarecrow, several pumpkins,
wooden barrels, bales of hay, and red-and-white checkerboard cloths. Also, back
in Mr. Gore's hotel room, a mule harness.

The Price of Fame

It has not been a good year for Mary Matalin, the Bush deputy campaign manager.
With her President, she has been through a riot in Los Angeles, a hurricane in
Florida and a 50-point drop in Mr. Bush's popularity. She also had the
misfortune to fall in love with her political rival, James Carville, the Clinton
strategist whom she must rebut at every turn.

So when she got on a plane from Washington to Atlanta this morning, all she
wanted was a little sleep.

But the stranger sitting next to her, recognizing her from her television
appearances criticizing Bill Clinton, would not stop jabbering, even though she
kept her eyes tightly closed.

As she hurried off the plane, the man called after her: "Good luck. I know
you'll do well because I programmed you while you slept."

No Need for Background

The spin is over:

Early signs promised a healthy dose of post-debate spin. By 7:20 P.M., with the
debate less than half an hour old, the Clinton campaign had already faxed the
third draft of its "Debate Talking Points -- Clinton-Gore '92" to its press
offices on the third floor of the building where reporters were housed.

"Dan Quayle doesn't know what he's talking about," was one point. "Al Gore set
the issue in this election: it's change versus more of the same," was another.
And this stunner: "Al Gore was on the side of American jobs."

The Republicans, for their part, made a special effort to beat the Democrats to
the press hall, and to present their exuberant (and apparently sincere) claim
that Mr. Quayle had vindicating himself, winning the debate handily.

But a funny thing happened. Given the presence of real news -- a debate that
must rank as one of the most exciting, if peculiar, of all Presidential
elections, not a single reporter seemed to feel the need to be spun.

They sat hunched over their laptop computers, feverishly typing, while
Republican and Democratic officials of a high-caste sort the reporters would
normally kill to get a chance to talk to, stood in lonely huddles here and
there, looking wistfully at the unspun.

LOAD-DATE: October 14, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Sam Jones, a supporter of President Bush, and Michelle Toncin,
a supporter of Gov. Bill Clinton, arguing outside the university theater
building at Georgia Tech were the debate was held (Alan S. Weiner for The New
York Times); Vice President Dan Quayle telling Frank J. Fahrenkopf Jr., a former
chairman of the Republican party and a co-organizer of the debate, to score the
debate last night in Atlanta as a victory. (Jim Estrin/The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              86 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 14, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Republicans;
Bush Renews His Attacks About Vietnam and Draft

BYLINE: By ANDREW ROSENTHAL,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 22; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 928 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 13


President Bush used an unscheduled appearance on a live broadcast from the White
House today to renew his attack on Gov. Bill Clinton's activities during the
Vietnam War years and to raise questions about his ability to serve as President
because of his antiwar activities.

Mr. Bush pressed his offensive in a moment of political theater played out on
breakfast television. He strolled, as if casually, into the Blue Room of the
White House as Katie Couric, the co-host of the NBC program "Today," was
interviewing Barbara Bush about White House history and furnishings.

If the moment was unplanned, Mr. Bush clearly decided it was a good chance to
make a few political points to a wide audience. He allowed Ms. Couric, who
occasionally seemed distracted as if messages were coming through her earpiece
faster than answers were coming out of the President's mouth, to conduct a
full-fledged 19-minute interview.

The President spent about half his time talking about the Vietnam years, trying
to counter accusations that he was questioning Mr. Clinton's patriotism. And he
offered a rebuttal to Mr. Clinton's effort at the debate Sunday night to turn
the tables on Mr. Bush by accusing him of McCarthy-like tactics and reminding
him that his father, Senator Prescott Bush, had stood against Senator Joseph R.
McCarthy.

Continuing to Press Attack

"He talked about my father," Mr. Bush said. "My father served his country and my
father believed in duty, honor and country. And I, like my father, do not like
McCarthyism. And this isn't McCarthyism. He ought to come clean on the draft."

Mr. Clinton spent the day in Williamsburg, Va., preparing for the next debate,
Thursday night, and resting his hoarse throat. George Stephanopoulos, the
communications director for the Clinton campaign, criticized President Bush for
not making public his testimony under oath about the Iran-contra affair.

"It's time for George Bush to make public the transcripts of his questioning,"
he said. "Since his current story is now different from his original alibi, Bush
either told the American people one thing in public and told investigators
another in private or misled both."

Mr. Bush, in the interview on "Today," repeated his position that he did not
know funds were being illegally diverted from covert arms sales to Iran to help
Contra rebels in Nicaragua, violating a ban imposed by Congress.

He also criticized Mr. Clinton once again for demonstrating against the war when
he was studying in England on a Rhodes scholarship in 1969, drawing a
distinction between protesting on American soil and protesting abroad in time of
war.

Broader Republican Assault

Mr. Bush said: "I simply do not understand when Americans are in a prison camp
in Hanoi and Americans are dying on the battlefield -- a lot of kids drafted,
didn't have any connections to get out of the draft -- I cannot understand an
American citizen organizing demonstrations in a foreign land."

He repeated his insistence that he was attacking Mr. Clinton's character and
judgment, not his patriotism. But he said that as a young man, Mr. Clinton was
"organizing demonstrations, organizing them against the U.S."

Mr. Bush's television appearance came during a broad Republican assault, making
it clear that the Bush campaign intended to continue hammering Mr. Clinton over
his draft record and antiwar activities. The Republicans seem intent on trying
to heat up this issue, which has prompted criticism of Mr. Bush since he opened
the full-scale offensive over the Vietnam issue.

Mary Matalin, the political director of the Bush campaign, wrote an article that
was published on the Op-Ed page of The New York Times today that repeated the
campaign's accusations that Mr. Clinton had lied about his antiwar activities.
"If you cannot trust a candidate's statements about his past, you certainly
cannot trust his promises for the future," Ms. Matalin said.

She complained that Mr. Bush had been "mugged" every time he brought up the
Vietnam issue and asserted that the Democrats had carried out a "relentless
assault on George Bush's character."

The Veterans Coalition of the Bush-Quayle '92 Campaign, meanwhile, sent at least
two news offices in Washington a document that suggested, without any
substantiation, that Mr. Clinton had been under Communist influence during the
Vietnam years.

One Attack Is Disavowed

Mark Katz, a paid official of the coalition, said he had prepared the document
at the direction of his superiors but would not say who told him to do so.

The three-page document was accompanied by a photocopy of a 1970 report prepared
by the staff of the House Committee on Internal Security, the successor to the
notorious House Un-American Activities Committee, on subversive activity by
purportedly Communist-backed American antiwar activists.

The campaign official's document drew no connection between Mr. Clinton and any
Communist, Communist-backed or Communist-funded organization. Clearly
embarrassed by the document, the campaign immediately disavowed it. Torie
Clarke, the campaign press secretary, announced within hours that Robert M.
Teeter, the campaign chairman, had dismissed Mr. Katz.

Ms. Clarke read a statement from Mr. Teeter that said: "As soon as I heard about
it, I insisted he be fired. I didn't know anything about it until around 6
o'clock today. As soon as I heard, I told his supervisor, Mimi Dawson, to fire
him immediately. The campaign totally repudiates the contents of the document
and disavows any association with it."

LOAD-DATE: October 14, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              87 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 14, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

ABOUT NEW YORK;
A Distant Conflict Lives In One Student's Heart

BYLINE: By Michael T. Kaufman

SECTION: Section B; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 808 words


AFTER what he has seen and lived through in Croatia and Bosnia in the last 15
months, it is hard for Dragan Lozancic to concentrate on the analysis and
enumeration of geared linkages, the subject of his doctoral thesis in mechanical
engineering at Columbia University.

"I've finished my course work, I've finished my exams and all I need is the
thesis," said the 29-year-old Bayside resident. "My parents are counting on me,
my mentor at Columbia has been great and sympathetic and I know that all I need
to do is work for six months or so and I should have a doctorate that would
assure my future. But my mind is elsewhere. Most of me is still back there."

Back there is the war from which Mr. Lozancic returned at the start of the
school year. He had gone to Croatia, which he originally left as a 9-year-old,
in the summer of 1991 as fighting raged between Serbs and Croats. For a while he
flirted with the idea of fighting but stopped short of enlisting in the Croatian
forces when he realized he had no military skills to offer. Instead, aware that
the world's perceptions of the conflict would be important, he organized a group
of volunteers to help foreign journalists by leading them to scenes of battle
and massacre and bringing them out again to safety.

Eventually he assembled 80 young people, most of them men and women of Croatian
origin from the United States, Canada and Australia, to staff offices in Zagreb,
Mostar, Dubrovnik and other smaller towns. Mr. Lozancic himself escorted
television crews and news reporters.

"I hate to admit it but I became addicted to the danger and the drama," he said.
"I remember the first time I was huddling down in a trench facing fire and one
of the men I brought out, a journalist who had been in Vietnam, smiled at me and
said, 'Don't you just love it!' I thought he was completely crazy but now I
understand."

Since that initiation he spent many days and nights hugging a trembling earth as
the sky was lit with explosions and tracer bullets. He has driven down back
roads into Sarajevo and talked his way past checkpoints. He has been at almost
every front in Croatia and Bosnia. In some villages and towns he was among the
first to see the bodies of executed civilians. He has smelled rotting corpses.
He has talked to survivors and escorted streams of refugees. In the midst of it
all, Mr. Lozancic, a Roman Catholic, fell in love with a Muslim woman who is a
student in Zagreb.

He carries a pack of photos with the scenes of battle, ruin and murder. As he
shows them to friends it is clear that, for now, these images -- like the one of
the rows of murdered civilians in the town of Voscin -- still define his reality
far more than the challenges of his dissertation or the day-to-day routines of
life in New York.

"What I hate most is when people ask, 'How was it?' " he said. "Maybe if I was a
writer I could explain it. The people who ask are good people, really concerned,
but I can see in their eyes that I'm not getting through." This failure of
communication, he made clear, was not about who was to blame or what should be
done but about more basic things, the quality of suffering, the quality of fear
and the qualities of hope and valor.

"I speak with people who are sympathetic and even moved, but for them it is just
one of many concerns," he said. "There is the election, the economy, job,
family, shopping, vacations. If I ever write my dissertation I will have to be
more like them and develop a similar variety of interests but right now it's
hard.

"Since I've been back I've felt depressed and bored. I wake up every day with
great energy and I've started lifting weights to get rid of it. Mostly I search
out people who have seen some of the things I've seen. I keep calling people in
Zagreb and Imotski, the little town on the Bosnian border where I lived for five
months. Maybe I am experiencing what some Vietnam veterans felt when they came
back, but I sleep well and haven't had bad dreams or the shakes or anything like
that. By the time I saw what I saw, I was older than the average soldier in
Vietnam.

"Meanwhile, I keep telling myself I have to finish the thesis and get the degree
I started on five years ago. My mentor, Professor Ferdinand Freudenstein, has
been fantastically supportive and I know he is rooting for me. Sometimes I feel
I have to get that doctorate if only not to let him down. That and to repay my
parents for their sacrifices. But then I also think, 'What am I doing here?' I
should be back there, not necessarily to help, but just to be where people are
having trouble."

For the moment, he is forcing himself to push ahead, however unenthusiastically,
with the dissertation, setting weekly targets for himself. "If I can make it to
December, I'll be O.K.," he said. "That's when my girlfriend is coming to
visit."

LOAD-DATE: October 14, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: "My mind is elsewhere," said Dragan Lozancic, who lived in
Croatia but is trying to finish his doctorate at Columbia University. "Most of
me is still back there." (Angel Franco/The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              88 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 14, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN;
Surprise Interview With Bush for 'Today'

BYLINE: By BILL CARTER

SECTION: Section A; Page 22; Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 287 words


The NBC program "Today" obtained an unexpected interview with President Bush
yesterday in which he discussed his role in the Iran-contra affair and renewed
his attacks on Gov. Bill Clinton's activities during the Vietnam war years.

The spontaneous 19-minute session with Katie Couric, one of program's anchors,
came after she toured the White House and interviewed Barbara Bush as part of a
celebration of the 200th anniversary of the Executive Mansion.

Jeff Zucker, the executive producer of "Today," said the White House had turned
down the program's request that Mr. Bush appear yesterday morning. Mr. Zucker
said his program has tried unsuccessfully to interview Mr. Bush for a year,
although the President has appeared on both "CBS This Morning" and the ABC
program "Good Morning, America."

Mr. Bush walked into the Blue Room as Ms. Couric was concluding her interview
with Mrs. Bush, and Ms. Couric immediately began to question him.

Despite occasional gentle protestations from both the President and Mrs. Bush,
Ms. Couric asked the President about Sunday's debate, about his continued
questioning of Bill Clinton's character and about Mr. Bush's Iran-contra
statements.

The President also sparred jokingly with Ms. Couric about Ross Perot's remark
that she was trying to "prove her manhood" with tough questions.

Mr. Zucker said he "changed the show on the fly" to accommodate the live
interview, dropping one segment of news and weather and the appearance of one
guest. The guest was Brandon Tartikoff, the chairman of Paramount Pictures, and
former head of NBC Entertainment, who was going to talk about his new book.

"It was O.K.," Mr. Zucker said. "Brandon knows good television programming."

LOAD-DATE: October 14, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: President Bush and his wife, Barbara, speaking with Katie
Couric, co-host of NBC's "Today" program, during an appearance yesterday that
was broadcast live from White House's Blue Room. (NBC via Associated Press)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              89 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 14, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Mapping Out Ethnic Foods, Freeway By Freeway

BYLINE: MOLLY O'NEILL

SECTION: Section C; Page 1; Column 3; Living Desk

LENGTH: 1959 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES


LIKE most Angelenos, Linda Burum was used to getting on the freeway and driving
past every neighborhood except her own. But seven years ago, she gave up the
fast track for smaller streets with meandering turns and traffic lights, streets
that frequently lack signs. Her detours resulted in "A Guide to Ethnic Food in
Los Angeles," which will be published this week by HarperPerennial.

Ms. Burum, who appears to be as obsessed with arcane foods as she is easily
confused by unfamiliar streets, was determined to map her hometown's ethnic
frontiers and render its exotic tastes accessible. But would Lewis and Clark
have risked so much for a meal?

"Move it, lady!" screamed the driver of the tractor-trailer rig behind Ms.
Burum's blue Subaru, which was paused, as usual, in the middle of an
intersection. But Ms. Burum, 47 years old, who taught home economics before she
turned to ethnic cartography, was impervious to the honking horns. She's learned
to deal with unsympathetic traffic, desolate neighborhoods and directions issued
in unfamiliar dialects.

"Hmmmm," she said. "Oh, dear." She reached to the back seat, where she carries a
library of atlases and maps and guide books. "Hmmmm," she said again.

"I thought the Japanese pastry shop was in this mini-mall, but, hmmmm. Maybe
not. Well, hmmmm. On the other hand, you really should taste some more soba" --
a reference to the thin buckwheat noodles that she predicts will become as
popular as pasta with pesto.

Ms. Burum had proposed a three-day eating binge, concentrating on Japanese,
Mexican, Thai and Persian food. She promised that the sampling would deliver
"the most authentic ethnic food in the United States." Finding a handful of the
city's thousands of obscure food shops and ethnic restaurants is a little like
finding some of the dots that, when connected, create a picture of a complicated
port of entry -- and a vibrant culinary melting pot.

Los Angeles has its discrete Chinatown, its Koreatown and Japantown. But the
4,070-square-mile sprawl of Los Angeles County, whose central nervous system is
its freeways, has bred diaspora after diaspora. For instance, tourists shop and
dine in Japantown along San Pedro Street in downtown Los Angeles. But the
Japanese and dedicated aficionados of Japanese culture know to head to west Los
Angeles, a hub of Japanese life since before World War I, or to Torrance and
Gardena, where Japanese settled later. Often well heeled, these later immigrants
had the money to buy real estate and to develop giant Japanese malls and
superstores.

Likewise, since the late 1950's, it has been a rare mile in Los Angeles that
hasn't offered a nacho-and-combo-platter Mexican restaurant. The affordable,
Americanized food simultaneously appealed to non-Mexicans and gave the Mexican
families who own the restaurants a financial base that allowed them to dine out.
After several generations, there are enough affluent Mexicans to support
Mexican-owned mini-malls in Huntington Park that are devoted to Mexican
products.

In the same fashion, after the Vietnam War, some of the immigrants from
Southeast Asia built upscale Thai restaurants in Hollywood featuring dishes that
became familiar to Americans, like sate and pad thai. For the patronage of their
fellow immigrants, they opened tiny spots in the San Fernando Valley and
Lakewood sections, with obscure regional fare, like the Isaan-style cuisine from
northeast Thailand. The Los Angeles Thai Chamber of Commerce estimates that
there are 350 Thai restaurants in the greater Los Angeles area, more than in any
place in the world except Bangkok, Thailand.

More recently, the last decade of political unrest in the Middle East has
brought so many Iranian expatriates to Los Angeles that they call the place not
Little Teheran, but Teherangeles, said Jeff Beckerman, the city's demographer.

Ms. Burum notes that the food of the ancient Persian court was once the haute
cuisine of the medieval Islamic world, but newly arrived Iranians, like the
Japanese, Thais and Mexicans who preceded them, did not open grand restaurants.
They served simple kebabs, which -- like teriyaki for the Japanese, nachos for
the Mexicans and sate for the Thais -- have given them cultural currency and the
beginnings of an economic base.

"The kinds of stores and restaurants an ethnic group opens is a thumbnail sketch
of where that population is in the assimilation process," Ms. Burum said. "The
little patches that sprout up here and there show the numbers of individuals
who've immigrated, where they are financially and how long they've been here."
When one is greeted by a host with uninflected English and served with
European-style cutlery and linens, for instance, it is generally safe to assume
that the restaurant is owned by second- or third-generation Americans.

The discrete neighborhoods are an adventurous food lover's dream: because of
their isolation, they serve up un-Americanized ethnic cooking. But these
far-flung enclaves are also a food lover's nightmare: who can find them?

"That's one of the differences between tenements and track housing," said Ms.
Burum, who is fond of calling Los Angeles "Ellis Island, west."

At the same time, the isolation born of dispersion seems to create a more
ubiquitous sense of ethnicity in the city. "I've eaten more ethnic food in Los
Angeles than I have in any other city," said Eberhard Muller, the former chef of
Le Bernardin in New York, who moved to Santa Monica last year and opened the
Opus restaurant there. "It's not that there are more ethnic restaurants here.
It's just that they are more apparent and more talked about."

This phenomenon may account for the fluid lines between Los Angeles's citadels
of chic and their ethnic underpinnings. At Spago, where Thai spring rolls and
Cambodian soups are routinely served along with pizzas and risotto, Wolfgang
Puck, the owner and chef, credits the city's vivid pluralism with both his
inspiration and his appreciative clientele.

"It's a pain when it comes to shopping," he said, "because lemon grass is one
place; the best Hawaiian shrimp is a 40-minute drive in the other direction.".
But the dispersion means that Angelenos have a panoply of disparate ethnic
restaurants in close range of their homes.

Experience has taught Ms. Burum that the emerging ethnic dishes of today are
foolproof harbingers of the flavors of haute cuisine to come. She began her
odyssey seven years ago, by collaborating on "Cook's Marketplace Los Angeles," a
shopping guide published by 101 Productions in 1986. Her new book has more than
500 entries, and she continues to study ethnic newspapers to find what she calls
"little patches of ethnicity that sprout up like wild mushrooms after the rain."

In midintersection, she continued to weigh a yakitori-and-noodle shop against a
pub with Japanese-style hors d'oeuvres. The honking behind Ms. Burum's car was
escalating.

"Oh, dear," she said. "I guess soba is really the thing. Those noodles are going
to jump into the mainstream." She headed toward Sanuki No Sato (18206 South
Western Avenue, Gardena), a tidy little noodle restaurant nestled in a
mini-mall.

A gaggle of Japanese businessmen were delicately plucking long buckwheat noodles
from the zaro, the bamboo-latticed serving container, and nimbly flicking them
into the dipping sauce. "It's gauche to saturate the noodles," Ms. Burum said in
a clear stage whisper. As well as a tireless chronicler, she is an indefatigable
teacher.

"It's disrespectful to the chef," she said. "He rolls this pasta by hand." Under
a mountain of steamed vegetables, the chilled noodles are deliciously chewy, yet
delicate. "Definite crossover dish," Ms. Burum added.

She next suggested dropping into Yoro No Taki, (15462 South Western Avenue,
Gardena) a Japanese pub in a nearby mini-mall that offers seven sakes, a variety
of yakitori and fried appetizers, and a glimpse of Everyman's Japan in Los
Angeles today. "The population is growing, not so much in numbers, but in
affluence," she said.

As proof, she drove by the Yaohan Market (21515 Western Avenue, Torrance),
several acres of an antiseptically clean Japanese supermarket with everything
from prepared foods and Asian produce to more than a dozen types of soy sauce.
"Better food shopping here than Tokyo," said Ms. Burum, who when not scouting
neighborhoods in Los Angeles is traveling in Asia and Latin America. "But you
need a pair of roller skates to get through the place."

Nearly as large, but with a humbler ambiance, was El Gallo Giro (7136 Pacific,
Huntington Park), a tile-floored Mexican deli that serves up dozens of Mexican
prepared foods -- fresh tortillas, torta rolls with roast pork and chilies,
tacquito, empanada, stews, roasts and fresh-squeezed tropical juices. The crowd
was made up of families clad in embroidered peasant shirts, long cotton skirts
and sandals, as opposed to the dress-for-success singles in Japanese spots.

"See the difference?" whispered Ms. Burum. "Both populations have been in Los
Angeles forever, but the Japanese community has money from Japan, while many of
the Mexicans keep greeting relatives who come here practically destitute."

She bent into her bowl of tinga, pork braised with chipotle and poblano peppers,
priced at $1.50. Across town at the trendy Border Grill, a similar dish was
offered as a luncheon special for $12.50. That's the kind of cultural exchange
that Ms. Burum loves to hear about.

She was excited, for instance, to show the difference between the food at El
Gallo Giro and that at Sierra's (6819 Canoga Avenue, Canoga Park). As if to
reassure patrons, the sign on the heavy colonial door of Sierra's reads
"Restaurant policy: service, cleanliness, quality of food." For generations, Ms.
Burum said, "Angelenos have eaten the Americanized Mexican food here."

She was equally excited by the difference between the trendy sate bar at
Talesai, a soaring, whitewashed dining room at 9043 Sunset Boulevard, and that
of Renu Nakorn (13041 East Rosecrans Avenue, Norwalk), a hole-in-the-wall that's
situated between a barber shop and a gun-and-tackle store in a mini mall.

The first restaurant, where the food lives up to the menu's promise, "the art of
Thai cooking," featured inventive sates, a delicious pad Thai and soups with
depth and finesse. The hole-in-the-wall featured pungent deep-fried dried beef
called neua dad deal with a peppery dipping sauce; stuffed and deep-fried
chicken wings; pickled Thai sausage, and minced beef, quickly sauteed and topped
with a mound of mint and cilantro.

It is too soon, Ms. Burum said, to see the same contrast in Persian restaurants.
Steering through clogged intersections, she passed Shahrezad Flame, at 1442
Westwood Boulevard in West Los Angeles, where tanur lavash (oven-fired flat
bread) is baked in a clay oven. She finessed several one-way streets to find
Golestan (1398 Westwood Boulevard, West Los Angeles), where the walls are
covered with mirrors and mosaics and the pungent stews are served from an
all-you-can-eat steam table.

After several wrong turns and the ritual midintersection pause, Ms. Burum
screeched into an illegal parking space near Shekarchi (1712 Westwood Boulevard,
West Los Angeles). Passers-by stared and oncoming traffic braked, but the
premier chronicler and cartographer of Los Angeles's ethnic plenty was unfazed.
Her mind was on Shekarchi, where, behind a plate-glass window, a chef prepared
magnificent kebabs over a wood-burning fire. The kebabs were served with basmati
rice with saffron butter, tart cherries, sweet orange peel and almonds.

"More authentic than Iran," Ms. Burum said in a whisper as she entered the
restaurant. "Definitely crossover cuisine. Just wait."

LOAD-DATE: October 14, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Renu Nakorn specializes in Isaan-style cuisine, from northeast
Thailand. Seated are Luxkana Sreewarm, the owner, and her son, Chris Vongsaroj.
Standing are Eumpoin Bonchit, left, and Banyat Parkjita, the chef. (pg. C1); El
Gallo Giro in Huntington Park, Calif., is a Mexican deli that offers dozens of
prepared foods like fresh tortillas, empanadas and fresh-squeezed tropical
juices.; Linda Burum, author of "A Guide to Ethnic Food in Los Angeles," keeps a
number of maps and guidebooks in her car.; The Yaohan Market in Torrance,
Calif., a Japanese supermarket, carries more than a dozen types of soy sauce.
(pg. C6) (Photographs by Jan Sonnenmair for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              90 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 14, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: James Stockdale;
Reluctant Politician Tempers Professional Edge

BYLINE: By DAVID E. ROSENBAUM

SECTION: Section A; Page 18; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 706 words


His hands shook with nerves. He stammered. He paused in the middle of his
opening statement to put on his reading glasses. His snow-white forelock kept
falling in his eye. He missed one question because his hearing aid was off.

"Who am I?" James B. Stockdale asked at the beginning of last night's debate.
"Why am I here? I'm not a politician."

In the political spotlight for the first time, Ross Perot's running mate, a
retired Admiral who won a Medal of Honor for heroism as a prisoner of war in
North Vietnam, was no match for the glib professional politicians he was
competing with.

But there was some charm in this 68-year-old who uttered simplicities amid the
bombast, sometimes addled but occasionally pointed. He changed the familiar
cadence of the political debate. Without practiced skills and polished
positions, he made the evening more awkward, less solemn.

Stationed between Vice President Dan Quayle and Senator Al Gore, Mr. Stockdale
spent most of the evening swiveling his head -- "like an observer at a Ping Pong
game," he said -- as the Republican and Democratic candidates went after each
other.

Of Water Lilies and Incentives



 When Hal Bruno of ABC News, the moderator, called a cease-fire between Mr.
Quayle and Mr. Gore so Mr. Stockdale could get a word in on the economy, he
could only say, "I'm out of ammunition on this one."

But minutes later, he got in his best line of the night. As his opponents shook
their fingers and lobbed statistics, Mr. Stockdale interjected: "I think America
is seeing right now the reason this nation is in gridlock. The trickle-downs and
the tax-and-spends, or whatever you want to call them, are at swords' points. We
can't get the economy going."

In answer to a question about the environment, he said, "You can overdo
environmental cleaning," he said. "If you purify the pond, water lilies die.

"I love this planet," he went on. "I don't want to see it the property of
fanatics."

On education, he said simply, "In schools, bureaucracy is bad and economy is
good."

On the question of health care, Mr. Gore huffed that if a criminal had a right
to a lawyer, every family had a right to a doctor. Mr. Quayle puffed that
legislation restricting medical malpractice was the key.

Mr. Stockdale referred to the problem was "a web of wrong-way incentives that
has to be changed." Few experts would disagree. But, Mr. Stockdale seemed not to
have a clue as to what the necessary changes might be.

Mr. Stockdale expressed impatience with what he called the pointless "chitchat
back and forth on the issues," saying the candidates' character was more
important.

His own character, he said, was shaped by his seven and a half years as a
prisoner, the highest ranking officer incarcerated. He ran a "civilization" with
its own laws and constitution, he said, adding, "I was the sovereign."

"The best thing I had going for me," he remarked, "was I had no contact with
Washington all those years."

Mr. Stockdale seemed to have tried to memorize Mr. Perot's economic plan, but in
his nervousness, he often had trouble recalling it and more trouble finding it
in his notes.

Mr. Clinton and Mr. Gore went on and on about the economy. Here, by contrast, is
Mr. Stockdale's entire answer to a question about what should be done to get
people back to work:

"The lifeblood of our economy is investment. And right now when we pay 350 -- we
borrow $350 billion a year -- it saps the money markets, and the private
investors are not getting their share. What we do is work on that budget by an
aggressive program, not a painful program, so that we can start borrowing less
money and getting more investment money on the street through entrepreneurs who
can build factories, who will hire people, and maybe we'll start manufacturing
goods here in this country again. That's my answer."

He used a question about the military budget to warn against unnamed people "who
are really kicking the props out from under our grand military establishment."

On the abortion question, he had a clear answer. "I believe a woman owns her
body and what she does with it is her own business. Period."

Mr. Quayle and Mr. Gore debated that issue for more than five minutes.

NAME: James Stockdale

LOAD-DATE: October 14, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: November 7, 1992, Saturday

CORRECTION:

An article on Oct. 14 about James B. Stockdale's performance in the Oct. 13
Vice-Presidential debate quoted his remark on education incorrectly. Mr.
Stockdale said, "In schools, bureaucracy is bad and autonomy is good"; he did
not say "economy."


TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              91 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 15, 1992, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: CAMPAIGN WATCH;
Standing Toe to Toe and Slugging It Out on the Air

BYLINE: By ELIZABETH KOLBERT

SECTION: Section A; Page 23; Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 812 words


Lots of people who tuned in to watch Tuesday night's debate probably went to bed
disappointed -- those hoping to hear a clear discussion of the candidates'
differences on issues, for example, or those simply looking forward to some new
and uproarious gaffe by the Vice President.

But for those who like to watch politics in its purest form -- as a kind of
psychological gang warfare -- the Vice Presidential debate was one of the best
shows the campaign has offered so far. From the very beginning, when Senator Al
Gore reminded Vice President Dan Quayle of his performance four years ago
against Senator Lloyd Bentsen, through the bitter end, when Mr. Quayle asked,
"Do you, do you trust Bill Clinton to be your President?" Tuesday night's
encounter represented a public exchange of nightmares between the Clinton and
the Bush campaigns.

In the end, the question seemed to be not so much who had won as who had done
the better job of messing with his opponent's mind.

From the Git-Go

For the innocent tone and brutal implications of his opening statement, Mr. Gore
probably deserves the evening's Eve Harrington Award for adroitly undermining a
rival.

Practically in the same breath, Mr. Gore managed to remind viewers that Mr.
Quayle had not served in Vietnam ("Those of us who served in Vietnam look at you
as a national hero," he said to James B. Stockdale, Ross Perot's running mate),
that the Vice President had been flattened by Senator Bentsen in their 1988
debate ("If you don't try to compare George Bush to Harry Truman, I won't
compare you to Jack Kennedy") and that the No. 2 man on the ticket regularly
does end up serving as President ("Harry Truman, it's worth remembering, assumed
the Presidency when Franklin Roosevelt died here in Georgia," he said.)

Later in the debate, Mr. Gore obliquely questioned the Vice President's
usefulness ("What's your role in this going to be?" he asked Mr. Quayle after
reciting the many jobs President Bush has said he will give James Baker) and his
scholastic aptitude ("Dan, I appreciate you reading my book very much," he
drawled.)

'Pulling a Clinton'

Although not nearly as self-possessed as Mr. Gore, Mr. Quayle still succeeded in
introducing into the debate just about every torment that could make his
opponents wish that they, too, had prescriptions for Halcion.

He coined a new phrase, "You're pulling a Clinton," which translates "You are
equivocating." He invoked the likelihood of some international crisis over the
next four years to draw attention to Governor Clinton's inexperience in foreign
affairs. He used the word "trust," which some polls show to be a good one for
President Bush, so often that it started to sound like an incantation. And he
even managed to slip in a reference to Mr. Clinton's youthful adventures with
marijuana.

"Take a deep breath, Al," he said at one point. "Inhale."

Befuddlement in the Middle

Amid all the back and forth, it was easy for the television audience to identify
with the befuddled-looking Mr. Stockdale, who could frequently be seen pacing
behind his lectern while Mr. Gore and Mr. Quayle went at it. When Mr. Stockdale
blurted out, "I think America is seeing right now the reason this nation is in
gridlock," he seemed to be speaking for the frustrated viewer, sitting
powerlessly in front of the set, unable to intervene in an escalating squabble.

From Mr. Gore's and Mr. Quayle's reaction to Mr. Stockdale -- mostly they
ignored him -- it was clear, though, that they were not much interested in the
audience, or at least not in those members that Mr. Stockdale represented. They
both seemed to realize, as viewers, too, had been told, that Americans did not
vote for a President on the basis of his running mate. The audience they seemed
to be playing to were the insiders: the newscasters and commentators who would
go out and tell the audience who had most rattled his opponent's campaign.

Yesterday, these insiders were calling the debate for all intents and purposes a
draw, with Mr. Gore maintaining the advantage in stature. Several commentators
noted that Mr. Quayle had performed better than expected -- "People expected him
to put countries on the wrong continent," the Atlanta Constitution's Cynthia
Tucker explained to CNN -- but they also pointed out that he had often been put
on the defensive and had not managed to fundamentally alter the race.

The Morning After

"The format won," Bob Beckel, a Democratic strategist, told CBS.

As for Mr. Gore and Mr. Quayle, they were still going at it yesterday morning.
Both put in separate appearances on NBC's "Today," ABC's "Good Morning America,"
and on "CBS This Morning."

"George Bush is in a panic," Mr. Gore said on the "Today" show.

"The question," Mr. Quayle said later on the same program, "is do you really
trust Bill Clinton to be President?"

LOAD-DATE: October 15, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              92 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 15, 1992, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Judge Bars Military From Recruiting on Law School Campus

BYLINE: By KIRK JOHNSON,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 7; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 568 words

DATELINE: HARTFORD, Oct. 14


A state judge today barred military recruiters from conducting interviews on the
campus of the University of Connecticut Law School because the armed forces
discriminate against homosexuals.

The judge said Connecticut's one-year-old gay rights law specifically prohibits
state agencies or institutions from helping any employer that discriminates
against gay people and that therefore even such courtesies as giving a recruiter
a cup of coffee and a chair to sit in is illegal.

Lawyers at the American Civil Liberties Union, which argued the case for the Gay
and Lesbian Law Students Association, said they believed it was the first
instance in the nation in which a state judge, using state gay rights laws, had
ordered the military off campus. Connecticut is one of only seven states that
ban discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation.

"It's a real victory for lesbian and gay men," said William B. Rubenstein, the
director of the A.C.L.U.'s national lesbian and gay rights project. "It says
that even against institutions as powerful as the University of Connecticut and
the United States military, gay rights laws apply."

The order, by Superior Court Judge Frances Allen, is technically only temporary,
pending her final ruling on the students' efforts to bar the recruiters
permanently. But the judge used 10 pages to elaborate on her reasoning about why
the state was wrong in giving the military special treatment. To refuse to make
the ban permanent would in effect mean rejecting her own argument.

Lawyers for the university argued at a hearing in Hartford last week that the
Legislature, in a law passed in the early 1980's, had bestowed special rights
upon military recruiters that were not affected by the later gay-rights law.
That earlier statute, intended to overcome what the lawyers said was a lingering
post-Vietnam War hostility toward the military, said recruiters had the same
rights as private employers and could not be banned.

But Judge Allen rejected that argument. She said that the earlier law guaranteed
the military only the same rights as others, and that the newer law had changed
the rules and obligations for all parties. The gay-rights bill also specifically
gives one military exemption, to Reserve Officer Training Corps programs, which
continue to operate as the main military recruiting effort on most campuses. If
the Legislature had wanted other military recruiters exempted, the judge said,
the highly specific law would have spelled that out.

Order Being Studied

"The present statute merely requires the same recruiting opportunities for the
military as are provided to non-military recruiters," Judge Allen wrote. And
since the Judge Advocate General Corps -- in effect the lawyers brigade for the
armed forces -- openly refuses to consider gay lawyers, gay students had been
penalized, with the University's assistance, by being offered fewer jobs.

"The have suffered stigma, humiliation, and the loss of professional and
educational benefits as a result of the defendant's unlawful conduct," she said.

The order, as an interim ruling in a case that remains in Judge Allen's hands,
could not likely be appealed until a final injunction could be issued, perhaps
later this year, lawyers said. A spokesman for the state Attorney General's
office, Bernard L. Kavaler, declined to comment except to say that the order was
being studied.

LOAD-DATE: October 15, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              93 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 16, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Debate;
ISSUES, NOT ATTACKS, DOMINATE AS AUDIENCE GUIDES 2D DEBATE

BYLINE: By ROBIN TONER

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 2147 words


The three Presidential candidates engaged in an earnest town-meeting exchange
last night that became a forum for airing the nation's domestic woes during
President Bush's Administration.

Mr. Bush defended his record and his sensitivity to the suffering of the
recession. "Of course, you feel it when you're President of the United States,"
he said.

But he asserted that a Clinton Presidency would mean huge new taxes rather than
a growing economy. "Governor Clinton's program wants to tax more and spend
more," Mr. Bush said. "I don't believe that's the way to do it."

Governor Clinton, however, quickly dismissed the charge.

It was a night in which there were a few sweeping promises. Ross Perot, the
independent candidate, promised he would serve only one term and would not take
compensation for the $200,000-a-year job. Mr. Clinton promised to propose a
universal health-care plan in the first 100 days of his Presidency.

Thrives on Format

Mr. Clinton, who seemed to thrive on the town-meeting format that he had used
throughout his primary campaign, presented himself as a man with long years of
experience in dealing with the problems of ordinary people.  He also asserted
that the blame for these problems clearly rested with the "failed economic
theory" of the Republicans.

Mr. Perot once again sharply criticized the "gridlock" in Washington, casting
the two parties as mired in a cycle of blame that produced only economic drift
and decline. "It's not the Republicans' fault, of course, and it's not the
Democrats' fault," he said.  "Somewhere out there there's an extraterrestrial
that's doing this to us, I guess."

At the start of the program and in his closing statement, Mr. Bush tried to move
the debate to the issue of character and trust, which he said should be a
paramount consideration for voters when they choose a President, and suggested
that Mr. Clinton did not pass the test. He asked the voters which President they
would prefer in the event of an international crisis.

As for Mr. Clinton, at one point he looked at Mr. Bush and said: "I'm not
interested in his character. I want to change the character of the Presidency."

Little New Ground

But in general, it was a night that broke little new substantive ground and
offered Mr. Bush few opportunities for the dramatic strokes that his strategists
think he needs to come back from a clear deficit in the public opinion polls.

Mr. Clinton, for his part, seemed clearly content to avoid confrontations and
follow a no-risk strategy befitting a front-runner. He pointedly turned away
from opportunities to respond to Mr. Bush's probing attacks on his character and
to take on the President over his handling of Iraq.

The 90-minute debate, held on the campus of the University of Richmond, opened
the candidates to questions from an audience of 209 people selected by the
Gallup Organization to represent uncommitted voters. Carole Simpson, of ABC
News, was the moderator.  The questioners were relentlessly focused on issues,
from gun control to free trade, from health care to urban woes.

The unusual format, with the candidates occasionally perched on stools and
occasionally wandering the stage like talk show hosts, made for a far less
confrontational debate than might have been expected, given the tenor of the
campaign dialogue in recent days.

More than once, members of the audience gently chided the candidates for not
sticking to the issues this year.

Still, Mr. Bush again assailed Mr. Clinton as a man who habitually straddled the
issues. He also took pains to answer Mr. Clinton's attack of Sunday night's
debate, in which the Democrat pointedly noted that Mr. Bush's father, Senator
Prescott Bush, had been a leading critic of Senator Joseph R. McCarthy.
Democrats have accused the Republicans of practicing McCarthyite tactics against
Mr. Clinton.

Mr. Bush's reply last night suggested that the allusion to his father had nagged
him. "I remember something my Dad told me," Mr. Bush said. "I was 18 years old,
going to Penn Station to go on into the Navy, and he said, 'write your mother,'
which I faithfully did; he said 'serve your country,' -- my father was an honor,
duty and country man -- and he said, 'tell the truth.' And I've tried to do that
in public life, all through it. That says something about character."

Despite the occasional personal jab, the debate was dominated by domestic
concerns. The only question on foreign policy came more than an hour into the
debate, and it was a general inquiry about how the country should participate in
the "new world order."

The candidates agreed that the United States should remain an international
superpower. Mr. Bush tied the collapse of Communism to steady Republican
stewardship, while Mr. Clinton and Mr. Perot insisted that the nation had to
improve economically to maintain its strength internationally.

Mr. Perot, who was widely considered the winner of the first debate, spoke
mostly in generalities last night.  While he consistently contended that ridding
the country of its huge deficit was crucial, he did not use the forum to advance
his package of austere tax increases and spending cuts.

Mr. Perot tried to distinguish himself from his rivals on trade, lambasting what
he asserted was a government that failed to look after the interests of the home
front when trade agreements were negotiated.

Mr. Bush countered that the nation's economic problems would be much worse
without strong exports. "Free and fair trade is the answer, not protection," he
said.

Mr. Clinton sounded a similar theme, arguing, "The trick is to expand our export
base and to expand trade on terms that are fair to us." To do that, he said,
requires making sure that markets in other countries are as open to the United
States as America is to foreign products, and changing the tax code to insure
that it encourages investment at home.

On the subject of the deficit, the candidates were asked to detail how much they
would reduce it in four years and whether they would promise not to seek
re-election if they failed.

Governor Clinton said he would not make such a promise, warning that overly
drastic measures would harm the economy. Instead, he said he would work to cut
the deficit in half in his first term, which he contended would still allow for
measures to spur economic growth.

Mr. Bush countered, "I don't see how you can grow the deficit down by increasing
taxes."

Mr. Perot, who said he did not plan to seek re-election, repeated his pledge to
make cutting the deficit a priority and charged that the two major parties had
proved themselves unable to deal with it.

Several questioners expressed disgust at what they said was the mudslinging tone
of the campaign and asked the candidates to discuss national issues rather than
dwelling on character questions.

Mr. Perot said issues were exactly what he was trying to talk about, noting that
he had bought 30-minute chunks of television advertising time to describe in
detail his economic proposals. "Let's talk jobs, health care and crime," he
said.

But Mr. Bush said "character is part of being President," as important to
qualities of leadership as detailed programs. He accused Governor Clinton of
starting the negative campaigning and said, "I'm not going to sit there being a
punching bag."

He renewed his attack on Governor Clinton's involvement in Vietnam War protests
while he was studying at Oxford University in England in the 1960's. He said he
was "deeply troubled by someone who demonstrates and organizes demonstrations
against his government in a foreign country."

Is It a Generation Gap?

"Maybe that's generational," he said.

Mr. Clinton, responding briefly, said he was disheartened by "the tenor and tone
of this campaign."

Mr. Bush defended his domestic accomplishments throughout the night.  For
example, he said he supported one questioner's call for doing more to rebuild
the cities and the nation's roads, bridges and water systems. He said that this
year the Government passed the "furthest looking transportation bill in the
history of this country since Eisenhower started the interstate highway
program." The President also defended his call for enterprise zones to help
revive the nation's inner cities. He said he was frustrated at the difficulty in
getting such a proposal through Congress, but acknowledged that he had
threatened to veto the bill that provided tax breaks for investments in poor
urban areas.

Motives for Veto

He said he objected to other provisions of the bill added by Democrats in
Congress and used the discussion to appeal anew for a line-item veto. If he had
that, he said, "we could knock out the pork, knock out the tax increases and do
what the people want us to do, create enterprise zones."

But Mr. Clinton quickly retorted that the real reason Mr. Bush wanted to veto
the bill, which included several tax increases that Mr. Bush opposed, was
because it "asks the wealthy to pay a little more." Sensitive to charges of
dirty campaigning made by some in the audience, Mr. Clinton insisted that his
charge was not "mudslinging but fact-slinging."

All three candidates tried to tread lightly on the politically perilous ground
of gun control. Governor Clinton said that while he supported the right of
people to keep arms, he supported a bill in Congress that would require people
seeking to buy guns to submit to a waiting period while their backgrounds could
be checked for mental illness or criminal records.

Mr. Bush said he opposed the gun-control bill, named for James Brady, the former
White House press secretary who was severely wounded in the attempted
assassination of President Ronald Reagan in 1981.

President Bush said, "I was not for the bill because it was not tough enough on
criminals."

Mr. Perot called the Brady bill "a timid step in the right direction."

The candidates split three ways on the question whether members of Congress
should be subject to term limitations.

"I strongly support term limits," said President Bush, staking out ground taken
by most Republicans in the Democrat-controlled Congress. He said he believed
"this would return government closer to the people."

Merits of Term Limits

Mr. Clinton said term limits "may be popular, but I am against them." He said
they would "pose a lot of problems for little states" and "would increase the
influence of staff members -- people who were never elected."

Mr. Perot responded: "I intend to be there one term. I don't want to spend one
day thinking about re-election. I will take absolutely no compensation.

"The point is we have got to reform government. If you don't reform government,
term limits won't help."

On the issue of health care, Mr. Clinton reiterated his promise to produce a
national health-care plan in the first 100 days of his Presidency. Mr. Bush said
a leading factor driving up health costs was malpractice suits. "They're
breaking the system," he said, noting they cost more than $20 billion a year. "I
want to see those outrageous claims capped."

He said he wanted to make insurance available to the poor and to allow Americans
to take their health-care policies with them when they leave their jobs.

The questioners sometimes seemed to unsettle the candidates. Mr. Bush took
umbrage with what he saw as the premise of a woman who asked how each of the
candidates had been personally affected by the national debt.  He said she
seemed to be suggesting that people of means were untouched by it. "I don't
think it's fair to say that if you haven't had cancer, therefore you don't know
what it's like," he said.

"You ought to be in the White House for a day, hear what I hear, see what I see,
the mail I read," he said. "Everybody's affected by debt. Everything is more
expensive. Everything comes out of your pocket and my pocket."

Mr. Perot said his decision to enter the Presidential race, disrupting his
private life and business, was evidence of his deep concern with the debt.

Economic Woes Discussed

Mr. Clinton used this moment to make an impassioned case for his commitment and
his closeness to the nation's economic woes. He said that as Governor of
Arkansas for 12 years, and as a candidate over these past two years, he had seen
the troubled economy and its toll up close. "When a factory closes, I know the
people who ran it," he said. "For the last 13 months, I've been meeting with
people like you all over America, who have lost their livelihoods, their jobs,
their health insurance."

But he told the questioner that the deficit was not the only cause of these
problems, citing a lack of investment in America's people and years of what he
called trickle-down economics. "We're in the grip of a failed economic theory,"
he said. "And this election better be about what kind of economic theory you
want."


LOAD-DATE: October 16, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: President Bush and Gov. Bill Clinton arguing in front of Ross
Perot during the debate last night. (Associated Press) (pg. A1); President Bush,
Ross Perot and Gov. Bill Clinton during their debate last night at the
University of Richmond. They answered questions from an audience of 209 people
selected to represent uncommitted voters. (Andrea Mohin/The New York Times) (pg.
A10)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              94 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 16, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: News Analysis;
A No-Nonsense Sort of Talk Show

BYLINE: By MAUREEN DOWD

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1192 words


The format of the second Presidential debate last night may have resembled the
sort of daytime talk shows where guests wax confessional and personal on all
human idiosyncrasies. But when George Bush tried to press the character attack
that his advisers see as his best hope to beat Bill Clinton, the audience
swiftly cut him off.

They wanted a sober, serious discussion of issues: infrastructure, keeping jobs
in the United States, crime, gun control, health care and deficit reduction.
They did not ask about foreign policy in the first 65 minutes of the debate.
They did not want to know about Mr. Clinton's draft record, marital problems,
travel schedule in Moscow or antiwar activities in Europe.

Last night's debate in Richmond was the natural culmination of a campaign season
that has been played out on television talk shows and other populist forums. But
those who had worried that the "Oprah Winfrey" format, with the candidates
perched on stools and the audience asking the questions, would lower the quality
of the Presidential discourse, were proven very wrong.

It was a night in which the voters blew the whistle on mud wrestling and had a
civilizing effect on the often feral 1992 campaign.

The President, cut off on character and foreign-policy issues for the most part
and boxed into a situation where he was forced to confront his weakest issue,
the economy, seemed uncomfortable and sometimes grew testy. By 9:50 P.M., he was
checking his watch to see how much longer this infrastructure quizzing would go
on.

Mr. Clinton, who suggested a format that he has made the medium for his
campaign, had the empathy and confidence of a television evangelist, moving
close to the questioners and urging one woman to repeat her question about
whether Mr. Bush was out of touch.

Ross Perot offered his usual back-porch wisdom: "If you want to have a high-risk
experience comparable to bungee-jumping, go into the Congress," he said. "Wear
your safety-toe shoes when you go."

He accepted a pledge to avoid any negative campaigning and offered to forgo a
salary and a second term if elected. Mr. Perot, who was positioned in the middle
this time, tried to exert a physical dominance by standing most of the time
before a stool that was too tall for him.

Jabs at Mr. Fixit

But the audience and Carole Simpson, the ABC News correspondent who served as
tart-tongued moderator, seemed less interested in colorful maxims and sweeping
promises than in pinning him down on specific ideas.

Ms. Simpson was an unusually intrusive moderator: at one point she needled Mr.
Perot about his know-it-all answers, and she drew a few laughs when she referred
a question about schools to Mr. Bush as "the education President."

Mr. Bush and Mr. Clinton, clearly relieved that Mr. Perot was not charming the
audience as easily as he had in the first debate, both tried to capitalize on
the sterner mood about economic solutions, by telling Mr. Perot, each at
separate moments, a version of, "You can't just say you're going to fix it."

The President's original strategy had been to follow up on the Vice Presidential
debate on Tuesday night, in which Dan Quayle aggressively pressed the issue of
whether America can trust Bill Clinton.

Soon after the debate started, a woman in the audience complained that "the
amount of time the candidates have spent in this campaign trashing their
opponents' character and their programs is depressingly large."

At first, in an inaccurate reading of the audience mood, Mr. Bush only saw this
question as an opening to push the trust issue. He accused Mr. Clinton of
starting the fight and then resumed his attack on the Arkansas Governor for
demonstrating against the Vietnam war while he was a Rhodes scholar at Oxford in
1969.

Then he began pressing another Republican argument that Mr. Clinton changes his
positions regularly. "I do think that you can't turn the White House into the
Waffle House," Mr. Bush said. He continued the assault, but was cut off by Ms.
Simpson, who gave the floor to Mr. Clinton.

In reply, the Governor quoted a newspaper editorial that called Mr. Bush a
political chameleon, but he seemed to quickly sense the change in temperature.

'The Night Belongs to You'

"I'm not interested in his character," Mr. Clinton said. He added, turning to
the questioner, "So I think you're right, and I hope the rest of the night
belongs to you."

Mr. Clinton, who has been bruised by Republican attacks on his evasiveness on
the draft and other issues, tried to make himself the victim. "I'm just as sick
as you are by having to wake up and figure out how to defend myself every day,"
he said, walking toward the audience as though to identify with their concern.
"I never thought I'd be involved in anything like this."

Mr. Perot, however, was the only one of the three candidates who was willing to
"take the pledge," demanded by a man in the audience, that the candidates stick
to the issues and stop "mud wrestling."

He also realized that the talk-show format, often used by people selling books
or exercise videos, was the perfect place to plug his campaign advertisements.

Until Tomorrow

"I'll see you tomorrow night. On NBC, 10:30 to 11 eastern," he told the crowd,
expansively.

Mr. Bush thinks he is a good politician when he is able to be with voters one on
one, as opposed to giving large set speeches. But it did not work tonight
because the audience wanted to see where he planned to take the country and
whether he understood their problems.

His worst moment came when a young black woman in the audience asked him
pointedly and repeatedly, "How can you honestly find a cure for the economic
problems of the common people if you have no experience in what's ailing them?"

Mr. Bush did not react warmly, saying, "Help me with the question, and I'll try
to answer it."

Mr. Clinton immediately saw his opening to be a champion of the middle class. He
moved toward the woman and said: "Tell me how it's affected you again. You know
people who've lost their jobs and lost their homes?" The woman nodded and said,
"Well, yeah."

He then explained that as governor of a small state, "When people lose their
jobs, there's a good chance I'll know them by their names. When a factory
closes, I know the people who ran it."

Endorsement for Barbara Bush

Mr. Clinton even passed up an opening offered to him by Ms. Simpson to attack
Mr. Bush on one of the Democrats' favorite issues, his friendly policy toward
Iraq before the war in the Persian Gulf.

Struggling through the issues portion of the evening, Mr. Bush a couple of times
tried to point to his best asset: Barbara Bush, who watched from the audience.
At one point, sounding pessimistic about his own prospects, he said: "I think if
Barbara Bush were running this year, she'd be elected, but it's too late."

In his closing statement, the President tried to return to his game plan,
presenting himself as the more trustworthy of the two major party candidates.

"Who has the perseverance, the character, the integrity, the maturity to get the
job done," he said. "I hope I'm that person."


LOAD-DATE: October 16, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH



GRAPHIC:  Live television coverage of the last 90-minute debate will be provided
by ABC, CBS, NBC, Fox, C-Span, CNN and PBS.

Presidential
Chart: "Debate on the Air"

Monday, Oct. 19

East Lansing, Mich., 7 P.M. Eastern (pg. A10)

TYPE: News Analysis

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              95 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 16, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

U.S. Aide Says Laos Markings Remain Puzzle in M.I.A. Issue

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 6; Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 802 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 15


A top American intelligence official said today that two sets of large symbols
etched into the ground in Laos in 1973 and 1988 were almost certainly human-made
signs intended to send a message. But the official said experts had not been
able to prove or disprove that they were distress signals from stranded American
prisoners of war.

In the first case, the figures "1973" or "1573" with a "TH" or "TA" were
spotted, apparently by satellite, gouged into a field in the Plain of Jars in
May and June 1973, after all American prisoners were reported returned. In
January 1988, Central Intelligence Agency surveillance picked up a "USA" dug
into a rice field near Sam Neua, along with what was possibly a "K" made of rice
stalks.

Experts said the could not rule out that these were attempts to display coded
symbols that American pilots had been taught to use to attract attention if they
were captured.

"These symbols were clearly intended to send a signal to someone above, and we
cannot explain them today," said the official, Duane Andrews, Assistant
Secretary of Defense for Command, Control, Communications and Intelligence. He
was testifying before the Senate Select Committee on P.O.W.-M.I.A. Affairs at
the start of two days of hearings, some in closed session, on
intelligence-gathering and covert operations involving missing Americans.

The existence of these symbols is an important factor in the debate over whether
and where Americans may have remained in captivity in Indochina after United
States forces were withdrawn in early 1973. Many other symbols also produced by
satellite or reconnaissance imagery have been declared by Defense Department and
Central Intelligence Agency experts to be natural formations on the ground.

Senator John F. Kerry, Democrat of Massachusetts and the committee chairman,
cautioned today against irresponsible conclusions that would mislead families.

"The American public is listening very carefully," he said. "If we pretend to
them that something is a symbol when it's not, we are raising false hopes."

But two other Senators on the committee, Bob Smith of New Hampshire and Charles
E. Grassley of Iowa, both Republicans, were critical of the Pentagon analysts,
whom they accused of trying to debunk what looked like powerful evidence.

The committee has agreed to call in independent analysts to look at Defense
Department material.

This weekend, President Bush's special envoy, Gen. John W. Vessey Jr., will lead
a team to Hanoi to renew discussions on the missing in the light of repeated
testimony in recent months that the Governments of Vietnam and Laos know more
about the fates of many Americans than they have revealed in nearly two decades.

The United States lists 2,265 Americans still unaccounted for since the war, of
which cases about 130 or 135 could be resolved by Hanoi with existing archival
information, it is believed.  Three former Secretaries of Defense have told the
Senate committee that they believed that some Americans might have been alive in
Indochina when the war ended, but were not returned or accounted for by Hanoi.

It was evident in the disagreements during the hearings today that experts are
not in complete accord about the handling of some satellite imagery in cases
where symbols have been detected in Indochina.

Two officials of the Joint Services Search, Evasion, Rescue and Escape Agency,
which trains American service personnel in emergency techniques, said they had
seen what they thought were credible photographs of coded symbols in various
locations in Vietnam and Laos. But they said they had been convinced by the
Defense Intelligence Agency that imagery enhancement had proved the names and
numbers they saw did not in fact exist.

In several critical cases, long periods of time elapsed between the finding and
analysis of some symbols. Various branches of the armed services were not always
sharing information.

No 'Authenticator' List'

Mr. Andrews acknowledged today that there was no comprehensive list of
"authenticator" numbers assigned to each pilot or crew flying into enemy
territory. Without such a readily available list, numbers or letters picked up
from the ground could not always be quickly checked for clues that could
correlate to missing servicemen.

The 1988 symbols, in particular a giant "USA" in letters nearly 11 feet high,
were spotted accidentally during Central Intelligence Agency surveillance of an
area in Laos near the Vietnamese border in January. But Mr. Andrews said they
were not analyzed by the Pentagon until the next December.

What looked like the letter "K" found near the "USA" was considered important by
some analysts, because a K with a specially assigned modification, called a
"walking K," was a generic signal of distress at the time.

LOAD-DATE: October 16, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              96 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 16, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

State Dept. Admits Clinton File Error

BYLINE: By ERIC SCHMITT,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 22; Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 1159 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 15


Dropping its contention that an urgent search for consular records on Gov. Bill
Clinton was properly handled, the State Department said today that the effort
had violated its own regulations.

On Wednesday the department defended the urgency of the search because of the
Presidential election. But today it acknowledged that its policies bar special
handling of such cases when the reason for haste is an imminent election.

The disclosure that the search was contrary to department policy adds to the
impression that the rush for information about the Democratic nominee may have
been part of an Administration effort to gather material that could be used
against him in the final weeks of the Presidential campaign.

Charges by Clinton Camp

The State Department has said the search was initiated by requests from news
organizations under the Freedom of Information Act for details about Mr.
Clinton's overseas travel while he was in England as a Rhodes Scholar in the
late 1960's. The Clinton campaign has charged that the Administration used the
requests as a pretext for an improper effort to find information that might
support unsubstantiated rumors that Mr. Clinton considered renouncing his
citizenship to avoid military service during the Vietnam War.

The department's handling of the search appears to have left career diplomats
and officials uneasy. Today's disclosures by the State Department represented an
awkward reversal for Richard Boucher, the Acting Assistant Secretary for Public
Affairs, who defended the search on Wednesday. But even as he reversed course,
Mr. Boucher seemed to hold low-level officials responsible for actions that he
earlier said were personally directed by Elizabeth Tamposi, the Assistant
Secretary for Consular Affairs.

Mr. Boucher told reporters today that "low-level people" had erred in
classifying the requests for expedited handling, which he said was meant to
reflect "the urgency which the requesters in the media had placed on their
requests.

"That particular designation and other notations were clearly a mistake," he
said.

Mr. Boucher said on Wednesday that Ms. Tamposi a political appointee of Mr.
Bush's former chief of staff John H. Sununu, took personal charge of the records
search. An official at the American Embassy in London said Ms. Tamposi had taken
the unusual step of ordering another political appointee, Norbert Krieg, the
Embassy's consul general, to oversee the search personally. The order, by
telephone, was unusual because such matters are normally handled by diplomatic
cable. It is unclear whether Ms. Tamposi was aware of the request when it was
designated for expedited handling.

Moreover, Ms. Tamposi directed her subordinates to check Mr. Clinton's records
at a Federal storage complex in the Washington suburb of Suitland, Md., Mr.
Boucher said. Mr. Boucher also told reporters on Wednesday that "there is no
inappropriate behavior at all in this."

The results of the search have not been released, and it is not clear whether
they ever would have been. Under the law, Mr. Clinton would have had to sign a
waiver to permit that release.

Mr. Boucher offered the agency's explanation of the error at the State
Department's daily news briefing for reporters today. The Freedom of Information
requests were made by two news organizations, The Associated Press and Hearst
Newspapers, about Mr. Clinton's visa, passport, draft and citizenship records.

The Washington Post reported today that according to a Sept. 28 memo, Yvonne P.
Evans, a processing manager in the State Department's office that handles
Freedom of Information requests, alerted officials in her office of the requests
and noted that "due to the Presidential election on Nov. 3, these requests are
time sensitive."

Soon after, Mr. Boucher said, the memos had come to the attention of State
Department lawyers who alerted the Freedom of Information office that the
requests did not meet the requirements for speedy handling.

Under department regulations, such requests are to be handled on a first-come,
first-served basis and may only be handled more speedily "if somebody's going to
die or get injured, or if somebody's Constitutional rights are going to be
violated by any delay," Mr. Boucher said.

By the time the lawyers caught the error, Mr. Boucher said the cases had already
been passed for action to the Bureau of Consular Affairs. Mr. Boucher said there
had been no contact between the State Department and the White House or the
Bush/Quayle '92 campaign.

Backlog of 4,000 Requests

Although the Freedom of Information office is reported to have a backlog of
4,000 requests for information, Mr. Boucher said it had been responding to
information requests in one to six weeks "so it's sort of anybody's guess at
that point whether things moved faster or slower because of the expedite
stamps."

Other officials expressed skepticism about such efficiency. The Federal
Government often delays for months, and sometimes years, before meeting
reporters' requests for official records.

"From everything I know about the State Department and other large agencies, if
they start processing the requests within one to two months it would be really
pushing things," said Harry Hammitt, editor of Access Reports, a biweekly
newsletter on the Freedom of Information Act published in Lynchburg, Va.

The Center for National Security Studies, a project of the American Civil
Liberties Union, today filed a Freedom of Information request for records on how
the State Department processed the requests for the Clinton files.

No Punishment Expected

Asked today if any disciplinary action had been taken against those responsible
for mishandling the request, Mr. Boucher said, "No, I don't think there's any
grounds for considering something like that."

The State Department's policy on expedited Freedom of Information requests
involving political elections has been upheld in two recent court cases.

In May, the Justice Department, acting on behalf of the State Department, denied
a request for speedy action from a Republican Congressional candidate in
California, Michael Huffington, saying that a political election did not warrant
expedited handling of a Freedom of Information request.

"The Court of Appeals reviewed this very issue under the broader standard of
summary disposition and held that a request for use in a public election did not
present strongly compelling reason for expedited consideration," the State
Department said at the time.

In that case, the Administration cited a 1988 case involving a Presidential
election. In that case a public interest group sued the Central Intelligence
Agency for files relating to George Bush, who was then running for President.
The group asked for expedited treatment. Both the United States District Court
and the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit
denied that request.

LOAD-DATE: October 16, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              97 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 16, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Review/Television;
Why Things Are Looking Up for the Democrats

BYLINE: By WALTER GOODMAN

SECTION: Section B; Page 16; Column 1; Cultural Desk; Word and Image Page

LENGTH: 1336 words


After years of exile amid the fleshpots of Republican Administrations, Ben J.
Wattenberg seems to be going home to the Democratic Party. Or, as he prefers to
characterize the situation, it has come home to him and other disaffected
Democrats. "The Democrats, 1960 to 1992" -- the first of two programs called
"America's Political Parties: Power and Principle" -- is his account of the ups
and downs and, as he sees it, this year's up of Democratic fortunes.

Mr. Wattenberg, a newspaper columnist and television commentator who served in
the Administrations of Lyndon B. Johnson and Jimmy Carter, identifies with the
traditional Democratic coalition that was shattered by what he calls "the cause
groups" that gave Senator George S. McGovern the Presidential nomination and, in
Mr. Wattenberg's opinion, the resounding defeat of 1972. He says that to the
blue-collar workers and others who had been the party's mainstay, the new
Democrats seemed "too soft, too liberal, too permissive, too squishy."

Most of the program's news clips are familiar, and the interviews with such past
and possibly future players as Mr. McGovern, Walter F. Mondale, the Rev. Jesse
Jackson, Gary Hart and Geraldine Ferraro will knock no one off the couch. But
the Wattenberg point of view -- that of the alienated Democrats who created the
Coalition for a Democratic Majority -- comes through clearly enough.

For him, the 1992 Bill Clinton-Al Gore ticket represents a movement back to
"opportunity, community, responsibility" that can once again appeal to Democrats
who found themselves voting for Ronald Reagan and George Bush in the 80's. Mr.
Wattenberg seems to take particular satisfaction in the way "Clinton stiffed
Jesse Jackson and the left."

Next week, David Gergen, who served in the Nixon, Ford and Reagan
Administrations before ascending to "The MacNeil/Lehrer Newshour," gives his
view of "The Republicans, 1960 to 1992," focusing particularly on the tension
between moderates like himself and right-wingers like Pat Robertson and Patrick
J. Buchanan. Tonight, he joins Mr. Wattenberg briefly for amiable chats, during
which Mr. Gergen calls Mr. Clinton "a Reagan Democrat."

Paid for largely by conservative foundations, these accounts of the last 32
years of American politics from a centrist position should comfort those who
criticize public broadcasting for a chronic tilt to the left. On that subject, I
detect an effort by PBS to open things up this election season. Maybe the
programmers are tired of being accused of being too soft, too liberal, too
permissive, too squishy.

Anyway, no one can complain of a dearth of political programs. "The Democrats"
is followed on Channel 13 tonight at 10 by "Move Over: Women and the '92
Campaign," which can be seen at 9 P.M. on Channel 49. On Sunday, at 10 P.M., CNN
will show "The Battle to Lead: Bill Clinton of Arkansas," and on Oct. 25, it
will pay similar attention to his opponent on "The Public Mind of George Bush."

'The Two Coasts of China'
'Asia and the Challenge
of the West'
PBS
(Channel 13 in New York, tomorrow at 6 P.M.)

Granted, a history of China could easily fill 10 hours of television. But faced
with compressing it into a single hour, as part of an even more ambitious
project, the producers of this documentary have found an approach that works.

Tomorrow's enlightening opener of "The Pacific Century," a new 10-part PBS
series, focuses on the tension between the insular vision of China's rulers in
the interior and the outward reach of traders along its coast. The overview is
no doubt simplified, but it is not simplistic. Conceived by Frank Gibney, an
Asia specialist who also appears as a resident expert, the program is
intelligently focused, and the production turns his thesis into a colorful tale.

Embellished by a mix of archival materials and up-to-date photography, ancient
scrolls and scenes from recent movies, maps and interviews, the story begins
with the 13th-century Mongol invasion. Everyone knows the Mongols were warriors,
as movie clips of Genghis Khan's galloping riders attest; but Mr. Gibney
emphasizes that they were also traders who established a direct route between
China and Europe and the Middle East.

But when they left China in the 14th century, the Mongols were replaced by the
Ming Dynasty, which mistrusted the outside world. The Great Wall stands as a
symbol of the Ming efforts to keep foreigners at bay, and the heritage of
inwardness was passed on to the Manchu invaders. But no wall could keep out the
capitalists. Their influence can still be seen in the views of bustling
Guangzhou, formerly Canton, where merchants prospered from trade with the West.

This rich history, richly presented, ends in Hong Kong, that glittering symbol
of international trade and finance, which is to be taken back from Britain in
1997. The question viewers are left with is how the conservative men in
Tiananmen Square will deal with the contemporary Mongols in business suits. A
rock video singer cries, "Come soon, 1997/I want to have a wild time!"

Next week, the subject is Japan (which will also be featured this month on TBS
in "Portrait of Japan," on Oct. 26 and 27). Then the series sweeps through
Vietnam and Indonesia, South Korea, Singapore, Taiwan and the Philippines, with
return visits to China and Japan today. I haven't watched them all, but if they
come up to the quality of "The Two Coasts of China," your time will not be
misspent, although their scheduling by Channel 13 at 6 P.M. Saturdays may seem
inscrutable.

Mr. Gibney's companion book, "The Pacific Century: America and Asia in a
Changing World," has just been published by Charles Scribner's Sons. The series
is also being offered as a college-level video course, and videocassettes are on
the market. The Western traders are at it again.

'The Missiles of October
What the World Didn't Know'
ABC, tomorrow at 9 P.M.
(Channel 7 in New York.)

This two-hour report makes the case that the Cuban missile crisis brought the
world much closer to nuclear war than most people realized 30 years ago, or
realize today. Through tape recordings of President John F. Kennedy's executive
committee of the National Security Council and interviews with American, Soviet
and Cuban players of the time, the documentary emphasizes what the decision
makers did not know about their adversaries' actions and intentions. In
particular, tomorrow's account emphasizes, President Kennedy did not know that
the Soviet commander in Cuba had battlefield nuclear weapons and the authority
to use them.

From the American point of view, the discovery that the Soviet Union had shipped
missiles with nuclear warheads to Cuba meant that most of the United States
would be within range of a nuclear strike. From the Soviet Union's point of
view, its missiles in Cuba were only a response to American missiles in Turkey,
close to Soviet soil.

President Kennedy is shown to have been under pressure from the Pentagon to
strike first. Soviet Premier Nikita S. Khrushchev was under pressure from his
ally, the Cuban President Fidel Castro, to shoot down an American plane or two.
Peter Jennings quotes the Cuban leader's exhortation to the Soviet generals:
"The Americans are sneezing on you, just as much as they are sneezing on us."

"The Missiles of October" is a cautionary reminder of how narrow and fuzzy the
line can be between a nuclear strike and striking a deal.

America's Political Parties: Power and Principle
The Democrats, 1960 to 1992
PBS, tonight at 9.
(Channel 13 in New York.)

Written by Ben J. Wattenberg, Todd Brewster, Michael Pack, Daniel B. Polin;
Andrew Morreale, editor; Doug Abel, associate producer; Todd Brewster,
co-producer; produced and directed by Michael Pack and Mr. Polin for Manifold
Productions, in association with the South Carolina Educational Television
Network and Great Projects Film Company; Kenneth Mandel and Mr. Polin, executive
producers; David Gergen and Ben J. Wattenberg, hosts.

LOAD-DATE: October 16, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              98 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 16, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Editorial Notebook;
Lord of the Us

BYLINE: By Karl E. Meyer

SECTION: Section A; Page 30; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 497 words


One of the most interesting moments in Tuesday's Vice-Presidential debate was
all but drowned out in the rehearsed sound and fury. That was when Vice Adm.
James Bond Stockdale spoke of "US" -- as in "us" or "United States" or "Unity
over Self."

These lines came not from a coach or Teleprompter but from his heart, from his
long ordeal as a prisoner of war in North Vietnam. In answer to a question about
urban enterprise zones, Ross Perot's running mate plumbed deeper themes. He
discussed the great unmentionable in a country that exalts free markets and
rugged individuals: the power of we.

"I ran a civilization for several years," the admiral began, "a civilization of
three to four hundred wonderful men. We had our own laws. We had our own,
practically our own, constitution. And I was the sovereign for a good bit of
that."

In what its "guests" sardonically called the Hanoi Hilton, the term BACKUS was a
password to self-respect. Admiral Stockdale recalled that when the camp's harsh
hoteliers tried to compel submission, to force P.O.W.'s to take part in
propaganda broadcasts, each prisoner summoned up the term BACKUS, meaning that
each was backed by his fellow prisoners and his country.

As the Admiral wrote in 1982: "Young Americans in Hanoi learned fast. They made
no deals. In the end, the prisoner learns he can't be hurt and he can't be had
as long as he tells the truth and clings to that forgiving band of brothers who
are becoming his country and his family. This is the power of comradeship and
high-mindedness."

Those words brought to mind a talk I had years ago with a Soviet aviator who had
flown to freedom in Austria. His co-pilot soon succumbed to despair and
redefected. As he explained: "In the Soviet Union, everything is 'we, we,' in
America, everything is 'I, I.' Dmitri could never get used to thinking only
about himself."

Of course, Communism only promised comradeship. It rarely delivered. Its
solidarity was hollow, and it failed. Even so, the promise addressed a deep
human yearning. The American system, rooted in the doctrines of Adam Smith and
John Locke, speaks mostly of individual rights, rarely of community duties. The
great exception is patriotism -- routinely extolled by politicians who
themselves never went to war.

More power, therefore, to Admiral Stockdale, a teacher of philosophy, who did
serve. He rose above a debate on enterprise zones -- the market approach to
urban despair -- to talk about love and community.

Many Americans felt for him, a political amateur learning rough politics from
professionals on that stage Tuesday night. But it was he who taught the
important lesson. By way of preparing for the debate, he said, he went back and
read the Lincoln-Douglas debates. "How do they come down? Douglas . . . knows
all of the little stinky numbers these guys do. Abraham Lincoln had character."

Admiral Stockdale may not be able to impart the little stinky numbers; he
radiates character.

LOAD-DATE: October 16, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              99 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 16, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Abroad at Home;
The Rot of Corruption

BYLINE: By ANTHONY LEWIS

SECTION: Section A; Page 31; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 669 words

DATELINE: BOSTON


At the end of this political campaign we are seeing what an overweening love of
power can do to a President and to the institutions of government. We are seeing
the rot of corruption.

That is the meaning of the almost daily disclosure of abuses by agencies of the
Bush Administration: the C.I.A., the Justice Department, the F.B.I., the State
Department, the Treasury. The institutions have been corrupted in the attempt to
keep George Bush in office.

The Justice Department tried to smother a prosecution that would show how
President Bush covertly helped Saddam Hussein before the Persian Gulf war. The
C.I.A. and the F.B.I. were drawn into that sinkhole. High State Department
officials broke the rules to search for Bill Clinton's passport records in the
hope of finding something wrong.

But the most devastating episode of recent days -- devastating because of what
it showed about personal character -- involved the President himself.

Mr. Bush walked into the Blue Room of the White House, where Katie Couric of the
NBC program "Today" was interviewing Mrs. Bush. Ms. Couric asked him about a
subject that few journalists have had the courage to press with Mr. Bush: the
Iran-contra affair.

"Did you have any knowledge of the Iran-contra arms for hostages deal while you
were Vice President?" Ms. Couric asked. The President replied: "I've testified
450 times under oath, some of them, and our staff 3,500 that yes. . . ."

Again a moment later Ms. Couric asked: "You knew about the arms for hostages?"
Mr. Bush answered: "Yes, and I've said so all along, given speeches on it."

Those answers were astonishing. They conflicted with Mr. Bush's insistence over
many years that he had no role in Iran-contra. And they conflicted with the
facts.

Mr. Bush has not testified under oath on Iran-contra 450 times, or "some of
them," whatever that means. He did so once, on Jan. 11, 1988, in a meeting with
the staff of the independent counsel on Iran-contra, Lawrence E. Walsh.

From the moment the scandal broke, in November 1986, Mr. Bush said that he had
not known arms were being sent to Iran in a trade for American hostages. He
first learned that that had happened, he said, when he was briefed in December
1986 by Senator David Durenberger.

On March 13, 1987, Mr. Bush said: "I wish it with clairvoyant hindsight that I
had known that we were trading arms for hostages, as the [Tower commission]
report concluded, and then I would have weighed in very heavily with the
President."

After the Couric interview Mr. Bush's counsel, C. Boyden Gray, said the
President had not intended to say that he knew about arms for hostages. "I think
he misinterpreted the question," Mr. Gray said.

But it was a simple, direct question, and Ms. Couric came back to it. How could
it be "misinterpreted"?

What happened in that interview is clear. George Bush wanted to wriggle out of
the unbelievable position he has taken on Iran-contra. He tried to obfuscate. He
falsified his past words. He hoped nobody would remember, or care.

It all could have been different at the beginning of Iran-contra. Mr. Bush could
have told the truth.

In a 1988 interview with Dan Rather of CBS, Mr. Bush said he was moved by the
torture and death of one American hostage in Lebanon, William Buckley, a C.I.A.
agent. He could have said that at the start: admitted that he was involved in
trading arms for hostages, said it was done for humane reasons but turned out to
be a mistake.

Instead he went down the path of lies. He has had to change the story again and
again, as new documents have surfaced. One C.I.A. expert called Mr. Bush's
performance "the rolling stonewall."

The Iran-contra story is a metaphor for George Bush's Presidency: sacrificing
integrity to political ambition. It is Willie Horton, it is Mr. Bush's switch on
abortion, it is the attempt to make something sinister of Bill Clinton's
opposition to the Vietnam War.

In the end the process exacts its price. Like murder, corruption will out.

LOAD-DATE: October 16, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              100 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 16, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

CHRONICLE

BYLINE: By NADINE BROZAN

SECTION: Section A; Page 23; Column 5; Style Desk

LENGTH: 279 words


Col. MARGARETHE CAMMERMEYER, who was discharged from her post as the chief nurse
of the Washington State National Guard in May because she is a lesbian, is
coming to New York to be honored at a party by the Lambda Legal Defense and
Education Fund. The reception is scheduled for Monday at Lola's restaurant.

Since her dismissal, Col. Cammermeyer said, she has filed a lawsuit against the
Federal Government and has become, to her surprise, a national spokeswoman for
the cause of gays and lesbians in the military. She is waiting to sign contracts
for a book and a movie.

"I feel so humbled by the response," said Col. Cammermeyer, who is a Vietnam War
veteran and mother of four sons.

Of the hundreds of letters she has received, only two postcards could be
categorized as hate mail, she said. "I've received letters from everyone from
Vietnam veterans to professors to young people still in the military to older
folks who have dealt with the same problem," she said. "The
telephone-information operator asked one person who called for my address, 'Are
you calling to offer your support?' When the person said 'yes,' the operator
said, 'Tell her that Mike and his buddies are rooting for her.' "

Although she was stripped of her military assignment in the National Guard, Col.
Cammermeyer did not lose her full-time job as a clinical nurse specialist at the
American Lake Veterans Affairs Medical Center in Tacoma, Wash.

"The curious part of it is that I am considered a danger to the morals of
soldiers, but evidently I cannot undermine the morals of the remains of
soldiers," she said, referring to veterans hospitalized because of combat
injuries.

LOAD-DATE: October 16, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              101 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 17, 1992, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Overview;
Bush, Angered At Jersey Rally, Assails Clinton

BYLINE: By ANDREW ROSENTHAL,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1; Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 1530 words

DATELINE: EDISON, N.J., Oct. 16


Angered by a crowd packed with jeering supporters of Gov. Bill Clinton,
President Bush today broke out of a speech that was supposed to unveil a new car
insurance plan and for the first time accused his Democratic opponent directly
of evading the draft.

It was not clear whether Mr. Bush was consciously trying to accuse Mr. Clinton
of criminal conduct or if he merely became twisted in his words because of his
evident anger.

The President, looking tired and with his voice hoarse after Thursday night's
second Presidential debate, also denounced a group of college-age protesters on
the campus of Middlesex County College as "draft dodgers," although many of them
were not even born when the military induction program was last in effect.

Ordeal for Bush

Mr. Bush stopped at the campus for what was supposed to have been a triumphant
post-debate rally that the President's advisers hoped would help lift his
campaign in New Jersey. The campaign had invited most of the prominent
Republicans in the area to join him, including former Gov. Thomas H. Kean.

But the crowd was small and salted with Clinton supporters, and the rally
quickly turned into an ordeal for Mr. Bush as the Democratic partisans twice
shouted the President into silence during his speech. His remarks were uneven in
tone and syntax, and were laced with blunt insults about his opponents and his
audience.

The crowd grew increasingly provocative, shouting at the President, "Liar!
Liar!" and "No more Bush!"

"I wish these draft dodgers would shut up so I can finish my speech," Mr. Bush
said at one point. "Pathetic!"

By contrast, there was so much boasting among the Democrats that Mr. Clinton,
embarking today on a bus trip through Louisiana, cautioned his supporters
against overconfidence. The Bush campaign could take little comfort in the
latest New York Times/ CBS News Poll, which showed Mr. Clinton receiving as much
voter support in the critical state of Illinois as he does nationwide, while Mr.
Bush is slightly weaker there than nationally.

Opens Strident Attack

A few minutes after Mr. Bush was interrupted by the hecklers, he moved into the
portion of his speech that his aides had been advertising for two days -- a
proposal to cut automobile insurance premiums nationwide. The chanting began
again and Mr. Bush was forced to stop speaking while his own supporters shouted
back, "Bill is a fake!"

The President then abandoned his discussion of the insurance proposal and hurled
himself into an increasingly strident attack on his opponent's character -- a
subject that Mr. Bush had been forced to abandon on Thursday night at the
debate.

"You all are familiar with Governor Clinton's stories on what he did to evade
the draft," Mr. Bush said. "He still has not leveled with the American people.
He still has not told the truth."

Although the President has tried hard to make an issue in the campaign of Mr.
Clinton's lack of military service, he has always skirted any direct accusation
that the Arkansas Governor evaded the draft.

Mr. Clinton has frequently amended his story of how he avoided being drafted to
serve in the Vietnam War, but there has never been any suggestion that he was
guilty of draft evasion, a criminal offense.

Asked about the comment, Torie Clarke, Mr. Bush's campaign press secretary,
said, "I think I'll let the President's words speak for themselves."

As Mr. Bush flew to New Jersey, campaign aides distributed documents outlining
the new insurance program, which the President said he would present to Congress
after it returns from its election recess. But the proposal took up only about 2
minutes of the 17-minute speech.

The President gave a hint of his mood today as he opened the address. "Politics
is like baseball," he said. "It isn't over till the last batter swings, and we
are going to win this election. We are going to surprise the pundits, annoy the
media and hit a home run."

In explaining the dynamic of the race, both Mr. Clinton and Vice President Dan
Quayle today drew baseball analogies from the recent National League
championship series: The Pittsburgh Pirates were in the lead and had a chance to
win it with two outs in the ninth but lost the game to the Atlanta Braves on a
close play at home plate.

"We're the Atlanta Braves," Mr. Quayle said at a rally at Fayetteville Technical
College in North Carolina, "and when we get to the bottom of the 9th, and it's
two outs, we're going to score another run and win this election."

Mr. Clinton, at a rally at the state capitol grounds in Richmond, offered a
different spin. "Just remember what happened," he said. "The guy was coming into
home, the catcher drops the ball, the last half of the ninth inning. Lesson: It
is not over till it's over. I need your help for two and a half more weeks."

'We Cleaned Their Clock'

Despite Mr. Clinton's warnings about overconfidence, the aim of the Clinton camp
was to project an appearance of unqualified optimism. After the debate Mickey
Kantor, the Clinton campaign chairman, walked up to Ronald H. Brown, the
Democratic national chairman, and told him that an "instant" poll had Mr.
Clinton the winner. "T.K.O., right?" Mr. Kantor said. "Call it off. We cleaned
their clock."

Mr. Clinton's wife, Hillary, did more of the speaking for her husband at the
rally in Richmond this morning because Mr. Clinton was still nursing a hoarse
throat. The Clintons were joined by the Democratic Vice-Presidential nominee,
Senator Al Gore, and his wife, Tipper, for a bus trip to the Baton Rouge-New
Orleans corridor in an effort to energize black voters.

Mr. Bush's attacks here were stronger than those he has leveled at the two
nationally televised Presidential debates. He repeated his accusation that Mr.
Clinton is "running down America" to scare voters into voting for him. "My
opponents -- sorry opponents, pathetic -- try to tell you America is in
decline," he said, trying to ignore the Clinton-Gore signs that suddenly
sprouted in the crowd.

The President, who has been trying to make the case that Mr. Clinton will tax
middle-class Americans and not just the most wealthy taxpayers, as the Democrat
has said, has been steadily reducing the level at which he claims Mr. Clinton's
proposed tax would begin. Mr. Bush said today that it would affect those who
have "$22,000 in income," a figure that is several thousand dollars lower than
the last one he used.

As protesters held up signs that said "Bush Lies," and Republican partisans
waved back placards reading "Clinton -- Draft Dodger," Mr. Bush started into the
familiar, broad attack on Mr. Clinton's character that is at the center of his
re-election strategy.

'Character Does Matter'

"Character does matter," Mr. Bush said. "A pattern of deception is not right for
the Oval Office. You can't be leader of the world, leader of this country, if
you have a pattern of deception."

Mr. Bush used the phrase "pattern of deception" a half-dozen times during his
speech. Ms. Clarke said later that the President was referring to the draft
issues, Mr. Clinton's antiwar activities in London in 1969, and what the
Republicans say is Mr. Clinton's "waffling" on a variety of policy issues.

Mr. Bush noted that in the debate on Thursday night, Mr. Clinton said he was
"not interested" in the President's character, but in "changing the character of
the Presidency."

Today Mr. Bush said: "You cannot separate the character of the President from
the character of the Presidency. They go together. You cannot be one kind of man
and another kind of President. It is that simple."

The Times/CBS Poll, conducted before and during Thursday's debate, found that in
Illinois, 48 percent of registered voters are for Mr. Clinton, 29 percent for
Mr. Bush and 10 percent for Mr. Perot.

That 19-point lead for Mr. Clinton compares with a 13-point lead nationwide,
with less than three weeks remaining before Election Day. Four years ago Mr.
Bush won 51 percent of the vote in Illinois over Michael S. Dukakis, the
Democratic nominee.

The poll also found that Carol Moseley Braun, the Democratic Senate candidate in
Illinois, is also ahead in her contest, with a lead of 19 percentage points over
Rich Williamson, her Republican opponent. But 43 percent of registered voters in
Illinois say questions about Ms. Braun's management of her mother's finances
raise "doubts in their mind about her honesty and integrity."

The telephone survey was conducted on Wednesday and Thursday with 1,393 adults
throughout the state, of whom 1,150 said they were registered voters. The poll
had a margin or sampling error of plus or minus three percentage points.

The third and last Presidential debate will be held in East Lansing, Mich., on
Monday, and will provide one more chance for Mr. Bush to try to catch up with
Mr. Clinton.

The 90-minute debate Thursday on the campus of the University of Richmond broke
little new substantive ground and was relatively void of personal jabs. It was
marked by quips from Mr. Perot, who portrayed himself as the candidate who could
break the gridlock in Washington, and repeatedly hawked his commercial that was
broadcast tonight.

LOAD-DATE: October 17, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: President Bush speaking with members of the Arkansas Fraternal
Order of Police yesterday on the South Lawn of the White House. (Michael
Geissinger for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              102 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 17, 1992, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

The Vivid Tombstones of Fordham;
In the Bronx, a Painter Keeps Alive the Names of Victims

BYLINE: By DAVID GONZALEZ

SECTION: Section 1; Page 27; Column 2; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1400 words


Perched atop a wobbly ladder, Michael Tracy finished his latest graffiti mural,
a Technicolor tableau whose images ranged from a curvaceous cartoon siren to a
steely-eyed Charles Bronson. The figures attest to the lures and dangers of
street life, and as he does with many of his murals, Mr. Tracy topped this one
with a scroll of names from his Fordham neighborhood, the first few lines
dictated by fate.

"Yo, Tracy!" shouted a grinning teen-ager from across Morris Avenue. "Put my
name up!"

Pausing between staccato hisses from his spray-paint can, Mr. Tracy casually
looked over at the youth. "That's the dead list," he said over his shoulder.
"You want to be on this one?"

The grin slipped from the youth's face as if he had glimpsed his own ghost, and
he turned away with a never-mind wave. Mr. Tracy resumed his list. Jimmy Ha-Ha.
Binky. Flip 133.

The dead go first, a sign of respect, but their names are then joined by those
of others trying to survive a world of random crime, drug-addled doom and
seeming public indifference.

"I make them part of something, so they don't think they're alive just by
accident," said Mr. Tracy. "But believe me, this list is going to be fulfilled
as the dead list no matter what."

'The Dead Will Walk'

He knows. Michael Tracy is a Michelangelo of the memorial wall, the sprawling
street-side shrines to victims of urban violence that have sprung up around New
York with unnerving frequency in recent years. He puts his signature, Tracy 168,
on less sinister canvases, too, including gates and signs for stores along busy
Kingsbridge Road, and self-expressive pieces like the wall on Morris Avenue. Yet
even these pieces are adorned with "scrolls of respect," as he calls the lists
of names. And he knows it is only a matter of time before there is another
memorial to be painted and another mother crying.

"Like they said in the Bible, 'The dead will walk the earth,' " he said.
"Sometimes I wonder if it started happening. The buildings are starting to look
like tombs, and the people on crack are the walking dead."

Balding, paunchy and ruddy faced at 34 years old, Mr. Tracy cuts an unlikely
figure as a graffiti painter. Yet he is acknowledged to have been a seminal
figure in the development of "street art," as he calls it.

Born in Manhattan and raised in the South Bronx, he grew up doodling and drawing
and took to the fore of the nascent army of graffiti painters -- "writers" in
the argot -- that streamed through subway cars and yards in the early 70's.
Books about the era feature his car-long paintings with their characteristic
kinetic script embellished with flames, arrows and other fillips as well as
cartoon characters and the "Tracy face," a grinning shaggy-haired visage in
wrap-around shades.

"Wild style," a phrase that peppers his speech and murals, is his calling card.
Although apt, the phrase does not apply to his script, he says, but to a
commitment to be the best.

When the challenge of painting subway cars under cover of darkness bored him
creatively, he said he became the first person to do a towering mural on a
handball court. Most of his walls are now done with the owner's consent, he said
with a smile.

Rejected Most Teaching

Essentially self-taught, he did study at the High School of Art and Design. "A
lot of teachers manipulated me to draw like them," he said dismissively. "But a
one-eyed teacher taught me how to look at color, to just see the color without
looking at the outline. Bring the color out, then detail it."

During the 80's, he said, he worked at several advertising agencies. He also
drew Rhoda Roach, a cartoon strip for a short-lived publication. In recent years
he has worked as a messenger, cab driver and lifeguard, as well as accepting
commissions for store gates and walls, which can run $2,000 and higher.

A street artist, he said, gets inspiration from his surroundings, translating
the rhythms of daily life into streaks of color and epigrams. And few things hit
him as hard as what he saw happening in Fordham during the last decade.

"I found my neighborhood falling apart," he said in the quiet of his studio
inside his grandmother's apartment on the Grand Concourse and Kingsbridge Road.

The destruction touched his own life and inspired his first memorial wall two
years ago, when Benjamin Dominguez, "Binky" to his friends, was shot and killed
in a fight over a girl. Mr. Tracy knew the family and painted a wall that
featured Binky's gold-toothed smile, a heart pierced with a dagger and a
smirking Bart Simpson aiming a slingshot under the words "Can't Touch This."

A Message Beyond Grief

Other walls followed, and Mr. Tracy accepted them with a caveat: no tributes to
criminals and drug dealers. In some neighborhoods, drug dealers have
commissioned walls, spreading their illicit largesse like street-corner Medicis.
Those walls send a message beyond grief, said Joseph Sciorra, a folklorist who
is putting together a show on memorial walls for the Bronx Museum of the Arts:
Often the dealers use them to stake out territory.

Mr. Tracy resists their overtures. He often pokes around a neighborhood and
roots out details of the dead person's life. He said the one time he was tricked
was when a friend persuaded him to do a memorial for "Prince" on Valentine
Avenue near Fordham Road. He realized something was amiss when he finished the
wall and the dead man's friends saluted him with 9-millimeter gunfire.

The memorials, he said, cover more than space on blank walls, they remind the
survivors that their friend or relative was admired in the community. "You need
that space filled because now it is empty," he said. "People get together after
a death. Not many people go to cemeteries anymore. A wall is out there."

His mother, an intensely private woman who would only identify herself as
Florence (a name he once painted on a train to goad her), thinks he has wasted
his time and talent on the streets.

"I think he would have been a good cop because he likes adventure, he's fearless
and very bright," she said, as he smirked nearby.

With Age, Serious Intent

He acknowledged that at 34 years of age, he was becoming more serious about his
work, especially after the success of less talented graffiti painters. He paints
graffiti-inspired canvases for sale at a downtown gallery, and he has an agent
who is selling his work on stickers and calendars, in what he hopes will be his
break.

"I'm too old for this," he said while painting a list of names last week. "As
you get older you want more from your life. I want my house, my little BMW, my
yacht, my island. Tracy Island."

Some of his admirers are surprised when they see him still painting. "He got
old, man," said Al Flores, who remembers him as a slender, curly-haired dynamo.
But while the artist looked different, he said the work was never better.

Day by Day

Jerry Landron, who under the name of Jerry Wild Style has helped Mr. Tracy with
some of his murals, said there was a simple reason why Mr. Tracy still was on
the block and not on his island.

"Tracy is one of the people who live by the day," he said. "I've been with him
when he picked up a check for $1,200, and the next day it's gone. He'll treat
everybody, and the next day he's broke. He doesn't plan for the future. He'll
never get out of the Bronx, especially this block."

A knot of youths gathered around Mr. Tracy one recent afternoon as he finished
his wall. That's a good sign, he said. Mr. Tracy noted that he paints the walls
to remind people of the dangers that lurk in the neighborhood, where a miscast
glance or perceived insult can lead to a terminal fight. He sees his walls and
the scrolls of names as grittier versions of the Vietnam Veterans Memorial,
allowing youths from different blocks to ponder the lessons of urban life.

Once a wall that commemorates a victim is done, he says, "It's quieter after a
while. They get together more. That lasts until the next incident, and then
there's usually another wall to be painted."

But maybe not by him. On Thursday, his grandmother, Irene Martinez, fell to her
death after slipping from her fourth-floor window. Mr. Tracy, in a quiet moment
last night, doubted that she would have liked a wall in her honor. "I think it's
time for me to get going," he said. "Maybe I'll paint a canvas fro her.
Something high class."

LOAD-DATE: October 17, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: The struggle to survive, and remembering those who have not,
keeps Michael Tracy, a graffiti artist, on the top rung of his ladder, creating
murals around the city like this one at Morris Avenue and Kingsbridge Road in
the Bronx; In a gesture to give their deaths meaning, Michael Tracy lists
victims of urban violence in his "scrolls of respect." (Photographs by Angel
Franco/The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              103 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 17, 1992, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Corrections

SECTION: Section 1; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 104 words


A front-page article on Sept. 22 about a Senate hearing on American prisoners in
the Vietnam War and a correction in this space on Oct. 6 rendered a comment by
President Richard M. Nixon incorrectly. In March 1973 Mr. Nixon said he wanted
"to get the Vietnam out of the way." The comment, from the White House tapes, is
ambiguous. In its full context, it can be read as a reflection of a desire to
end the American entanglement in Vietnam because of the growing Watergate
scandal. Or it can as easily be interpreted as simply a reference to the
scheduling of a speech about Vietnam that Mr. Nixon was about to deliver.

LOAD-DATE: October 17, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Correction

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              104 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 17, 1992, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

The Candidates, Unvarnished

SECTION: Section 1; Page 24; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 509 words


There was much to like about Thursday night's Presidential debate, and more to
learn than from the first one, when an unwieldy cast of three candidates, three
panelists and one moderator produced a hash of choppy sound bites. It was also
better than the Vice-Presidential slugfest, which an overburdened moderator
could not control.

Why the improvement? The audience, for starters. It consisted, purposely, of
uncommitted voters, randomly selected. They not only asked the questions but
provided a valid proxy for the electorate that no panel of journalists or
candidates' claque could match.

This format also invited civility. Early on, President Bush tried to exploit the
"character" issue, specifically Bill Clinton's "waffling" and his participation,
years ago, in demonstrations against the Vietnam War. Mr. Clinton riposted by
quoting an editorial describing Mr. Bush as a chameleon.

The audience wasn't buying. "I think there is a real need here to focus on
needs," one questioner insisted. The candidates quickly got the message.

Three other factors helped make the evening. One was a persistent moderator,
Carole Simpson of ABC News, who tried to serve the desires of the audience
rather than the tactical needs of the candidates. Second, there was literally no
barrier between the candidates and the public, no lecterns or desks; the
candidates were on unvarnished view. Third, the format was roomier, allowing the
candidates to talk in whole paragraphs, until checked by Ms. Simpson or rumbles
from the audience.

Governor Clinton thrived in this setting. The town hall format allowed him to
bring anecdotal warmth to his usual bang-bang, 1-2-3 policy prescriptions. Mr.
Bush also enjoys this format. But it didn't help him. Presiding over a weak
economy, he holds a weak hand. His laundry list of things he has tried to do
inevitably pales against Mr. Clinton's list of things he promises to do. The
President also suffered from jumbled presentation.

Even worse for Mr. Bush, there was only one question on foreign policy, his
strong suit. It is a devastating irony that the end of the cold war, for which
the President can claim some credit, has robbed him of his trump card.

Ross Perot? The man who denounces sound bites turned out to be Mr. Sound Bite.
Confronted with a serious question, he offered one-liners. "For 45 years we were
preoccupied with the Red Army. I suggest now that our No. 1 preoccupation is red
ink." What followed was usually self-praise.

The glib Texan, with so little to say, would do the voters a favor by
withdrawing from Monday's final debate, allowing a confrontation between the two
contestants with a real chance.

That would deny listeners anecdotes, simplicities and a certain charm. But it
would advance the interests of the voters. Whatever its virtues, the Thursday
debate did not greatly advance public understanding of the candidates' economic
programs -- which is what the public most wants to hear about. The format that
would make that easiest on Monday is one on one.

LOAD-DATE: October 17, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              105 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 17, 1992, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Man in the News: Raymond Walter Kelly;
A Street-Smart Boss

BYLINE: By CRAIG WOLFF

SECTION: Section 1; Page 28; Column 4; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1171 words


On the night last July when Washington Heights erupted, Raymond W. Kelly did all
the dutiful, commissioner-like things. He met with the precinct commanders,
helped devise a strategy to control the disturbances and kept City Hall advised.

Then, without any announcement and accompanied by just a single aide, the first
deputy commissioner slipped into a department Jeep and drove himself through the
neighborhood, past cars that had been set afire and crowds that were hurling
bottles at police officers.

Close associates say that this is typical of Mr. Kelly, a man who has gained a
reputation for staying in the background and mastering the details of any
situation he confronts. As the chief architect of Mayor David N. Dinkins's Safe
Streets, Safe City program, he personally prepared the management analysis
reports, complete with budgets and deployment figures.

But those who know him well say that now, as Police Commissioner Kelly, he faces
a challenge that does not intrinsically mesh with his nature -- to use the high
visibility of his office to establish a tone for the department. At a time when
the department is trying to win the trust of minority communities and lift the
morale of a vast and complex rank and file, perhaps nothing he does will be more
crucial.

At least yesterday, Mr. Kelly seemed to grasp that the public's image of the
department will be largely based on its image of him. With a smile, he told
reporters that he would no longer be the answer to a departmental trivia
question -- "Who's minding the store?"

"I realize that I have an exterior constituency and an interior constituency,"
he said. "I realize that people will look to me. I realize the power of my
public positions."

For people to take to him, they must overcome what he has called a "typical
first impression," created by his very appearance, with his old marine's low-top
haircut and the short, stocky weight-lifter's physique. (He works out at a Jack
LaLanne health club several times a week.) All the more reason, he has said, to
be "vocal and out there."

29 Years on the Force

While Lee P. Brown before him was mainly considered an academic type, it is
difficult to categorize Raymond Walter Kelly, age 51, whose tastes run from the
art galleries of SoHo to MTV. His portfolio lists 29 years on the force in about
two dozen positions, from switchboard operator to undercover officer to his last
position as First Deputy Commissioner. But, it also lists degrees from Manhattan
College, Harvard University, New York University Law School and St. John's
University School of Law.

"He is a new breed of well-educated police officers," said Gerald W. Lynch, the
president of the John Jay College of Criminal Justice and a member of the search
committee that recommended Mr. Kelly. "He is not just your street cop. He has
seat-of-the-pants smarts and is a sophisticated police manager at the highest
level."

Many police experts advised the Mayor to pick someone who could not be tarnished
by the recent allegations of corruption and by the fallout created by the rowdy
demonstration of officers outside City Hall. Mr. Kelly, as an insider, would be
vulnerable to criticism that he knows too much about how the department works.

But Mr. Lynch and others suggested that Mr. Kelly's intimate knowledge of the
department was exactly what would enable him to fix problems, ranging from
failures in the Internal Affairs Division to recruiting more minority candidates
for the force. They also suggested that as he makes his foray into the public
spotlight, he not abandon the subtle approaches that they said had established
his credibility and authority inside the department. His small regard for the
pomp of his new $110,000-a-year job may serve him well.

He said he would continue his unpublicized visits to minority churches on the
weekend. He will still ride the subways on weekends, as he did the last two
weekends with his wife, Veronica. He plans to cut in half, from 10 to 5, the
security detail that typically stays with the Police Commissioner. And if
visitors look real close, they will still be able to notice the bulge in the
bottom of one pant leg. That is because he will still carry a gun beneath his
sock.

He also wrote a quick bit of folklore in the department last summer, when
driving near the Franklin D. Roosevelt Drive one morning, he came upon an
officer sleeping in his car. He jumped out of his car and gave the officer a
nudge. Later he suspended him.

'I'm a Cop'

"I'm a cop basically in my head," he said yesterday.

And he added, "I'm a New Yorker. Nothing can prepare you for the complexities of
this city more than that."

Mr. Kelly was born on Sept. 4, 1941, and grew up in a building at Columbus
Avenue and 91st Street in Manhattan with his three older brothers and sisters.
The neighborhood was then overrun by gangs and street crime, and as a boy, he
got into his share of fights. His father, a milkman who later went to work for
the Internal Revenue Service, passed on a certain physical air that helped him
survive the streets. When he was 13, the family moved to Sunnyside, Queens,
where he attended St. Ann's High School, which later changed its name to
Archbishop Molloy. As a teen-ager, he broke his wrist, his thumb and his nose
several times playing football.

He came to the department, he said, out of boredom and frustration. While
working as a stock boy in the baby clothes department at Macy's, where his
mother worked as a dressing room checker, he saw an advertisement for the police
cadet program. First he worked taking emergency calls over the switchboard, an
experience he has said made him sensitive to people in crisis. And among other
assignments, he worked in the 10th, 20th and 23d Precincts

His three years as a marine in Vietnam did not harden him, he said, but rather
taught him to value the smallest things. During an amphibious mission, he did
not eat for days and developed kidney stones from a lack of water, an experience
that, he has said, removed any notion of glamour from the war.

When he returned, he seemed to turn into a man in a hurry. He went to law school
at night and later received a master's degree in law. In 1984, he took a year's
sabbatical and received a master's degree in police administration from Harvard.

Mr. Kelly and his wife have two grown children and have homes in Battery Park
City and Garden City, L.I.

In the last two months, as acting commissioner, Mr. Kelly's chances at the
permanent job were shaken by the demonstration at City Hall, and he learned
that, if he got the job, there would be no honeymoon period.

Then yesterday, the phone call came at 7 A.M. from the Mayor and all anxieties
were washed away. He said they talked about a few issues, and then he remembered
hanging up the phone, and feeling a few moments of disbelief.

"It was an awe-inspiring feeling," he said. "I literally grew up in this
organization. I started as a teen-ager and to reach this level is
mind-boggling."

NAME: Raymond W. Kelly

LOAD-DATE: October 31, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Police Commissioner Raymond W. Kelly with Mayor David N.
Dinkins. (John Sotomayor/The New York Times)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              106 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 18, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

How to Understand Bush's Attacks on Clinton

SECTION: Section 4; Page 14; Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 393 words


To the Editor:

As one of the demonstrators at the United States Embassy in London in the fall
of 1969, I was dismayed by President Bush's implication that Bill Clinton and
the rest of us somehow surrendered the moral right to voice disapproval of our
Government's policies when we took up temporary residence abroad.

The President said it was wrong to "go to a foreign country and demonstrate
against your own country." But the hundreds who gathered peacefully in Grosvenor
Square that October and November did not journey to Britain to participate in
protests. We were United States citizens studying or working there, who sought
to register disagreement with a policy that appeared misguided. Finding
ourselves on foreign soil, we delivered the message to the accredited United
States diplomatic authorities. Does the President suggest we had to recross the
Atlantic Ocean to press our views legitimately?

The President has not explained how expression that would have been honorable
opposition within the United States became dishonorable beyond its borders. The
demonstration I attended took the form of a dignified memorial: with reverence
for the fallen, the names of United States servicemen who had died were read
aloud at the Embassy gate. Far from tarnishing the image of the United States,
the spectacle of America's overseas sons and daughters assembling soberly to
express their doubts about the nation's course and its terrible toll must have
been an inspiring example of devotion to country.

Driven by his re-election strategy, the President has revived the discredited
notion that dissent equals disloyalty, using as his foil expatriates of the
Vietnam War era. His attack echoes the crude nativism that has crept into much
of the Bush campaign oratory. Witness the demonization of Oxford, the university
where Governor Clinton supposedly imbibed alien ideas about social engineering
and learned diabolical debating tricks. Rather than broadening their horizons,
Mr. Bush implies, those who ventured abroad became tainted by dangerous,
subversive thinking.

In the 1960's, we heard the chauvinistic refrain "America, love it or leave it."
The President seems to have embraced an even more narrow-minded corollary: that
those who left it, even briefly, must not have loved it.

R .V. DENENBERG
Red Hook, N.Y., Oct. 12, 1992

LOAD-DATE: October 18, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              107 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 18, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Strike Zone;
Debating 'Character' to the Bitter End

BYLINE: By MAUREEN DOWD

SECTION: Section 4; Page 1; Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1157 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


It has been said that a man never discloses his own character so clearly as when
he describes another's.

Most Americans are so frantic about the economy that they are turning a deaf ear
to Republican attacks on Bill Clinton's character. But the President and the
Governor are still locked in a tendentious tango on the issue of Presidential
character -- one that is highly revealing about their respective strengths and
weaknesses as leaders.

Mr. Clinton knows that he is vulnerable on the matter of integrity. He has
admitted to a history of problems in his marriage and to breaking a written
commitment in order to avoid the Vietnam war-era draft. When stung by the past,
he has evaded, eluded and edited.

But, buoyed by a public more in the mood for statistics than titillation, he has
shifted the debate on Presidential character by slicing the concept in half. His
message is this: Never mind about what has happened in my private life. That's
not relevant. Judge my character by the way I handled my job in Arkansas.

With the cupboard bare on domestic issues, Mr. Bush is forced to take the
opposite tack. His message is this: Never mind about the promises I broke in my
first term. Don't be angry that I got so distracted by my love of foreign
affairs that I often seemed like an absentee landlord. Judge my character and my
opponent's by my personal code of conduct.

Mr. Clinton tries to camouflage criticism about his evasiveness by blanketing
the public with plans and programs. Mr. Bush tries to camouflage his governing
failures by throwing hand grenades about trust.

There is something poignant about watching Mr. Bush as he strains to make
character the campaign's central issue.

In the past, George Bush seemed to view character as something baked into you by
your parents and teachers. It was not something that you boasted about and
served up on a fancy dish for company.

In the 1988 race, he found it hard to address the character issue, even though
it was clear from conversations with him that what he felt had prepared him to
be President had been instilled in Greenwich, Andover and Yale: the love of
country, the desire to serve, the sense of loyalty and team-play.

He could bash Michael Dukakis on trumped-up patriotism issues like the Pledge of
Allegiance with relish. But when his campaign advisers insisted he talk about
his own war record, he felt guilty -- even more so when his mother told him it
was unseemly. He had to force himself to talk to reporters about the 1953 death
of his 3-year-old daughter, Robin, of leukemia, a heartbreaking event that his
advisers felt could be portrayed as character-shaping.

He often waved off character and personality questions with a good-natured line
about not wanting to "get on the couch" or not liking "psychoanalysis" stories
or "Gail Sheehy stuff," referring to the Vanity Fair writer who combined her
campaign profiles into a book called "Character."

But now he has no choice. At the debate in Richmond on Thursday night, Mr. Bush
looked uncomfortable and slightly depressed as he tried to press his case before
the audience and his rivals yanked him back into a policy discussion.

He began by defending himself against Mr. Clinton's barb that his father, a
Senator, would not have approved of his innuendos about Mr. Clinton's trip to
Moscow as a young man: "He raised the question of my father and said, 'Well,
your father, Prescott Bush, was against McCarthy. You should be ashamed of
yourself. McCarthyism.' I remember something my dad told me. I was 18 years old,
going to Penn Station to go into the Navy, and he said, 'Write your mother' --
which I faithfully did -- he said, 'Serve your country' -- my father was an
honor, duty and country man -- and he said, 'Tell the truth.' And I've tried to
do that in public life, all through it. And that says something about
character."

Mr. Clinton, by contrast, argued that character is substance: "I'm not
interested in his character. I want to change the character of the Presidency.
And I'm interested in what we can trust him to do and what you can trust me to
do and what you can trust Mr. Perot to do for the next four years."

Further evidence of the President's desperation came on Friday, when he began a
speech on a new plan on car insurance and ended up abandoning it to launch an
emotional attack on Mr. Clinton's honesty.

"Character does matter," Mr. Bush insisted. "A pattern of deception is not right
for the Oval Office." And he added: "You cannot separate the character of the
President from the character of the Presidency. They go together. You cannot be
one kind of man and another kind of President. It's that simple."

The President was so rattled by a group of young pro-Clinton hecklers that he
scorned them as "draft-dodgers," a displacement insult meant for the Democratic
candidate.

The polls reflect a sense that Mr. Bush's style of leadership, that of a
cautious caretaker, is out of date and out of sync. Mr. Bush still seems
disbelieving that the country could prefer a man of Mr. Clinton's character and
resume. He may be having trouble understanding what has happened to the country
he fought for. Mr. Bush came of age in an era of absolutes. Mr. Clinton came of
age in an era of moral ambiguity, part of a generation that had more complicated
experiences with sex, drugs, war and abortion.

In the past, the Republicans had great success raising the specter of a nasty
and volatile Evil Empire to argue that the nation needed a strong, stable figure
in the White House. The end of the cold war makes it more difficult to scare
Americans into believing in the importance of a muscular "stand-up" character.
They are yearning for a nurturing character -- and Mr. Clinton has played to
this mood.

Dan Quayle sounded more vague than ominous when he said during the Vice
Presidential debate in Atlanta: "At some time during these next four years there
is going to be a crisis -- there will be an international crisis. I can't tell
you where it's going to be, I can't even tell you the circumstances, but it will
happen. We need a President who has been tested, who has the integrity and
qualifications to handle the crisis."

Mr. Bush and Mr. Quayle are right that character matters. But Republicans are
not getting any traction on the character issue because they are defining it in
an outdated way and because the attacks are hollow, only serving to remind
voters that Mr. Bush is having trouble running on his record.

Within President Bush's argument about character is buried his fatal flaw: He
has always seemed to think he should be President because he had the right
breeding, the right resume and the right character to serve as a careful steward
of the country, not because he had ideas he wanted to implement.

And what the public is saying is that, in a year of economic crisis, concern and
performance may be the most important tests of character.

LOAD-DATE: October 18, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              108 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 18, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

U.S. Delegation in Vietnam For Discussions on M.I.A.'s

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section 1; Page 14; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 152 words

DATELINE: HANOI, Vietnam, Oct. 17


A high-ranking delegation from the United States arrived in Hanoi today to meet
with Vietnamese officials on way of speeding cooperation to determine the fate
of American servicemen missing from the Vietnam War.

The special Presidential envoy on the missing, Gen. John W. Vessey Jr. , said
that joint search efforts had improved since his last visit to Vietnam in
January.

"We're making progress," he said.
 General Vessey is to meet on Sunday with Foreign Minister Nguyen Manh Cam and
Defense Minister Doan Khue. Among the officials accompanying him are Deputy
Assistant Secretary of State Kenneth Quinn; Deputy Assistant Secretary of
Defense Alan Ptak; Senator John McCain, Republican of Arizona; Ann Mills
Griffiths, head of the National League of Families of American Prisoners and
Missing in Southeast Asia, and Maj. Gen. Thomas Needham, commander of a military
task force on the subject.

LOAD-DATE: October 18, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              109 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 18, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN;
Clinton Retains Lead in New Poll

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Page 26; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 160 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 17


A week after the round of Presidential debates began, Gov. Bill Clinton is
holding his lead over President Bush, a Newsweek poll said today.

The survey, conducted after two Presidential and one Vice-Presidential debates,
showed Clinton with 46 percent of the vote, Bush with 31 percent and Ross Perot
with 14 percent. Before the debates, Newsweek's poll showed the Democrat with 44
percent, Mr. Bush with 35 percent and Mr. Perot with 12 percent.

Some 751 registered voters were questioned by telephone by the Gallup
Organization on Oct. 15-16. The margin of potential sampling error was plus or
minus four percentage points.

The latest poll appeared to show that the attacks by Mr. Bush and Vice President
Dan Quayle on Mr. Clinton's character and his draft status during the Vietnam
War have had little effect.

About 6 in 10 of those questioned, 58 percent, said they believed Mr. Clinton
had the honesty and integrity to serve as President.

LOAD-DATE: October 18, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              110 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 18, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Charges of Political Favoritism Mark Charged Battle Over a West Point Hotel

BYLINE: By WILLIAM GLABERSON with ERIC SCHMITT,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 45; Column 2; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1795 words

DATELINE: HIGHLAND FALLS, N.Y.


For generations, the quaint Thayer Hotel on the grounds of the United States
Military Academy here has provided a respite for cadets' families and West Point
visitors.

But for the last four years the famous hotel, which remains open although
rundown and, some say, dangerous, has been the center of a quiet but furious
battle that has sometimes made the Academy's lessons on warfare seem tame. The
fight, over which of two competing bidders will win the right to "privatize" the
hotel now owned by the Government, has dragged in major Wall Street and
construction industry players. And it has brought assertions by one group of
contestants that a member of the other group, a top political aide to President
Bush, has used his influence and has benefitted from favoritism by military
officials.

The controversy raises as many questions as it answers about what once seemed
the simple idea of turning Government property over to private industry to
increase efficency, and about the business activities of Frederic V. Malek, an
official in a series of Republican administrations who is currently the general
manager of the Bush-Quayle campaign.

'Limited Passive Partner'

Mr. Malek, a West Point graduate, says he is nothing more than a "limited
passive partner" in one group of bidders managed by Douglass Bennett, a
Washington lawyer and another West Point graduate. "I have never talked to
anyone in the Army or in the Government or anyone with influence over the Army
and the Government about this project," Mr. Malek said.

But the leader of the other group, John A. Dodson, a Harvard and West Point
trained engineer who served in the Army in Vietnam and Iran, says he and his
partners have become convinced that Mr. Malek "is using his position of
authority to further his own personal interest, which is not right."

Mr. Dodson said he believes Mr. Malek personally intervened to help his group
and to hurt Mr. Dodson's group. The winning bidder would take over the hotel,
refurbish it, and operate it as a private business. Mr. Dodson said the Army has
changed the rules of the contest each time his group appeared to be on the verge
of winning. "He was," Mr. Dodson said, "the preselected winner of this
contract."

Senior Army officers involved in the project deny there has been any political
influence. "I never had any pressure from above to provide favoritism or to look
more favorably on one offer than another," said Jack K. Norris, who was the Army
colonel in charge of the Thayer contract process until he retired this summer.

But two inquiries, a formal one by an Army Review Board in 1990 and an informal
one by a Congressional panel this summer, bolstered to some extent the
assertions by the Dodson group. And accounts by people involved in the process
support some of Mr. Dodson's assertions.

The controversy had been simmering for two years when it expanded sharply in
1990 after the Army conditionally awarded the contract to start a $50 million
renewal of the Thayer to the group that included Mr. Malek. Mr. Dodson's group
and a third bidder, Treadway Inns Corporation, were disqualified. Mr. Dodson's
group appealed and won a decision from the Army Review Board.

The Army panel concluded that "corrective action is necessary" because the
bidders "were not treated equally" in the first bidding process, but it did not
find any fault on the part of the group that includes Mr. Malek.

After the Review Board decision, the Army reopened the bidding process. Treadway
dropped out.

The reopened procedure, however, has been marked by a series of roadblocks that
have frustrated virtually everyone concerned.

Inquiry by House Panel

This summer, after Mr. Dodson complained about what he called continuing
unfairness, a panel of the House Armed Services Committee conducted an informal
inquiry on his allegations that the unfair treatment is continuing.

The ranking members of the Armed Services Committee's Morale, Welfare &
Recreation Panel then wrote to Army Secretary Michael P. W. Stone on Sept. 14.
Their letter said they were "concerned" that "commitments have been made" on the
Thayer project that could impinge on the panel's ability to monitor military
spending.

The letter indicated that the Committee would be watching the actions of the
Army, which has yet to decide which of the two competitors it favors.

Mr. Dodson, who has assembled a development team that includes a seasoned hotel
operator, a nationally known architecture firm, HOK Architects, and a major
contractor, Tishman Construction Corp., said he believes Mr. Malek, whose group
is also backed by major construction and hotel companies, has been actively
involved in his team's efforts to win the contract.

The Dodson group had obtained a commitment from the First Boston Corp., the New
York investment banking house, that it would arrange financing if the Dodson
group won the contract. At a key moment in the bidding process this spring,
First Boston suddenly resigned and placed the Dodson group in jeopardy of
disqualification because it lacked financing.

Exploring Investor's Role

Mr. Dodson and other members of his team said they were told that Mr. Malek
telephoned John Hennessy, the president of First Boston and the finance chairman
for Bush-Quayle '92 in New York State, to request that First Boston renege on
its commitment to the Dodson group.

Through a spokesman, Barry Koling, Mr. Hennessy said Mr. Malek never asked First
Boston to withdraw and that Mr. Hennessy did not participate in the decision to
withdraw the financing. Mr. Koling said First Boston decided to withdraw for
reasons "having to do with the economics of the project." Mr. Malek said he
never spoke about the Thayer project with Mr. Hennessy.

But Mr. Dodson and others on his team said that was not what they were told.
Owen N. Rabourn, a convention center consultant and a former vice president of
the GTE Corp. who is a partner in Mr. Dodson's group, said the timing of First
Boston decision's to withdraw appeared suspicious. He said the explanation the
Dodson team was given was that Mr. Hennessy was acting at the request of Mr.
Malek.

Mr. Rabourn said the news of First Boston's withdrawl was delivered to the
Dodson team by Jerome H. Mandel, a Westchester-based construction finance
consultant, who had introduced the Dodson group to First Boston. Mr. Rabourn
quoted Mr. Mandel as saying that, "a friend of his at First Boston, a vice
president, told him Malek called Hennessy and told him not to finance us." Mr.
Mandel declined to discuss the incident.

Concern Over Malek Role

Others who were involved in the project also said Mr. Malek, who was at one time
president of the hotels division of the Marriott Corporation, appeared to be
actively involved in the West Point project.

Michael Crall, a hotel construction consultant who reviewed the bidders for West
Point, said that in early 1990 Mr. Malek and Mr. Bennett made a formal proposal
before a West Point panel considering bidders.

In the end, Mr. Crall said, he favored the group that included Mr. Malek because
of Mr. Malek's experience with Marriott hotels.

Mr. Crall said in an interview that the West Point panel members were concerned
that Mr. Malek might have permitted his name to be used by the group only
because of his political connections and that they quizzed him about that. "My
recollection was, quote, he would be an 'active participant' and he would have a
real active role," Mr. Crall said.

Political Insider

Mr. Malek said he recalled addressing a group at West Point about the Thayer
project but did not recall what he said.

Mr. Malek has worked in the Nixon, Ford and Bush Administrations and compiled a
record as a well-connected political insider who favors Washington-style
hardball. He was criticized by the Senate Watergate committee for authoring a
"responsiveness" plan to dole out Federal grants in a way that would help Mr.
Nixon's re-election in 1972.

President Bush made him deputy chairman of the Republican National Committee in
1988 but he resigned from that post when news accounts showed he had compiled a
list of Jews working in the Bureau of Labor Statistics for Mr. Nixon in 1971.
Mr. Nixon had suggested to Mr. Malek that Jewish employees in that agency had
been trying to embarrass him by reporting negative statistics.

In recent years, before he appeared once again at the helm of Mr. Bush's current
campaign committee, Mr. Malek has been working in several major corporate posts
and at a Washington, D.C., investment banking firm, Carlyle Group. While there,
he persuaded Frank C. Carlucci, the former Secretary of Defense, to join
Carlyle.

Claims of Unfair Advantage

Mr. Dodson said the odds against his group remain unfair. He said his group
labored through the night, for example, to meet a July 1992 deadline set by the
Army for both sides' "best and final offers." Just after he submitted his final
proposal, the Army advised him that it had postponed the deadline. Mr. Dodson
said the deadline extension gave the other group an unfair advantage.

Colonel Norris, the Army contract officer, said both sides had failed to submit
complete new offers.

Mr. Dodson said his bid was complete until the Army changed the rules once again
after he submitted it. That change, he said, was a "ruse" to justify the
extension.

On another occasion, contract officers said a new analysis of projected revenues
showed the Dodson group would lose money in its 10th year operating the hotel.
Mr. Dodson said that criticism was based on a faulty mathematical assumption.

Increasing Frustration

Lieut. Col. Marilla Cushman, a spokeswoman for the Army, said that officials are
paying special attention to the review because of Mr. Dodson's repeated
complaints of unfairness and that a final decision is not expected before March
1993.

Some who have studied the hotel that holds the memories of generations of Army
families say the delay will continue a dramatic path toward deterioration at The
Thayer.

Mr. Crall, the West Point consultant on the project, said he grew frustrated as
he saw the privitization project stretch into years. He has not been involved
since the Army decision to reopen the bidding in 1990. But Mr. Crall said he has
been in touch with senior Army officials because conditions at the Thayer, which
was completed in 1925, are dangerous because of lack of maintenance.

"What is incredible," Mr. Crall said, "is this unconscionable delay by the Army.
Nobody back there is willing to make a decision becasue they are afraid of the
consequences of the decision they are going to make. So that what is happening
is that people are going into that hotel everyday and they are at risk."

LOAD-DATE: October 18, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: John A. Dodson is one of two developers competing for the right
to "privatize" the Government-owned Thayer Hotel on the grounds of the United
States Military Academy at West Point in Highland Falls, N.Y. (Joyce Dopkeen/The
New York Times)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              111 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 18, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Foreign Affairs;
No National Interest

BYLINE: By LESLIE H. GELB

SECTION: Section 4; Page 15; Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 713 words


No wonder Americans don't want to ask questions about foreign policy or even
hear about it anymore. It is not just that the cold war is over and their lives
at home have soured. Foreign policy turns them off.

As practiced by Presidents and their minions for over two decades, foreign
policy seems to have produced endless trouble: scandals from Watergate to
Iraqgate, fodder for political trashing, smoke screens for domestic failures,
enervating hypocrisy, billions of wasted dollars, lies and dead Americans.

Foreign policy has become synonymous with scandal. Since the Nixon years, every
major Government outrage has had its roots in partisan foreign policy disputes.
Watergate sprang ultimately from Vietnam. The Nixon Administration had an
uncontrollable lust to spy on and destroy Vietnam War dissenters. The
Iran-contra affair arose because Reaganaut true believers were hell-bent on
finding a way around Congressional restrictions on arming the anti-Communist
Nicaraguan rebels. Iraqgate, now rising from the glorious ashes of Desert Storm,
begins to look like a Bush Administration cover-up of its aid to Saddam Hussein
before his attack on Kuwait.

Foreign policy has turned Presidents, their men and would-be Presidents into
liars. It is almost impossible to believe, for example, that President Reagan
and Vice President Bush did not lie about the Iran-contra scandal. How could
they not know in 1986 that their aides were trading arms to Iran for Americans
held hostage in Lebanon, and using the profits to finance the contras?

Lies about national security affairs have become so routine, so inevitable, that
Americans no longer seem interested in the truth. Perhaps they think the truth
is that everybody is lying. They don't want to listen to another word from
President Bush about Bill Clinton's avoiding the Vietnam draft. They correctly
see this trashing as a ploy by the Bush team to avoid talking about a dismal
economic record. Nor can Americans bear another Clinton "explanation" of his
draft history.

The politics of foreign policy has destroyed institutions, most notably the
C.I.A. It has secret power and therefore a sacred trust to be above reproach,
above politics. Time and again, it has dishonored that trust.

The C.I.A. has done so, once again, in the unfolding Iraqgate story. Agency
officials have admitted withholding vital information from the court in the
trial of a bank executive for making illegal loans to Iraq. According to the
agency, the Justice Department told it to withhold this evidence. How can
Americans possibly trust these people, these once-sacred institutions?

Even the State Department, which traditionally sidestepped election-year manure,
has now got into the act. Republican right-wingers stimulated press inquiries
about Mr. Clinton's student days abroad during the Vietnam War. To get that
information "for the press" before the election, the department violated every
rule of decency and its own strict procedures. Its apology means little now.
That venerated institution has been compromised.

Presidents have so often abused the national interest for their own political
ends that Americans hardly blink at the practice any longer. In one breath, Mr.
Bush wisely said he would cut back on dangerous arms sales to the Mideast. In
the next, he sold billions of dollars in new arms to Saudi Arabia and Kuwait. He
also recently broke a solemn pledge to China and made massive new arms sales to
Taiwan. Worried about jobs, even Mr. Clinton kept his mouth shut.

Did Mr. Reagan make war on Grenada to save American lives or to blot out the
story of Marines killed by terrorists in Lebanon? Did Mr. Bush invade Panama for
necessary national security reasons or to make himself look good at home? Is Mr.
Bush shrinking from humanitarian duty to stop the slaughter in Bosnia mainly for
fear that military intervention would cost him votes? What has become of foreign
policy that Americans even ask such questions?

No wonder people hardly question the candidates about international affairs. For
so long now have politicians and foreign policy experts treated this always
tricky enterprise as a political game and a blood sport that Americans no longer
see the national interest -- and have lost interest.

LOAD-DATE: October 18, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              112 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 18, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

How to Understand Bush's Attacks on Clinton;
Can He Send Others?

SECTION: Section 4; Page 14; Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 101 words


To the Editor:

Gov. Bill Clinton is not the only person who had mixed feelings about the
Vietnam War. Like thousands of other young men, I served during that war, and I
understand what Bill Clinton went through as a young man more than two decades
ago.

However, what makes his position unusual is that now he wants to be President
and become our Commander in Chief. Therefore, the big question is this: How
could Bill Clinton as President justify sending young men to war, for any
reason, when he did everything possible not to go himself?

FRANK J. BULLARO
Syosset, L.I., Sept. 25, 1992

LOAD-DATE: October 18, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              113 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 18, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

How to Understand Bush's Attacks on Clinton;
Humphrey in Leningrad

SECTION: Section 4; Page 14; Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 385 words


To the Editor:

"Mr. Bush's Campaign Mode: Nasty" (editorial, Oct. 9) gets it right. Translate
President Bush's absurd smear into plain talk, and it suggests that Gov. Bill
Clinton was cozying up to the K.G.B. on a student tour in Moscow 23 years ago,
hatching some sinister plot.

Like Governor Clinton, I was a student who went to Russia in 1969. Like Governor
Clinton and millions of other Americans, I protested the Vietnam War on my
college campus. Are all Americans who opposed the war and traveled to Russia
suspect?

As an exchange student at Leningrad University in the summer of 1969, I had a
sobering firsthand glimpse of life under Communism. One event underscored the
contrast between the Russian and American students living in our dormitory.

Hubert H. Humphrey visited Leningrad that summer, the year after having lost his
Presidential race against Richard M. Nixon. I tracked Mr. Humphrey down at his
hotel, and he agreed to meet informally with our group of students. Standing in
the middle of a large circle of American and Russian students in the dormitory's
main conference room, Mr. Humphrey responded with eloquence and concern to
tough, sometimes angry questions from the Americans, including many about
Vietnam.

The Russians stood silently, watching with astonishment a spontaneous town
meeting with a man who was nearly elected President the year before. This free
and open exchange was unimaginable in their society. Would Mr. Bush condemn this
exercise of freedom of expression because it took place on foreign soil?

More than 20 years later, while on a business trip, I sat with a group of
Americans in a Moscow hotel watching George Bush's "chicken Kiev" speech to the
Ukrainian Parliament, in which he admonished the Ukrainians to give up their
"extremist" notions about becoming a free and independent state. It was an
appalling moment. Mr. Bush had put his loyalty to Mikhail S. Gorbachev, then
struggling to keep the crumbling Soviet empire intact, above America's
commitment to the principles of freedom and self-determination.

Mr. Bush only hurts himself and the dignity of his office by leveling such
ludicrous attacks. He should examine his own house for cracks, before throwing
stones at 23-year-old students.

CYNTHIA STONE
New York, Oct. 13, 1992

LOAD-DATE: October 18, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              114 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 18, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

How to Understand Bush's Attacks on Clinton;
On the Train to Moscow

SECTION: Section 4; Page 14; Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 349 words


To the Editor:

I have no connection with Bill Clinton, but I was on that very same tour to
Moscow he took. It was completely innocuous: 10 days between autumn and winter
semesters: London-Warsaw-Vilnius-Leningrad-Moscow-Berlin-London, by train all
the way for less than £100. It was run by a student travel agency on Shaftesbury
Avenue in London, whose owners became friends of mine by chance 10 years later.
There was nothing political about them or the tour. It was the cheapest trip
available to Eastern Europe at that time of year.

Two of my best friends were in the United States exchange program at Moscow's
State University, and I went primarily to visit them. Mr. Clinton also visited a
friend on the same exchange program.

I talked a lot with Bill Clinton, as you can imagine on a long train journey
like that. Far from being anti-American, he was very patriotic and loyal. I know
because the Vietnam War had made me critical of America, and the loss of a
stepbrother there only made me more bitter. Bill Clinton would have nothing to
do with generic criticisms of the United States. He opposed the war as a
"tragic" mistake for America.

He was neither radical nor socialistic. His hero was John F. Kennedy, and he
believed in the Kennedy political legacy. Far from being prone to "youthful
indiscretion," he struck me as measuring his words and actions carefully. Bill
Clinton was a product of Middle America and Arkansas, and determined to stay
that way.

The Bill Clinton I met was a fine young man: soft spoken, balanced, smart,
intellectually curious, well intentioned; he had a good sense of humor and
seemed a regular guy. He gives one hope that someone so well constructed can
rise to the top of the political world in our democracy. I think it's perverse
of President Bush to use Mr. Clinton's efforts to educate himself and see
something of the world as a weapon with which to attack him. I trust the
American people will not let Mr. Bush get away with it.

JAMES W. MARQUIS
Rome, Oct. 12, 1992

The writer teaches and is in business in Rome.

LOAD-DATE: October 18, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              115 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 18, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Candidate's Record;
The Matter of Trust: Clinton's Big Burden

BYLINE: By MICHAEL KELLY,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 24; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 2010 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 17


On Tuesday night Vice President Dan Quayle introduced into the language the
phrase "to pull a Clinton," which he used to mean roughly "to lie, to distort,
to waffle or to slide around the truth."

By Wednesday morning the phrase had already made its way from politics to the
populace. A trucker in Maryland was asked by a reporter if he had ever broken
the regulations on hours driven without rest. "No," said the trucker, and then
caught himself. "Well, I don't want to pull a Clinton here. Truth is, I have
broken them sometimes."

If Gov. Bill Clinton of Arkansas is inaugurated as the 42d President, he will
enter the White House carrying a burden it took his predecessor three years and
a famous broken promise to fully earn. A great many people seem to take it as a
given that Mr. Clinton is not, at bottom, completely trustworthy.

Friends Defend Clinton

This belief, which readily appears in public opinion polls and even in the most
casual conversations with voters, is one that Mr. Clinton and his strategists
insist is false. To friends and aides, the Democratic Presidential nominee has
complained that it rests on a few widely publicized episodes in his life, and on
taking the most negative view of the sort of compromising that all politicians
must do.

It is true that the nature of both politics and governance makes a record of
absolute truth almost impossible, but it is also true that Mr. Clinton's
reputation as a politician quick to shade the truth is far greater than that of
many of his peers.

In part, Mr. Clinton's reputation rests on a matter of personal style. There is
something about the Governor of Arkansas -- something about the way he gently
bites his lower lip in quiet conversation, the way his words flow in
sorghum-sweetened smoothness, the way his wide-open eyes and drop-jawed smile
combine to suggest guileless candor -- that suggests to some, perhaps wrongly,
the sort of practice that makes perfect.

There is, however, also a matter of considerable record. A review of Mr.
Clinton's statements on both public and personal issues, and on matters both
large and petty, finds much that concerns voters.

Some Broken Promises

In the summer of 1969, Mr. Clinton, seeking a way out of induction into the
Army, made a written promise to join the Reserve Officers Training Corps at the
University of Arkansas. In the fall he broke that promise. In 1986, running for
re-election as Governor, he promised not to seek any general tax increases --
that is, ones that would affect all taxpayers. In 1987 he broke that promise by
seeking an increase in the sales tax. In 1990, running again for re-election, he
promised in a televised debate that he would not run for any other elected
office if re-elected, and would serve out his full term. In 1991, after his
re-election, he broke that promise and announced his candidacy for the
Presidency.

On the campaign trail this year Mr. Clinton has shown a pattern of making
misleading statements. The most famous involve his history with the Vietnam War.

In his early statements explaining how he had not been drafted in 1968 and 1969,
Mr. Clinton said that he had never received an induction notice, and that this
"was just a fluke." He also denied having received any special treatment, and
minimized the efforts he made to avoid the draft.

It eventually developed, through news reports, that Mr. Clinton had, indeed,
received an induction notice in the summer of 1969, that he had made elaborate
and extensive efforts to escape military service, that he had broken his promise
to the officials who led the R.O.T.C. program at the University of Arkansas and
misled those officers about his active role as an opponent of the war, and that
he had received at least some measure of help in getting around the draft from a
friend and former boss in the office of Senator J. W. Fulbright of Arkansas.

But He Didn't Inhale

Because of this sort of thing, the belief that Mr. Clinton has a hard time
telling the entire truth has come to gain a remarkably wide acceptance, becoming
in short time a part of the nation's popular culture.

Ccomedians mock Mr. Clinton for his explanations regarding his draft record, his
marital troubles and his claim, after years of seeming to deny that he had ever
smoked marijuana, that he had in fact done so, but had not inhaled. Time
magazine put the outline of Mr. Clinton's face in photo-negative image on its
cover, under the headline, "Why Voters Don't Trust Bill Clinton."

In the space of a year, "Slick Willie" has become as widely noted a nickname for
Mr. Clinton as "Tricky Dick" was for Richard M. Nixon.

In the national press corps, the belief that Mr. Clinton shades the truth
appears widely held, and the journalists whose writing will shape the public
view of a Clinton administration, for better or worse, speak of expectations
that it will be marked by dishonesty.

"I don't know many people who pay close attention to Clinton who do not believe
that he has difficulty in telling it straight," said Andrew Sullivan, the editor
of The New Republic, a magazine that strongly supports Mr. Clinton and his
running mate, Senator Al Gore of Tennessee. "I think that he is so completely
political a character that, when he has to address an issue the actual truth
about it is not the first thing that comes into his head. The first thing is,
'What are the political attributes of my position?' "

Mr. Sullivan said he feared "an administration where routine matters of
embarrassment, the kind of things that always happen to people in power, become
major issues of credibility because of his inability to come clean on things."

Within the Clinton campaign the subject is a delicate one, prompting George
Stephanopoulos, the campaign's communications director, into a defensive answer.

Asked if he thinks most Americans regard Mr. Clinton as really trustworthy, Mr.
Stephanopoulos replied, "I think trust is not the right word." Voters, he added,
do trust Mr. Clinton, but in a relative, not an absolute, way.

"They understand he's a human being," Mr. Stephanopoulos said. "He's always said
he's not perfect, but he's committed and tenacious and caring. The political
shorthand for this is that the people have processed this information and have
concluded that he's not perfect but he's on their side, and he's trying."

Support Along With Doubts

Public opinion polls suggest Mr. Stephanopoulos is right. In a political
dichotomy that has greatly benefited Mr. Clinton, it seems that many people
believe he is not wholly trustworthy, but they also believe he would make a
better President than George Bush.

A mid-September survey of 1,506 registered voters conducted for The Wall Street
Journal and NBC News found voters willing to elect Mr. Clinton because they
believed he would do a better job in dealing with the issues they most cared
about, while retaining doubts about his personal character.

Only 51 percent said they were satisfied with Mr. Clinton's character and
personal values, as against 72 percent who approved of Mr. Bush in that regard.
On another question, 30 percent said they did not believe Mr. Clinton had a
"good moral character." Seventeen percent cited unanswered questions about Mr.
Clinton's draft record and reported extramarital affairs as among the likeliest
reasons they would not vote for him.

The recent and harsh effort by the Bush campaign to encourage and exploit
negative perceptions of Mr. Clinton in this regard seems to have produced little
change. A Newsweek poll of 751 registered voters taken Oct. 15-16 found that 58
percent of the respondents said they were satisfied that Mr. Clinton had "the
honesty and integrity to serve as President," while 36 percent said he did not.
A poll taken the month before had found 62 percent unsatisfied with Mr.
Clinton's integrity, with 31 percent satisfied.

Many voters seem comfortable with a view of Mr. Clinton both as something of a
fibber and a man who should be President.

'The Guy Is Supersmart'

"Oh, for sure, he's Slick Willie," said Rob McCormack, a computer systems
analyst and Clinton supporter, as he sipped a beer near the University of
Richmond hall where the second Presidential debate on Thursday night had just
concluded.

"There's no question the guy is supersmart and a supersalesman, but in your
heart you've got to believe he lied about the draft -- it's clear he changed his
story several times -- and that he was cheating on his wife," Mr. McCormack
said. "And that does make you wonder what other compromises he'll make when he
gets into office."

But he said he would vote for Mr. Clinton.

"I know it's a gamble," Mr. McCormack said. "But I think that the Presidency is
a kind of crucible. Men who go through it sometimes come out different than they
were when they went in. Obviously, this didn't happen with George Bush. We'll
have to see if it does with Clinton."

Public and Private Matters

To a considerable degree, Mr. Clinton has benefited from the view that any
difficulties he might have with the truth are confined to matters largely in the
past and in his personal life. Voters tell poll takers and reporters they do not
regard questions about Mr. Clinton's draft record or accusations of marital
infidelity as germane to whether he would make a good President.

But Mr. Clinton's tendency to make misleading statements, renege on promises and
waffle on difficult questions has been a part of the story of his record in
matters of public policy and politics, not just in personal terms.

On the matter of using force in the Persian Gulf war, for example, Mr. Clinton
has described himself in unequivocal terms as a supporter of the President's
decision to use military force. On Sept. 16, 1991, he told reporters he would
have voted for the Congressional authorization to use force, had he been a
member of Congress.

In fact, Mr. Clinton's only recorded statements on this subject show he was not
an unequivocal supporter of the Congressional resolution. "I guess I would have
voted with the majority if it was a close vote," The Arkansas Democrat-Gazette
quoted him as saying. "But I agree with the arguments the minority made."

Welfare Statements Cited

On the campaign trail Mr. Clinton has promised an overhaul of welfare programs
to "end welfare as we know it," and points to the Project Success welfare reform
program he initiated in Arkansas in 1989, boasting that the Manpower
Demonstration Research Corporation had rated the program "one of the three or
four best in the country."

But, as both U.S. News and World Report and The New Republic have noted, the
manpower organization never did any such thing. The independent group gave that
rating to an entirely different program, called WORK, created by Mr. Clinton's
Republican predecessor, Gov. Frank White.

And Mr. Clinton's Project Success does not put all of those who could work off
welfare after two years, as he has claimed. The New Republic found that of the
state's approximately 27,000 welfare recipients, only 4,000 were participating
in the program, and 78 percent of them were not actually working but were
protected under various education, training or job search programs. Only 194
Arkansans were actually assigned to community service jobs.

Here in Washington, where Democrats regard a Clinton administration as the last,
best chance to prove that their party can run the nation, it is this sort of
thing, not Mr. Clinton's statements about his personal life, that has engendered
private worry among many Clinton supporters.

"If you are really going to have an administration of reform liberalism and are
serious about such things as welfare reform," said Mr. Sullivan, the editor of
The New Republic, "you need to exhibit forceful and direct honesty with the
public to win the tremendous political battles that it will take to do these
things. If you start with a fudge you will end with something useless. And if
that is what happens, that will be it for this administration."

NAME: Bill Clinton

LOAD-DATE: October 31, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Gov. Bill Clinton being greeted by members of the press after
arriving yesterday at Detroit Metropolitan Airport. (Lee Romero/The New York
Times)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              116 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 18, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Conversations/Robert McBride;
A Bomber Lives With His Guilt In a Land of Scant Innocence

BYLINE: By BILL KELLER

SECTION: Section 4; Page 7; Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1213 words

DATELINE: JOHANNESBURG


"So now tell me, what do you think about me?" asked the bomber, his dark eyes
challenging through round tortoise-shell frames. This is a question South
Africans often pose in one form or another after endeavoring to make themselves
understood to outsiders. Robert McBride, one of the most famous saboteurs in the
furtive military underground of the African National Congress, works harder than
most South Africans to explain himself, since he finds that for those outside
the liberation fraternity what he did surpasses understanding.

What he did is this: In June 1986, he taped together more than 100 pounds of
explosives, attaching a mine with a 15-minute timer as his trigger, and
swaddling this propulsive charge with bags of machine-gun bullets and metal
scraps for shrapnel. He secreted his lethal contraption in the spare-wheel well
of a powder-blue Ford Cortina, which he parked one Saturday night on a crowded
beachfront esplanade in Durban.

The bomber was out of earshot when his device exploded into two busy white bars
called Magoo's and the Why Not, killing three women, wounding 69 people, and
inaugurating a new, less morally fastidious stage in the war against apartheid.

"It was the first time the conflict in South Africa was brought home to white
people," Mr. McBride recalled the other day, at liberty after six years in
prison and, like the African National Congress itself, keen to convince that he
has matured from bush soldier to citizen. Last month Mr. McBride was freed, one
of hundreds of anti-apartheid irregulars being let out in phases in a grudging
Government concession aimed at reviving negotiations on South Africa's future.
He notes with pride that the reconciliation came close to breaking down over his
case, which is remembered with particular horror among whites.

The bomber is a rangy man of 29 years. Clad in a plaid shirt open over a blue
T-shirt, jeans, running shoes and a black baseball cap, he resembles a college
kid off for an intramural softball game. He has, in fact, been cramming for a
pre-law exam when he breaks off to receive a visitor in the kitchen of the cozy
Johannesburg home where he lives with the woman who married him as he sat on
death row. (Paula McBride's father is a director of South Africa's most powerful
corporate oligarch, the diamonds-gold-and-everything-else-that-matters
conglomerate Anglo-American; her marriage was the social equivalent of her
husband's car bomb.)

No Precautions

He lives without visible precautions, although the day before his scheduled
release an inmate came after him with a homemade knife, and three days later the
brother of one of his victims was burned when a cocktail of chlorine and brake
fluid -- over-the-counter bomb ingredients, presumably meant for Mr. McBride --
exploded prematurely.

Slouched in a kitchen chair, he recites his explanations like a script, but
stiffens to attention when he senses disapproval.

Mr. McBride is descended from Scottish, Irish, African and Malay ancestors,
making him by apartheid's eerie lights neither black nor white but "colored." He
grew up in Wentworth, a grim mixed-race township situated between an industrial
park and a Mobil Oil refinery in suburban Durban.

"Such a nice-sounding name, they made it sound like some English country town,"
he said bitterly. Mr. McBride recalled that when he went off to college he
"tried for white," aping the manners and attitudes of the English and
Afrikaners; rejected, he turned instead to the solace of black consciousness.
When a friend recruited him into the African National Congress army, Umkhonto we
Sizwe (Spear of the Nation), he went eagerly to a camp in Botswana to study
clandestine warfare. He smuggled weapons, then graduated to what the A.N.C.
calls "combat missions." He blew up electrical substations, water mains, oil
pipelines; he planted explosives under police cars. In the interest of making
the cities ungovernable, he gave hand grenades to township kids.

The Magoo's Bar bombing marked the beginning of a brief interlude in the armed
struggle about which the congress was always a bit ambivalent -- a phase of
pursuing what it called "soft targets." More bluntly, this has been called
terrorism.

At his trial Mr. McBride, hoping to protect the A.N.C. and to generate
extenuating sympathy, said he had acted on his own, driven by his impoverished
childhood and the embittering influence of his father, a
schoolteacher-turned-welder who despised whites. Now he says -- and the congress
confirms, embracing him as a hero -- that he acted under detailed instructions.
"The bar was identified by A.N.C. intelligence as a watering hole of the army
and police," he said. "Unlike our previous policy, when we showed great
restraint about bystanders, the new objective was to go after military personnel
and not to show too much restraint about whether bystanders got injured or not."

Mr. McBride is convinced that two factors made his crime a particular nightmare
to South Africans. One is that the victims were almost all white. Most of the
casualties in the apartheid wars were -- and are -- black.

The second difference, he believes, is that South Africans were alarmed to find
a "colored" taking up arms with blacks. "Coloreds" were accorded marginally
better treatment under apartheid, and were expected to identify with whites.

Short of Remorse

"When I was arrested one of the white security police said to me: 'But I don't
understand, you're almost like me. Why did you go to the other side?' They
expect to oppress me a little bit less than they oppress blacks, and for that I
should be loyal to their oppressive society."

Mr. McBride talks about his bombing the way some whites talk about apartheid,
with regret that falls short of remorse, and with frequent recourse to
historical analogy. What about Nagasaki? he asks. What about Dresden, and
Vietnam?

Does he think, he is asked, that his act and current heroic stature have
contributed to a culture of romantic violence that now runs riot in black
townships, largely divorced from the ideals of the anti-apartheid struggle?
"Let's stop right there," he interrupts. "The original sin is apartheid. If
there were no apartheid there would be no Umkhonto we Sizwe. Let's go to the
source, not the byproducts. Whenever there's conflict, you have negative
spinoffs."

Still, the bomber insists, he had misgivings until the last minute, and was
"horrified" the next day.

"One of the reporters who met me outside the prison asked, would you take up
arms again?" Mr. McBride recalled. "I said if the situation arises the same as
1985, if the A.N.C. was banned, if the suffering was the same, it would be my
duty to take up arms again. And so the headlines said, 'McBride Would Do It
Again.' But the next question was, would you do that kind of operation again,
and the obvious answer is no. I would not do that operation again. No matter how
eloquently I put the political arguments, as a human being it causes me too much
anguish in hindsight."

Anguish at what, the visitor wondered, the loss of innocent lives? The bomber
paused at that, as if trying to remember the answer.

"I don't like using that word 'innocent,' " he said finally. "Innocent in South
Africa is very relative."

NAME: Robert McBride

LOAD-DATE: October 31, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Robert McBride in Johannesburg last week. (Louise Gubb/JB
Pictures, for The New York Times)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              117 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 19, 1992, Monday, Late Edition - Final

In Northwest, Free-for-All Elections

BYLINE: By TIMOTHY EGAN,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 9; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1114 words

DATELINE: SEATTLE, Oct. 16


Near the end of an otherwise ordinary debate here recently, Representative Rod
Chandler, the Republican candidate for the open United States Senate seat in
Washington, did something extraordinary: He started singing.

"Dang me, dang me, they ought to take a rope and hang me," Mr. Chandler, a
five-term Congressman given to somber statements and cautious policy utterances,
started in. "Hang me from the highest treeeeeeee, woman would you weep for me."

The silver-haired Republican's version of the Roger Miller standby left his
audience of Rotarians, otherwise sympathetic, somewhat befuddled. Asked about it
later, Kraig Naasz, Mr. Chandler's spokesman said, "I can't explain it."

Even as the Presidential election has settled into a somewhat predictable
pattern in the closing days of the election, the battle for many United States
Senate seats remains a bit of a free-for-all. This is particularly true in the
Pacific Northwest and Alaska, where quirkiness reigns, in politics as in other
things.

Four Senate races in four states that make up nearly a third of the land mass of
the United States remain too close to call. The Republicans hold two of the
seats, with incumbents Frank H. Murkowski in Alaska and Bob Packwood in Oregon.
The two open seats are in Washington, where Senator Brock Adams, a Democrat, is
retiring, and in Idaho, where Steve Symms, a Republican, is stepping down.

If there is one thread running through all four races, it is the vast divide
over how to manage the great natural resources of this part of the country.
Candidates must know their owls, salmon and ungulates, or risk electoral scorn.

In Alaska, one issue is caribou -- or more specifically, what oil might do to
the vast caribou herds of the Arctic region. Both Senator Murkowsi and his
Democratic challenger, Tony Smith, a 50-year-old lawyer from Anchorage, favor
opening up the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge to oil development, which
Congress has refused to do, despite the backing of President Bush.

While it is not known how much oil may lie beneath the 19-million-acre refuge,
the hope of many Alaskans is that there is enough to keep the riches that have
paid for 85 percent of the state's government flowing.

Senator Murkowski has tried to link Mr. Smith with the philosophy of Gov. Bill
Clinton and the Democratic platform, which is against oil development in the
refuge. But this may backfire, because in this heavily Republican state, Mr.
Clinton is surprisingly popular, with the race rated a tossup.

Mr. Smith, a Navy Vietnam veteran, has been trying to build on voter distrust of
incumbents to dislodge Senator Murkowski, a 59-year-old former banker from
Fairbanks who is seeking his third term in the Senate.

History of Crossover

Even though Senator Murkowski has been running about 10 percentage points ahead
of Mr. Smith, Alaskans tend to defy poll takers, often crossing party lines.

In Washington State, the spotted owl is an issue that symbolizes how both
candidates feel about the future of the national forests. Timber jobs are only a
small part of this state that is home to corporate giants like Boeing and
Microsoft. Already squeezed by automation at the mills and log exports,
wood-processing jobs have further declined with the Federal restrictions on
tree-cutting in national forests in order to protect the bird.

Following President Bush's strategy of calling the Democrats environmental
extremists, Mr. Chandler, 50, says he is trying to restore balance to the
problem.

His Democratic opponent, Patty Murray, a 42-year-old novice in national
politics, has become something of a media favorite in a year when perhaps as
many as five women may be elected to the Senate. She has favored keeping strong
protection for the owl.

While Ms. Murray has run well ahead in polls over the last month, the gap has
been closing rapidly in recent days. Ms. Murray's inexperience was particularly
evident during the debate here this week, which was televised across the state.
Twice, she called the Democratic Presidential nominee "President Clinton," and
she lobbed softball questions at her opponent when given a chance to ask
questions of him.

Heated Race in Oregon

But Ms. Murray -- who bills herself as "just a mom in tennis shoes" -- was
underestimated during the primary campaign, and she beat all candidates by a
wide margin. She has scored well with audiences when she refers to the Reagan
years as "the credit card nightmare of the 1980's," and when she urges a new
partnership of business and Government. Also, Mr. Chandler, who is 6 feet 5
inches tall, has played into the 5-feet-4-inch Ms. Murray's outsider strategy
when he accuses her, as he did in the debate, of not being ready to "play in the
big leagues."

In Oregon, Senator Packwood and his Democratic opponent, Representative Les
AuCoin, have gone after each other with vigor that sometimes goes over the line
into nastiness.

Mr. AuCoin, 49, who was first elected to Congress as one of the reform-minded
Democrats swept into office in 1974 after the Watergate scandal, has suffered
because he wrote overdrafts on his checking account in the House bank. He has
tried to run in tandem with Mr. Clinton, who is well ahead in Oregon, and has
adopted the Clinton strategy of favoring a summit meeting as the way to solve
the timber crisis.

By contrast, Mr. Packwood, who is 60, has run away from his party's nominee,
President Bush. The Senator has backed some of Mr. Clinton's positions on health
care and foreign trade.

Idaho, one of the strongest Republican states in the nation, has not had a
Democratic Senator since Frank Church, who was voted out in 1980. Now, the man
who replaced Senator Church, Steven Symms, is retiring, and the seat is not a
safe Republican one.

The Democrat, Representative Richard Stallings, 52, is running even in recent
polls with Mayor Dirk Kempthorne of Boise, the Republican, who is 40.

Mr. Stallings, a former high school history teacher, was elected to Congress
from a part of Idaho where recent Democratic Presidential candidates drew no
better than 15 percent. He is popular with farmers, and conservative on social
issues like abortion and school prayer.

Mr. Kempthorne is running in large part on his record as Mayor of Boise, which
is booming, riding a wave of new construction and high-tech jobs. He is not
quite as conservative as Mr. Symms.

A big issue in Idaho has been how to save the diminishing stocks of Snake River
salmon. Mr. Stallings favors a plan to help young fish downstream in the spring
by letting more water pass through the rivers, while Mr. Kempthorne has held
back on which plan he endorses.

NAME: Rod Chandler; Patty Murray

LOAD-DATE: October 19, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Representative Rod Chandler, left, Republican candidate for the
open Senate seat in Washington State, is being challenged by Patty Murray, a
Democrat who has become something of a media favorite in a year when as many as
five women may be elected to the Senate. (Photographs by Doug Wilson for The New
York Times)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              118 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 19, 1992, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Abroad at Home;
The Bush War

BYLINE: By ANTHONY LEWIS

SECTION: Section A; Page 17; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 689 words

DATELINE: BOSTON


"Friends, that war [Vietnam] began in earnest a quarter of a century ago; and
surely the statute of limitations has been reached. . . . The final lesson of
Vietnam is that no great nation can long afford to be sundered by a memory." --
President Bush,
Inaugural Address, 1989

Vietnam has had a major place in President Bush's re-election campaign. "The
problem with Vietnam in the Bush view," he said on a radio talk show last month,
"is we tied the hand -- tied one hand behind the back of our military and we
didn't let them prevail."

Again last week, on NBC's "Today" show, he criticized opponents of the Vietnam
War who said it was immoral. What was really immoral, he said, was to send a
soldier there "and tie his hands behind his back by not winning."

The hand tied behind the back is a familiar right-wing metaphor for the way the
United States fought the war in Vietnam. It sounds the same theme of betrayal
that the German right used to such devastating effect after World War I.

But what does President Bush actually mean when he says that? What does he think
we should have done militarily that we did not do?

The United States had complete control of the air, and dropped more explosives
than Allied planes did in World War II. North Vietnam had a few planes but
hardly used them. It did have Soviet-supplied SAM ground-to-air missiles in the
north.

We had substantial elements of the world's most powerful navy there. North
Vietnam had no navy.

American B-52's, the most devastating bombers on earth, flew thousands of
missions from Guam. They bombed supply lines, suspected enemy troop hideouts and
targets in North Vietnam.

U.S. helicopter gunships roamed the battlefields, and other helicopters and
planes sprayed chemicals to defoliate the countryside. North Vietnam had no
helicopters.

What the United States did not use was nuclear weapons. Is that where President
Bush thinks we went wrong? Is that what he means by fighting with one hand tied
behind our back?

Yes, we could have gone nuclear. Or yes, we could have used B-52's to bomb the
dikes and flood much of North Vietnam. But not even Henry Kissinger thought
those strategies would benefit the United States.

The reason we lost, in the end, is not in doubt to any serious military
historian. We were fighting the wrong war in the wrong place at the wrong time.
The North Vietnamese Communist leaders had a brutal ideology that in peace has
been a disaster. But in the war they carried the banner of Vietnamese
independence, and their people were willing to die for that.

When Richard Nixon became President, in 1969, he knew we could not win the war.
That is why he began the process he called Vietnamization: withdrawing American
forces and turning the fight over to the South Vietnamese.

It was a charade, because Saigon could not be expected to win what we could not.
But the charade went on for four years, with the loss of an additional 20,000
American lives and countless more Vietnamese. We had to do that, Mr. Kissinger
said, to maintain American "credibility."

It was in 1969 that young Bill Clinton, in England, joined demonstrations
against the war. President Bush says it was wrong to "demonstrate against your
country." In the second Presidential debate he said, "That's what I feel
passionately about."

But Bill Clinton was not demonstrating against his country. He was demonstrating
against a policy that was uselessly killing Americans and others. He understood
what Nixon and Kissinger knew but were trying to conceal: that we were in an
unwinable war.

President Bush's use of the Vietnam betrayal theme is the most disappointing
single thing in a generally sordid negative campaign. It is the most
disappointing because I thought he meant what he said about Vietnam in his
Inaugural Address.

That speech was written by Peggy Noonan. In addition to the Vietnam passage, it
included the statement "I yearn for a greater tolerance and easygoingness about
each other's attitudes and way of life." It must have been Peggy Noonan speaking
then. It does not sound like the George Bush we have come to know.

LOAD-DATE: October 19, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              119 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 20, 1992, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Founder of Green Party Dies Mysteriously in Bonn

BYLINE: By JAMES BARRON

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 788 words


The founder of the Green Party in Germany -- who stormed the corridors of
mainstream politics with defiance and irreverence -- and her longtime companion
were found dead in their house in a suburb of Bonn last night, the investigating
prosecutor said.

The prosecutor, Wolfgang Komp, said that the Green Party founder, Petra Kelly,
44 years old, and her companion, Gert Bastian, 69, both former members of
Parliament, had been dead for some time. He said that identification was
difficult because their bodies had decomposed.

Mr. Komp said there was no reasonable doubt that the bodies were those of Miss
Kelly and Mr. Bastian, Reuters reported.

"It could be a joint suicide, a murder with suicide or murder," Reuters quoted
him as saying as he left the house in the Tannenbusch district north of Bonn.
"All possibilities were open" as to the cause of death.

The Associated Press, which reported the wounds found on the bodies indicated
violent death, said he would not discuss whether a weapon or a note had been
found.

The police were alerted by a neighbor who had been called by relatives who had
not heard from the couple for some time, Reuters said.

Miss Kelly, an environmentalist and feminist, was the best-known member of the
party, She and Mr. Bastian were both elected to Parliament in 1983.

The Greens -- formed in opposition to what they called "the life-and-death
issues of nuclear power and nuclear weapons" -- faded from power after German
unification. In the 1990 elections, the western German Greens failed to win the
5 percent they needed to retain a seat. The party later picked up crucial votes
in the state of Hesse as part of a coalition with the Social Democrats, thus
upsetting the majority Chancellor Helmut Kohl's faction held in the upper house.


Destruction by Bickering

By then the Greens had been feuding for years, and Miss Kelly declared that the
party had committed suicide by bickering.

"In the end the voters never learned about the good things we were still doing,"
she said, "because all the media tuned into was the fight."

Miss Kelly was educated in the United States, was befriended by Hubert H.
Humphrey and worked in Robert F. Kennedy's presidential campaign in 1968. Mr.
Bastian, a former general, left the West German Army to protest the planned
deployment of American missiles in Germany.

She said that the defining moment of her life occurred 20 years before, with the
painful death of her half-sister, Grace Patricia Kelly, at the age of 10. The
cause was eye cancer; Petra Kelly maintained that overdoses of radiation
treatment at a Heidelberg clinic killed the girl -- a metaphor for the
anti-establishment ideology she had been developing.

'Child for Sale'

Ms. Kelly, a frail-looking fast-talker whose vocabulary had all the cadences of
a sound bite left over from from the 1960's, was born Petra Karin Lehmann in
1947 in the southern Bavarian town of Gunzburg, which, she once noted, was the
hometown of Josef Mengele, the Nazi war criminal.

In her autobiography, she declared, "I made quite a story being the first child
and not being a husky red baby boy." She also said that when she told her father
she wanted a doll, he sent her to the town square with a sign that said, "This
child is for sale."

There were no takers. She was later sent to a convent and said she expected to
become a nun or a missionary. "I always thought I had to do a great thing
sometime for hunger, to stop it," she said in 1983.

When she was 7, her father abandoned her mother, who later married John E.
Kelly, an American lieutenant colonel in West Germany. In 1960, he was
transferred to Fort Benning, Ga., and the family moved there. Miss Kelly took
his name even though he did not adopt her.

She mastered English -- "crying every night until I learned it." After debating
the Vietnam war in high school, she enrolled in American University in
Washington and joined "the nonviolent occupation of the university president's
office."

In 1972, Miss Kelly joined the staff of the European Community in Brussels,
irritating her bosses by discovering evidence that Common Market money was being
channeled to right-wing European politicians. At the time, she was drawn to
Chancellor Willy Brandt, touched by the conciliatory gesture he made when he
fell to his knees at the Polish monument to victims of the Warsaw ghetto
uprising. Mr. Brandt died on Oct. 8.

She joined his Social Democrat party, but became disenchanted with the centrist
policies of Mr. Brandt's successor, Helmut Schmidt, especially his acceptance of
nuclear power. In 1978, she fired off a letter to Mr. Schmidt, telling him she
was quitting his party. The Greens were founded the next year.

NAME: Petra Kelly

LOAD-DATE: October 20, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              120 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 20, 1992, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

U.S.-VIETNAM TALKS MOVE TIES CLOSER

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 11; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 768 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 19


Vietnam and the United States have moved closer to establishing diplomatic
relations after two days of talks in Hanoi between a high-level Bush
Administration delegation and Vietnamese leaders, the State Department said
today.

During the meetings, Hanoi pledged to open to American inspection all archival
material relating to American servicemen unaccounted for since the Vietnam War,
according to a joint statement issued by Vietnamese officials and the leader of
the United States team, John W. Vessey Jr., a retired Army general.

"General Vessey indicated in the context of accelerated cooperation to resolve
the P.O.W.-M.I.A. issue, the U.S. would move more rapidly toward normalization,"
said Richard Boucher, the State Department spokesman.

The talks were hurriedly arranged by the Administration after Vietnam's Foreign
Minister, Nguyen Manh Cam, was invited to Washington two weeks ago for talks
with Acting Secretary of State Lawrence S. Eagleburger and Defense Secretary
Dick Cheney.

Photos Shown to Vietnamese

At that meeting, the United States apparently presented the Vietnamese with
information from Vietnam's own files that revealed Hanoi knew more than it has
acknowledged about some cases of missing Americans.

According to officials involved in independent investigations of the issue here
and in Southeast Asia, the material shown to the Vietnamese included photographs
smuggled out of the country depicting gruesome scenes of Americans mutilated in
crashes and military encounters or executed by their Vietnamese captors.

Information that has emerged in recent hearings of the Senate Select Committee
on P.O.W.-M.I.A Affairs has also indicated that Hanoi may have information it
has withheld from American officials for nearly 20 years.

A resolution of some cases of missing Americans has been the last hurdle to
lifting an American economic embargo and recognizing Hanoi.

November Visit by Senators

Some Pentagon officials said they believed that Vietnam might also be preparing
to release more American remains in the next few weeks, perhaps in advance of a
committee visit to Hanoi planned for mid-November.

General Vessey, the President's special envoy to Hanoi, will brief Mr. Bush on
his visit on Wednesday or Thursday, the White House said today.

The timing of these new moves is the subject of speculation here among both
supporters and critics of improved relations with Vietnam. Experts say Vietnam's
leaders are uncertain of what to expect from a Clinton Administration, while
they are on a clearly defined "road map" to recognition devised by the Bush
State Department.

Douglas Pike, the scholar who has written a history of the Vietnamese Army, said
today that Vietnamese leaders in Hanoi asked him over the summer what more they
could do to close this issue.

Vietnamese Politics Are Cited

"I would just advise them to overwhelm us with candor," he said, citing the
example of Russia. Mr. Pike, director of the Indochina studies at the University
of California at Berkeley, said objections to sharing more information had
apparently come from civilian security officials in Vietnam and not the
military.

He said that in the mid-1980's, military objections to "doling out bones" were
reliably reported to have been overruled in the Vietnamese Politburo by
civilians in control of policy toward the United States.

"My general sense is that they were deliberately not telling us things they
knew, and I think the basic reason was politics."

In Washington, the Bush Administration has been under pressure from American
businesses to end the embargo so that they can compete in the rebuilding and
industrialization of the country before all the contracts go to the Japanese,
Koreans, Taiwanese and Europeans, most of whom have embassies in Hanoi.

Virginia Foote, director of the United States-Vietnam Trade Council, an
independent organization supported by American companies, said today that
Vietnam, which would like to involve American oil companies in the development
of a block of offshore oil concessions in the South China Sea, is being pressed
to award contracts soon.

"If Vietnam awards those blocks, that will be pretty much the end of the
American role in development of the Vietnamese oil industry," she said.

She added that Japan, in addition to trading with Vietnam, is preparing to
resume direct foreign aid in contravention of American wishes. France is at the
same time trying to arrange for Vietnam's return to the International Monetary
Fund and World Bank, where Washington had consistently vetoed aid to Hanoi.

LOAD-DATE: October 20, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              121 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 20, 1992, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN;
Transcript of 3d TV Debate Between Bush, Clinton and Perot

SECTION: Section A; Page 20; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 16162 words


Following is a transcript of the Presidential debate at Michigan State
University in East Lansing last night between President Bush, Gov. Bill Clinton
and Ross Perot, as recorded by The New York Times:

Credibility and Believability


Q: Gentlemen, again, welcome and again good evening. It seems from what those
voters said at your Richmond debate and from polling and other data that each of
you fairly or not faces serious voter concerns about the underlying credibility
and believability of what each of you says you would do as President in the next
four years. Governor Clinton, in accordance with the draw, those concerns about
you are first. You are promising to create jobs, reduce the deficit, reform the
health care system, rebuild the infrastructure, guarantee college education for
everyone who is qualified among many other things; all with financial pain only
for the very rich. Some people are having trouble, apparently, believing that is
possible. Should they have that concern?

CLINTON: No. There are many people who believe that the only way we can get this
country turned around is to tax the middle class more and punish them more. But
the truth is that middle-class Americans are basically the only group of
Americans who have been taxed more in the 1980's and during the last 12 years
even though their incomes have gone down. The wealthiest Americans have been
taxed much less even though their incomes have gone up. Middle-class people will
have their fair share of changing to do and many challenges to face, including
the challenge of becoming constantly re-educated. But my plan is a departure
from trickle-down economics, just cutting taxes on the wealthiest Americans and
getting out of the way. It's also a departure from tax-and-spend economics
because you can't tax and divide an economy that isn't growing.

I propose an American version of what works in other countries. I think we can
do it better, invest and grow. I believe we can increase investment and reduce
the deficit at the same time if we not only ask the wealthiest Americans and
foreign corporations to pay their fair share. We also provide over $100 billion
in tax relief in terms of incentives for new plants, new small businesses, new
technologies, new housing and for middle-class families.

And we have $140 billion of spending cuts, invest and grow. Raise some more
money, spend the money on tax incentives to have growth in the private sector,
take the money from the defense cuts and reinvest it in new transportation and
communications and environmental cleanup systems.

This will work. On this, as on so many other issues, I have a fundamental
difference from the present Administration. I don't believe trickle-down
economics will work; unemployment is up; most people are working harder for less
money than they were making 10 years ago. I think we can do better if we have
the courage to change.

Q: Mr. President, a response. Specifically ----

BUSH: There's one minute -- now, just the ground rules here.

Q: Well, yes, roughly one minute. We can loosen that up a little bit, but go
ahead.

BUSH: He doesn't like trickle-down government, but I think he's talking about
the Reagan-Bush years where we created 15 million jobs. The rich are paying a
bigger percent of the total tax burden. And what I don't like is trickle-down
government. And therein I think Governor Clinton keeps talking about trickle
down, trickle down, and he's still talking about spending more and taxing more.
Government, he says, invest government, grow government. Government doesn't
create jobs. If they do, they're make-work jobs.

It's the private sector that creates jobs. And, yes, we've got too many taxes on
the American people and we're spending too much. And that's why I want to get
the deficit down by controlling the growth of mandatory spending. It won't be
painless. I think Mr. Perot put his finger on something there. It won't be
painless, but we've got to get the job done. But not by raising taxes. Mr. and
Mrs. America, when you hear him say 'We're going to tax only the rich,' watch
your wallet. Because his figures don't add up and he's going to sock it right to
the middle-class taxpayer and lower, if he's going to pay for all the spending
programs he proposes. So we have a big difference on this trickle-down theory. I
do not want any more trickle-down Government. It's gotten too big. I want to do
something about that.

Q: Mr. Perot, what do you think of the Governor's approach, what he just laid
out?

PEROT: The basic problem with it, it doesn't balance the budget. If you forecast
it out we'll still have a significant deficit under each of their plans as I
understand them. Our challenge is to stop the financial bleeding. If you take a
patient into the hospital that's bleeding arterially, step one is to stop the
bleeding. And we are bleeding arterially. There's only one way out of this and
that is to stop the deterioration of our job base, to have a growing, expanding
job base to give us the tax base. See, balancing the budget is not nearly as
difficult as paying off the $4 trillion debt and leaving our children the
American Dream intact. We have spent their money, we've got to pay it back. This
is going to take fair, shared sacrifice. My plan balances the budget within six
years. We didn't do it faster than that because we didn't want to disrupt the
economy. We gave it off to a slow start and a fast finish to give the economy
time to recover.

But we faced it and we did it. And we believe it's fair share and sacrifice. The
onething I have done is lay it squarely on the table in front of the American
people. You've had a number of occasions to see in detail what the plan is and
at least you'll understand it. I think that's fundamental in our country; that
you know what you're getting into.

Pain and Suffering

Q: Governor, the word pain -- one of the other leadership things that's put on
you is that you don't speak of pain. That you speak of, of all things --
nobody's going to really have to suffer under your plan. You heard what Mr.
Perot has said; he said it's got -- to do the things that you want to do, you
can't do it by just taking the money from the rich. That's what the President
says as well. How do you respond to that, if the numbers don't add up?

CLINTON: For one thing, let me just follow up here. I disagree with Mr. Perot
that the answer is to raise -- put a 50 cents gas tax on the middle-class and
raise more taxes on the middle class and the working poor than on the wealthy.
His own analysis says that unemployment will be slightly higher in 1995 under
his plan than it is today. And as far as what Mr. Bush says, he is the person
who raised taxes on the middle-class after saying he wouldn't and just this year
Mr. Bush vetoed the tax increase on the wealthy that gave middle-class tax
relief. He vetoed middle-class tax relief this year. And furthermore, under this
Administration, spending is increased more than it has in the last 20 years and
he asked Congress to spend more money than it actually spent.

Now it's hard to outspend Congress but he tried to for the last three years. So,
my view is that the middle class is the one -- they've been suffering, Jim. Now,
should people pay more for Medicare if they can? Yes. Should they pay more for
Social Security if they get more out of it than they've paid in and they're
upper-income people? Yes. But look what's happened to the middle class.
Middle-class Americans are working harder for less money than they were making
10 years ago and they're paying higher taxes. The tax burden on them has not
gone down. It has gone up. I don't think the answer is to slow the economy down
more, drive unemployment up more and undermine the health of the private sector.

The answer is to invest and grow this economy. That's what works in other
countries and that's what'll work here.

Q: As a practical matter, Mr. President, do you agree with the Governor when he
says that the middle class -- the taxes on the middle class -- do your numbers
agree that the middle -- the taxes on the middle class have gone up during the
last ----

BUSH: I think everybody's paying too much taxes. He refers to one tax increase.
Let me remind you it was a Democratic tax increase and I didn't want to do it
and I went along with it. And I said I make a mistake -- if I make a mistake, I
admit it. That's quite different than some. But I think that's the American way.
I think everyone's paying too much. But I think this idea that you can go out
and -- he, then he hits me for vetoing a tax bill. Yes, I did. And the American
taxpayer ought to be glad they have a President to stand up to a spending
Congress. We remember what it was like when we had a spending President and a
spending Congress and interest rates -- who, who remembers that? They were at
21.5 percent under Jimmy Carter. And inflation was 15.

We don't want to go back to that. And so yes, everybody's taxed too much and I
want to get the taxes down. But not by signing a tax bill that's going to raise
taxes on people.

Q: Mr. President, when you said just then that, you admit your mistakes and you
looked at Governor Clinton and said, what mistake is it that you want him to
admit to?

BUSH: Well, the record in Arkansas. I mean look at it. And that's what we're
asking America to have. Now look, he says Arkansas is a poor state. They are.
But in almost every category they're lagging. I'll give you an example. He talks
about all the jobs he's created in one or two years. Over the last 10 years
since he's been Governor, they're 30 percent behind -- 30 percent -- they're 30
percent of the national average, on pay for teachers, on all these categories
Arkansas is right near the very bottom. I'll -- you haven't heard me mention
this before, but we're getting close now and I think it's about time I start
putting things in perspective and I'm going to do that. It's not dirty
campaigning, because he's been talking about my record for a half a -- half a
year here -- 11 months here.

And so we've got to do that. I got to get it in perspective. What's his mistake?
Admit it! That Arkansas is doing very, very badly against any standard --
environment, support for police officers, whatever it is.

Q: Governor, is that true?

CLINTON: Mr. Bush's Bureau of Labor Statistics says Arkansas ranks first in the
country in the growth of new jobs this year -- first.

BUSH: This year.

CLINTON: Fourth in manufacturing jobs, fourth in the reduction of poverty,
fourth in income increase. Over the last 10 years, we've created manufacturing
jobs much more rapidly than the national average. Over the last five years, our
income has grown more rapidly than the national average. We are second in tax
burden -- the second-lowest tax burden in the country. We have the lowest per
capita state and local spending in the country. We're low spending, low tax
burden; we dramatically increased investment and our jobs are growing. I wish
America had that kind of record, and I think most people looking at us tonight
would like it if we had more jobs and a lower spending burden on the Government.

Q: Mr. Perot, if you were sitting at home now and just heard this exchange about
Arkansas, who would you believe?

PEROT: I grew up five blocks from Arkansas. Let's -- let's put it in
perspective. It's a beautiful state, it's a fairly rural state, it has a
population less than Chicago or Los Angeles, about the size of Dallas and Fort
Worth combined. So I think probably we're making a mistake night after night
after night to cast the nation's future on a unit that small.

Q: Why is that a mistake?

PEROT: It's irrelevant. You know, Jim, I ----

Q: What he did as Governor of Arkansas is irrelevant?

PEROT: Oh, no, no, but you can't -- I could say that I ran a small grocery store
on the corner, therefore I extrapolate that into the fact that I could run
Wal-Mart; that's not true.

Q: Mr. Perot --

Q: Governor --

PEROT: I can't protect an Arkansas company --

Q: Governor --

CLINTON: Mr. Perot, with all respect, I think it highly relevant and I think
that a $4 billion budget, with state and Federal funds, is not all that small.
And I think the fact that I took a state that was one of the poorest states in
the country and had been for 153 years and tried my best to modernize its
economy and to make the kind of changes that had generated support from people
like the presidents of Apple Computer and Hewlett Packard, and some of the
biggest companies in this country, 24 retired generals and admirals and hundreds
of business executives are highly relevant, and you know, I'm frankly amazed
that, since you grew up five blocks from there you would think that what goes on
in that state is irrelevant. I think it's been pretty impressive. And the people
who have jobs, the people who have jobs and educations and opportunities that
didn't have them 10 years ago don't think it's irrelevant at all. They think
it's highly relevant and they wish the rest of the ----

BUSH: I don't have a dog in this fight, but I'd like to get in on it. Governor
Clinton has to operate under a balanced budget amendment. He has to do it. That
is the law. I'd like to see a balanced budget amendment for America to protect
the American taxpayers. And then that would discipline, not only the Executive
Branch but the spending Congress, the Congress that's been in control of one
party, his party for 38 years. And we almost had it done and that institution,
the House of Representatives, everyone's yelling clean house, one of the reasons
is, we almost had it done and the Speaker, a very able, decent fellow, I might
add, but he twisted the arms of some of the sponsors of that legislation and had
them change their vote. What's relevant here is that tool, that discipline that
he has to live by in Arkansas and I'd like it for the American people. I want
the line-item veto, I want to check off, so if the Congress can't do it, let
people check off their income tax, 10 percent of it to compel the Government to
cut spending. And if they can't do it, if the Congress can't do it, let them
then have to do it across the board, a -- what we call a sequester. That's the
discipline we need. And I'm working for that, to protect the American taxpayer
against the big spenders.

Leadership at Home

Q: Mr. President let's move to some of the leadership concerns that have been
voiced about you and they relate to something you said in your closing statement
in Richmond the other night about the President being the manager of crises and
that relates to an earlier criticism that you began to focus on the economy, on
health care, on racial divisions in this country only after they became crises.
Is that a fair criticism?

BUSH: Jim, I don't think that's a fair shot. I hear it, I hear it echoed by
political opponents, but I don't think it's fair. I think we've been fighting
for Day 1 to do something about the inner cities. I'm for enterprise zones. I
have had it in every single proposal I've sent to the Congress.

And now we hear a lot of talk: Oh, well, they all want enterprise zones. And yet
the House and the Senate can't send it down without loading it up with a lot of,
you know, these Christmas tree ornaments they put on the legislation.

I don't think in racial, ah, racial harmony that I'm a laggard on that. I've
been speaking out since Day 1. We've gotten the Americans for Disabilities Act,
which I think is one of the foremost pieces of civil rights legislation.

And, yes, it took me to veto two civil rights quota bills, because I don't
believe in quotas.  And I don't think the American people believe in quotas. And
I beat back the Congress on that, and then we passed a decent civil rights bill
that offers guarantees against discrimination in employment. And that is good.

I've spoken out over and over again against anti-Semitism and racism. And I
think my record as a member of Congress speaks for itself on that.

What was the other part of it?

Q: Well, it's just that -- you've spoken to it. I mean, but the idea, not so
much in specific -- --

BUSH: Yes ----

Q: ---- but that it has to be a crisis before you -- it gets your attention.

BUSH: I don't think that's true at all. I don't think that's true. But, you
know, let others fire away on it.

Q: Do you think that's true, Mr. Perot?

PEROT: I'd like to just talk about issues and so ----

Q: You don't think this is an issue?

PEROT: No, well, no. But the point is that's a subjective thing. See, the
subjective thing is when does President Bush react. And I, I feel it would be
very difficult for me to answer that in any short period of time.

Q: Well, then, let's phrase -- I'll phrase it differently, then.

PEROT: Let's ----

Q: He said the other night in his closing words in Richmond that one of the key
things that he believes the American people should decide between, among, the
three of you is who they want in charge if this country gets to a crisis. Now,
that's what he said and, and the rap on the President is that it's only crises
time that he focuses on some of these things. So my question to you -- we're
going to talk about you in a minute. My question about you ----

PEROT: I thought you'd forgotten I was here.

Q: No, no, no, no, no, no. But my question to you is -- if you have nothing to
say about it, fine. I'll got to Governor Clinton. But ah ----

PEROT: No. I will, I will let the American people decide that. I would rather
not critique the two candidates.

Q: All right. Governor, what do you think?

CLINTON: The only thing I would say about that is I think that on the economy
Mr. Bush said for a long time there was no recession and then said it would be
better to do nothing than to have a compromise effort with the Congress. He
really didn't have a new economic program until over 1,300 days into his
Presidency, and not all of his health care initiative has been presented to the
Congress, even now.

I think it's important to elect a President who is committed to getting this
economy going again and who realizes we have to abandon trickle-down economics
and put the American people first again and who will send programs to the
Congress in the first hundred days to deal with the critical issues that America
is crying out for leadership on -- jobs, incomes, the health care crisis, the
need to control the economy. Those things deserve to be dealt with from Day 1. I
will deal with them from Day 1. They will be my first priority, not my election
year concern.

Q: Mr. President.

BUSH: Well, I think you're overlooking that we have had major accomplishments in
the first term. But if you're talking about protecting the taxpayer against his
friends in the United States Congress, go back to what it was like when you had
a Democratic President and a Democratic Congress. You don't have to go back to
Herbert Hoover. Go back to Jimmy Carter. And interest rates were 21 percent.
Inflation was 15 percent. The misery index -- unemployment and inflation added
together -- it was invented by the Democrats -- went right through the roof.
We've cut it in half. And all you hear about is how bad things are. You know,
remember the question: Are you better off? Well, is a home buyer better off if
he can refinance the home because interest rates are down? Is the senior citizen
better off because inflation is not wiping out their family's savings? I think
they are. Is the guy out of work better off? Of course he's not. But he's not
going to be better off if we grow the Government, if we invest, as Government
Clinton -- Governor Clinton says, invest in more Government. You've got to free
up the private sector. You've got to let small business have more incentives.

For three months -- three quarters -- I've been fighting -- three quarters been
fighting to get the Congress to pass some incentives for small business: capital
gains, investment tax allowance, credit for first-time home buyers. And it's
blocked by the Congress, and then if a little of it comes my way, they load it
up with Christmas trees and tax increases. And I have to stand up and favor the
taxpayer.

Staying the Course

Q: I have to let -- we have to talk about Ross Perot now, or he'll get me, I'm
sure. Mr. Perot, on this issue that I have raised at the very beginning that
we've been talking about which is leadership, as President of the United States,
it concerns, my reading of it at least, my concerns about you as expressed by
folks in the polls and other places. It goes like this; you've got a problem
with General Motors. You took your $750 million and you left. You had a problem
in the spring and summer about some personal hits that you took as a potential
candidate for President of the United States and you, you walked out. Does that
say anything relevant to how you would function as President of the United
States?

PEROT: I think the General Motors thing is very relevant. I did everything I
could to get General Motors to face its problems in the mid-80's while it was
still financially strong; they just wouldn't do it. And everybody now knows the
terrible price they're paying by waiting until it's obvious to the brain dead
that they have problems. Now, hundreds -- thousands of good, decent people;
whole cities up here in this state are adversely impacted because they would not
move in a timely way. Our Government is at that point now. The thing that I am
in this race for is to tap the American people on the shoulder and to say to
every single one of you, fix it while we're still relatively strong. If you have
a heart problem you don't wait until a heart attack to address it.

So the General Motors experience is relevant. At the point when I could not get
them to address those problems, I had created so much stress in the board who
wanted just to keep the Lawrence Welk music going that they asked to buy my
remaining shares. I sold them my remaining shares. They went their way, I went
my way, because it was obvious we had a complete disagreement about what should
be done with the company.

But let's take my life in perspective. Again and again on complex, difficult
tasks I have stayed the course. When I was asked by our Government to do the
P.O.W. project, within the year the Vietnamese had sent people into Canada to
make arrangements to have me and my family killed -- and I had five small
children -- and my family and I decided we would stay the course. And we lived
with that problem for three years.

Then I got into the Texans' War on Drug program and big-time drug dealers got
all upset. Then when I had two people imprisoned in Iran, I could have left them
there, I could have rationalized it. We went over, we got them out, we brought
them back home. And since then, for years I have lived with the burden of the
Middle East, where it's an "eye for an eye and a tooth for a tooth" country in
terms of their unhappiness with the fact that I was successful in that effort.

Again and again and again in the middle of the night and 2 or 3 o'clock in the
morning my Government has called me to take extraordinary steps for Americans in
distress. And again and again and again I have responded. And I didn't wilt and
I didn't quit.

Now, what happened in July we've covered again and again and again. But I think
in terms of the American people's concern about my commitment, I'm here tonight
folks. I've never quit supporting you as you put me on the ballot in the other
26 states. And when you asked me to come back in, I came back in. And talk about
not quitting? I'm spending my money on this campaign. Your two parties are
spending your money, taxpayer money. I -- I've put my wallet on the table for
you and your children, over $60 million at least, will go into this campaign to
leave the American dream to you and your children, to get this country
straightened out because if anybody owes it to you, I do. I've lived the
American dream. I'd like for your children to be able to live it, too.

Q: Governor, does -- do you have a response to the staying the course question
about Mr. Perot?

CLINTON: I don't have any criticism of Mr. Perot. I think the -- what I'd like
to talk about a minute is, since you're asking the question, was the -- the
General Motors issue. I don't think there's any question that the automobile
executives made some errors in the 1980's. But I also think we should look at
how much productivity has increased lately, how much labor has done to increase
productivity and how much management has done. And we're still losing a lot of
auto jobs, in my judgment, because we don't have a national economic strategy
that will build the industrial base of this country. Now just today I met with
the presidents and the vice presidents of the Willow Run union here -- near
here. They both said they were Vietnam veterans supporting me because I had an
economic program to put them back to work.

We need an investment, incentive to modernize plant and equipment. We've got to
control the health care costs for those people, otherwise we can't keep
manufacturing jobs here, and we need a tough trade policy that is fair, that
insists on open markets in return for open markets. We ought to have a strategy
that will build the economic and industrial place. So I think Mr. Perot was
right in questioning the management practices, but they didn't have much of a
partner in Government here as compared with the policies the Germans and the
Japanese followed, and I believe we can do better. That's one of the things I
want to change. We -- I know that we can grow manufacturing jobs. We did it in
my state and we can do it nationally.

Q: Mr. President, do you have a response?

BUSH: To this?

Q: Yes.

BUSH: Well, I wondered when Governor Clinton was talking to the auto workers
whether he talked about his and Senator Gore's favoring CAFE standards. Those
fuel-efficiency standards of 40 miles per gallon. That would break the auto
industry and throw a lot of people out of work.

As regarding Mr. Perot, I take back something I said about him. I once said in a
frivolous moment when he got out of the race, if you can't stand the heat buy an
air-conditioning company. And I take it back. Because I think he ex-- he said he
made a mistake. And the thing I find is if I make a mistake I admit it. I've
never heard Governor Clinton make a mistake. But the one mistake he's made is
fuel-efficiency standards at 40 to 45 miles per gallon will throw many auto
workers out of work and you can't have it both ways. There's a pattern here of
appealing to the auto workers and then trying to appeal to the spotted owl
crowd. Or the extremes in the environmental movement. You can't do it as
President. You can't have a pattern of one side of the issue one day and another
the next. So my argument is not with Ross Perot. It is more with Governor
Clinton.

Q: Governor, what about that charge? That you want it both ways on this issue.

CLINTON: Let's just talk about the CAFE standards.

Q: All right.

CLINTON: That's the fuel-efficiency standards that are now 27.5 miles per gallon
per automobile free, fleet. I never said, and I defy you to find where I said --
I gave an extensive environmental speech in April. And I said that we ought to
have a goal of raising the fuel-efficiency standards to 40 miles a gallon. I
think that should be a goal. I've never said we should write it into law if
there is evidence that that goal cannot be achieved. The National Science
Foundation did a study which said it would be difficult for us to reach
fuel-efficiency standards in excess of 37 miles per gallon for the year 2000. I
think we should try to raise the fuel efficiency. And let me say this. I think
we ought to have incentives to do it. I think we ought to push to do it. That
doesn't mean we have to write it into the law.

Look, I am a job creator, not a job destroyer. It is the Bush Administration
that has had no new jobs in the private sector in the last four years. In my
state we're leading the country in private-sector job growth but it is good for
America to improve fuel efficiency. We also ought to concert -- convert more
fuel vehicles to compressed natural gas. That's another way to improve the
environment.

Q: Mr. Perot, based on your experience at General Motors, where do you come down
in this? This has been thrown about, back and forth during this campaign, from
the very beginning about jobs and CAFE standards.

PEROT: Well, everybody's nibbling around the edges; let's go to the center of
the bull's-eye, the core problem -- and believe, me, everybody on the factory
floor all over this country knows it. You implement that Nafta, the Mexican
trade agreement, where they pay people $1 an hour, have no health care, no
retirement, no pollution controls, etc., etc., etc., and you're going to hear a
giant sucking sound of jobs being pulled out of this country right at a time
when we need the tax base to pay the debt, and pay down the interest on the debt
and get our house back in order. We've got to proceed very carefully on that.
See, there's a lot I don't understand. I do understand business, I do understand
creating jobs, I do understand how to make things work. And I got a long history
of doing that.

Now if you want to go to the core problem that faces everybody in manufacturing
in this country, it's that agreement that's about to be put into practice.
Here's -- it's very simple, everybody says it'll create jobs. Yes, it'll create
bubble jobs -- you know, watch this, listen very carefully to this --one-time
surge while we build factories and ship machine tools and equipment down there.
Then year after year, for decades, they will have jobs. And I finally thought I
didn't understand it -- called all the experts and they said, "Oh, it'll be
disruptive for 12 to 15 years." We haven't got 12 days, folks. We cannot lose
those jobs. They were eventually saying Mexican jobs will eventually come to
$7.50 an hour, ours will eventually go down to $7.50 an hour. Makes you feel
real good to hear that, right?

Let's think it through here, let's be careful. I'm for free trade
philosophically but I have studied these trade agreements till the world has
gone flat and we don't have good trade agreements across the world.

I hope we'll have a chance to get into that tonight because I can get right to
the center bull's eye and tell you why we're losing whole industries in this
country. Excuse me.

Q: Just for the record though, Mr. Perot, I take it then for your answer you do
not have as position on whether or not enforcing the CAFE standards will cost
jobs in the auto industry.

PEROT: Oh, no, it will cost jobs. But, that's not -- let me say this, I'd rather
-- if you gave me two bad choices, I'd rather have some jobs left here than just
see everything head South, see.

Q: So that means no -- In other words, you agree with President Bush, is that
right?

PEROT: No, I'm -- I'm saying our principal need now is to stabilize the tax
base, which is the job base, and create a growing dynamic base. Now please
folks, if you don't hear anything else I say, remember where the tax -- millions
of people at work are our tax base. One quick thought; if you confiscate the
Forbes 400 wealth, take it off, you cannot balance the budget this year.

PEROT: It kind of gets your head straight about where the taxes, year in and
year out, have got to come from: millions and millions of people at work.

Q: Yes, sir.

BUSH: Well, I'm caught -- caught in the middle on Nafta. Ross says, with great
conviction, he opposes the North American Free Trade Agreement. I am for the
North American Free Trade Agreement. My problem with Governor Clinton once
again, is that one time he's going to make up his mind he will see some merit in
it, but then he sees a lot of things wrong with it. And then the other day he
says he's for it, however, then we've got to pass other legislation. When you're
President of the United States, you cannot have this pattern of saying well I'm
for it but I'm on the other side of it. And it's true on this and it's true on
CAFE.

Look, if Ross were right, and we get a free trade agreement with Mexico, why
wouldn't they have gone down there now. You have a differential in wages right
now. I just have an honest philosophical difference. I think free trade is going
to expand our job opportunity. I think it is exports that have saved us when
we're in a global slowdown, a connected global slowdown, a recession in some
countries. And it's free trade, fair trade that needs to be our -- our -- our
hallmark. And we need more free trade agreements, not fewer.

Q: Governor, a quick answer on trade then I want to go on to something else.

CLINTON: I'd like to respond to that. You know, Mr. Bush was very grateful when
I was among the Democrats who said he ought to have the authority to negotiate
an agreement with Mexico. Neither I nor anybody else, as far as I know, agreed
to give him our proxy to say that whatever he did was fine for the workers of
this country and for the interests of this country. I am the one who's in the
middle on this. Mr. Perot says it's a bad deal. Mr. Bush says it's a hunky-dory
deal. I say on balance it does more good than harm if -- if we can get some
protection for the environment so that the Mexicans have to follow their own
environmental standards, their own labor law standards and if we have a genuine
commitment to re-educate and retrain the American workers who lose their jobs
and reinvest in this economy.

I have a realistic approach to trade. I want more trade. And I know there are
some good things in that agreement. But it can sure be made better. Let me just
point out: Just today in The Los Angeles Times, Clyde Prestowitz, who was one of
President Reagan's leading trade advisers, and a life-long conservative
Republican, endorsed my candidacy because he knows that I'll have a free and
fair trade policy, a hard-headed realistic policy, and not get caught up in
rubber-stamping everything the Bush Administration did. If I wanted to do that,
why would I run for President, Jim? Anybody else can run the middle class down
and run the economy in a ditch. I want to change it. We've got ----

BUSH: I think he made my case. On the one hand it's a good deal but on the other
hand I'd make it better.

Q: All right. We've got ----

BUSH: You can't do that as President. You can't do it on the war, where he says,
well, I was with the minor -- minority but I guess I would have voted with the
majority. This is my point tonight. We're talking about two weeks from now
you've got to decide who's going to be President. And there is this pattern that
has plagued him in the primaries and now about trying to have it both ways on
all these issues. You can't do that. And if you make a mistake, say you made a
mistake and go on about your business, trying to serve the American people.

Right now we heard it. Ross is against it. I am for it. He says on the one hand,
I'm for it -- on the other I may be against it.

CLINTON: That's what's wrong with Mr. Bush. His whole deal is you've got to be
for it or against it. You can't make it better. I believe we can be better. I
think the American people are sick and tired of either-or solutions, people
being pushed in the corner, polarized to extremes. I think they want somebody
with common sense who can do what's best for the American people. And I'd be
happy to discuss these other issues. But I can't believe he is accusing me of
getting on both sides. He said trickle-down economics is voodoo economics. Now
he's its biggest practitioner.

He promised, you know ----

BUSH: I've always said trickle-down Government is best.

CLINTON: I could run this string out a long time, but remember this, Jim; those
209 Americans last Thursday night in Richmond told us they wanted us to stop
talking about each other and start talking about Americans and their problems
and their promise, and I think we ought to get back to that. I'll be glad to
answer any question you have, but this election ought to be about the American
people.

Q: Mr. Perot?

PEROT: Is there an equal-time rule here tonight?

BUSH: Yes.

PEROT: Or do you just keep lunging in at will? I thought we were going to have
equal time but maybe I just have to interrupt the other two, is that the way it
works?

Q: Mr. Perot, you're doing fine. Go ahead. Whatever you want to say, say it.

PEROT: Now that we've talked all around the problem about free trade, let's go,
again, to the center of the bull's-eye.

Q: I thought you wanted to respond to what we're talking about.

PEROT: I do. I do. I just want to make sure -- foreign lobbyists, this whole
thing, our country has sold out to foreign lobbyists. We don't have free trade.
Both parties have foreign lobbyists on leaves and key roles in the campaigns.
And if there's anything more unwise than that I don't know what it is.

Every debate I bring this up, nobody ever addresses it. I would like for them to
look you in the eye and tell you why they have people representing foreign
countries working on their campaigns. And, you know, you've seen the list. I've
seen the list. We won't go into the names, but no wonder they -- if I had those
people around me all day every day telling me what's fair and free, I might
believe it. But if I look at the facts as a businessman, it's so tilted, the
first thing you ought to do is just say guys, if you like these deals so well,
we'll give you the deal you gave us.

Now, Japanese couldn't unload the cars in this country if we -- if they had the
same restrictions we had, and on, and on, and on and on. I suggest to you that
the core problem; one country spent $400 million lobbying in 1988, our country.
And it goes on and on, and you look at a Who's Who in these campaigns, around
the two candidates, they're foreign lobbyists taking leaves. What do you think
they're going to do when the campaign's over? Go back to work at $30,000 a month
representing some other country. I don't believe that's in the American people's
interest.

I don't have a one of them, and I haven't taken a penny of foreign money, and I
never will.

Role of Lobbyists

Q: Mr. President, how do you respond to that? Mr. Perot's made that charge
several times. The fact that you have people working in your campaign who are
paid foreign lobbyists.

BUSH: Most of the people that are lobbying are lobbying the Congress. And I
don't think there's anything wrong with an honest person who happens to
represent an interest of another country from making his case. That's the
American way. And what you're assuming is that that makes the recipient of the
lobbying corrupt, or the lobbyist himself corrupt. I don't agree with that. But
if I found somebody that was -- had a conflict of interest that would try to
illegally do something as a foreign registered lobby, the laws cover this. I
don't know why -- I've never understood quite why Mr. Perot was so upset about
it because one of the guys he used to have working for him, I believe, had --
had foreign accounts. Could be wrong, but I think so.

PEROT: And as soon as I found it out, he went out the door. Truth, yes!

BUSH: I don't -- I think you got to look at the integrity and the honor of the
people who are being lobbied, and those that are lobbyists. The laws protect the
American taxpayer in this regard if the laws are violated so much, but to
suggest if somebody represents a foreign country on anything that makes him
corrupt, or against the taxpayer, I don't agree with that.

PEROT: One quick relevant specific: We're getting ready to dismantle an airlines
industry in our country, and none of you know it. And I doubt, in all candor, if
the President knows it. But this deal that we're doing with BAC and USAir and
KLM and Northwest -- now guess who's on the President's campaign big-time? A guy
from Northwest. This deal is terribly destructive to the U.S. airline industry;
one of the largest industries in the world is the travel and tourist business.

We won't be making airplanes in this country 10 years from now if we let deals
like this go through. I can -- if the press has any interest tonight, I'll
detail it to you. I won't take 10 minutes tonight. All these things take a few
minutes, but that's happening as we sit here today. We hammerlock the American
companies, American Airlines, Delta, the last few great we have, because we're
trying to do this deal with these two European companies. And never forget,
they've got Airbus over there and it's a government-owned, privately-owned
consortium across Europe. They're dying to get the commercial airline business.
Japan is trying to get the commercial airline business. I don't think there are
any villains inside Government on this issue, but there sure are a lot of people
who don't understand business. And maybe you need somebody up there who
understands when you're getting your pocket picked.

Q: All right. We have to -- Governor I'm sorry but that concludes my time with
----

CLINTON: Boy, I had a great response to that.

Q: All right, go ahead quick -- quickly.

CLINTON: Just very briefly.

Q: Yeah.

CLINTON: I think Ross is right and that we do need some more restrictions on
lobbyists. We ought to make them disclose the people they've given money to when
they're testifying before congressional committees. We ought to close the
lawyers loophole. They ought to have to disclose when they're really lobbying.
And we ought to limit the -- we ought to have a much longer period of time,
about five years, between the time when people can leave the Executive Branch
offices and then go out and start lobbying for foreign interest. I agree with
that. We've wrecked the airline industry already because -- well there's all
these leveraged buyouts and all these terrible things that have happened to the
airline industry. We're going to have a hard time rebuilding it, but the real
thing we've got to have is a competitive economic strategy. Look what's
happening to McDonnell Douglas, even Boeing is losing market share, because we
let the Europeans spend 25 to 40 billion dollars on Airbus without an
appropriate competitive response. What I want America to do is to trade more but
to compete and win by investing in competitive ways and we're in real trouble on
that.

Q: I'm going to be in real trouble if I don't bring out -- it's now time ----

BUSH: I promise it's less than 10 seconds.

Q: O.K.

BUSH: I heard Governor Clinton congratulate us on one thing -- first time he
said something pleasant about this Administration. Productivity in this country
is up. It is way up. Productivity is up, and that's a good thing. There are many
other good ones, but I was glad he acknowledged that. Thank you.

Q: Now we're going to move to the second half ----

PEROT: Now give me one second. I volunteered now and all -- I mean, now, look,
I'm just kind of a, you know, cur dog here. I was put on the ballot by the
people, not the special interests. So have to stand up for myself. Now, Jim, let
me net it out. On the second debate, I offered, since both sides want the
enterprise zones we can't get together -- I said, I 'll take a few days off, go
to Washington and hold hands with you and we'll get it done. I'll take a few
days off, hold hands with you and get this airline things straightened out,
because that's important to this country.

That's kind of pathetic I have to do it and nobody's called me yet to come up, I
might mention. But if they do ----

Q: I want to ----

PEROT: If they do it's easy to fix. If you all want the enterprise zone, why
don't we pass the dang thing and do it, right?

Q: All right, now we're going to bring in the three other journalists to ask
questions. They are Susan Rook of CNN, Gene Gibbons of Reuters and Helen Thomas
of United Press International.

You thought you'd never get in here, did you?

Q: Good evening, gentlemen. Good evening.

Q: O.K., we're going to continue on the subject of leadership and the first
question goes to Governor Clinton for a two-minute answer. It will be asked by
Helen Thomas. Helen?

The Draft and Vietnam

Q: Governor Clinton, your credibility has come into question because of your
different responses on the Vietnam draft. If you had it to do over again, would
you put on the nation's uniform and if elected, could you in good conscience
send someone to war?

CLINTON: If I had it to do over again, I might answer the questions a little
better. You know I've been in public life a long time and no one had ever
questioned my role and so I was asked a lot of questions about things that
happened a long time ago. I don't think I answered them as well as I could have.

Going back 23 years, I don't know Helen. I was opposed to the war. I couldn't
help that. I felt very strongly about it and I didn't want to go at the time.
It's easy to say in retrospect I would have done something differently.
President Lincoln opposed the war and there were people who said maybe he
shouldn't be President. But I think he made us a pretty good President in
wartime. We got a lot of other Presidents who didn't wear their country's
uniform and had to order our young soldiers to the battle, including President
Wilson and President Roosevelt. So the answer is I could do that. I wouldn't
relish doing it, but I wouldn't shrink from it. I think that the President has
to be prepared to use the power of the nation when our vital interests are
threatened. When our treaty commitments are at stake. When we know that
something has to be done that is in the national interest and that is a part of
being President. Could I do it? Yes I could.

Q: All right, a reminder now -- we're back on the St. Louis rules, which means
that the Governor had his answer and then each of you will have one minute to,
to respond. Mr. President.

BUSH: Well, I've expressed my heartfelt feel -- difference with Governor Clinton
on organizing demonstrations while in a foreign land against your country when
young ghetto kids have been drafted and are dying. My argument with him on the
question was about the draft -- is that there is this same pattern. It -- in New
Hampshire, Senator Kerrey said you ought to level, you ought to tell the truth
about it. On April 17 he said he'd bring out all the records on the draft. They
have not been forthcoming. He got a deferment or he didn't. He got a notice or
he didn't. And I, I think it's this pattern that troubles me more than the
draft. A lot of decent, honorable people felt as he did on the draft. But it is
this pattern. And again, you might be able to make amendments all the time,
Governor, but you've got to, as President, you can't be on all these different
sides. And you can't have this pattern of saying, well, I'm, I did this or I
didn't. Then the facts come out. And you change it. That's my big difference
with him on the draft. It wasn't failing to serve.

Q: Your minute is up, Sir.

BUSH: Yes, sir.

Q: Mr. Perot, one minute.

PEROT: I've spent my whole adult life very close to the military. Feel very
strongly about the people who go into battle for our country. Appreciate their
idealism, their sacrifices. Appreciate the sacrifices their families make.
That's been displayed again and again in a very tangible way. I look on this as
history. I don't look on it personally as relevant. And I consider it really a
waste of time tonight when you consider the issues that face our country right
now.

Q: All right. The next question goes to President Bush. And Gene Gibbons will
ask it. Gene.

Alternatives to More Taxes

Q: Mr. President, you keep saying that you made a mistake in agreeing to a tax
increase to get the 1990 budget deal with Congress. But if you hadn't gotten
that deal, you would have either had to get repeal of the Gramm-Rudman Deficit
Control Act or cut defense spending drastically at a time when the country was
building up for the gulf war, and decimate domestic discretionary spending
including such things as air traffic control. If you had it to do all over
again, sir, which of those alternatives would you choose?

BUSH: I wouldn't have taken any of the alternatives. I believe that -- I believe
I made a mistake. I did it for the very reasons you say. There was one good
thing that came out of that budget agreement that that is we put a cap on
discretionary spending -- one-third of the President's budget is at the
President's discretion, or really the Congress since they appropriate every dime
and tell a President how to spend every dime. We put a cap on the growth of all
that spending and that's good, and that's helped. But I was wrong because I
thought the tax compromise -- going along with one Democratic tax increase --
would help the economy. I see no evidence that it has done it.

So what would I have done, what should I have done? I should have held out for a
better deal that would have protected the taxpayer and not ended up doing what
we had to do -- or what I thought at the time would help. So I made a mistake. I
-- you know, the difference, I think, is that I knew at the time I was going to
take a lot of political flak, I knew we'd have somebody out there yelling, "Read
my lips." And I did it because I thought it was right, and I made a mistake.

That's quite different than taking a position where you know it's best for you.
That wasn't best for me, and I knew it in the very beginning. I thought it would
be better for the country than it was. So there we are.

Q: Mr. Perot, one minute. Mr. Perot?

PEROT: 101 in leadership is to -- is be accountable for what you do. Let's go
back to a tax and budget summit briefly. Nobody ever told the American people
that we increase spending $1.83 for every dollar tax is raised. That's
absolutely unconscionable. Both parties carry a huge blame for that on their
shoulders.

This was not a way to pay down the deficit, this was a trick on the American
people. That's not leadership.

Let's go back in terms of accepting responsibility for your actions. If you
create Saddam Hussein over a 10-year period, using billions of dollars of U.S.
taxpayer money, step up to the plate and say, "It was a mistake." If you create
Noriega, using taxpayer money, step up to the plate and say, "It was a mistake."
If you can't get your act together to pick him up one day when the Panamanian
major has kidnapped him, and the Special Forces team is 400 yards away and it's
a stroll across the park to get him, and if you can't get your act together, at
least pick up the Panamanian major who they then killed, step up to the plate
and admit it was a mistake. That's leadership, folks.

Now leaders will always make mistakes. We have created -- and I'm not aiming at
any one person here, I'm aiming at our Government -- nobody takes responsibility
for anything. We got to change that.

Q: I'm taking responsibility for saying your time's up.

PEROT: I'm watching the light.

Q: All right. Governor Clinton, one minute, sir.

CLINTON: The mistake that was made was making the "read my lips" promise in the
first place, just to get elected, knowing what the size of the deficit was --
knowing what the size of the deficit was, knowing there was no plan to control
health care costs and knowing that we did not have a strategy to get real
economic growth back into this economy. The choices were not good then. I think
at the time the mistake that was made was signing off on the deal late on
Saturday night, in the middle of the night. That's just what the President did
when he vetoed the Family Leave Act. I think what he should have done is gone
before the American people on the front and said, "Listen, I made a commitment
and it was wrong. I made a mistake because I couldn't have foreseen these
circumstances, and this is the best deal we can work out at the time."

He said it was in the public interest at the time, and most everybody who was
involved in it, I guess, thought it was. The real mistake was the "read my lips"
promise in the first place. You just can't promise something like that just to
be elected if you know there's a good chance that circumstances may overtake
you.

Q: Mr. Perot, the question is for you. You have a two-minute answer, and it will
be asked by Susan Rook.

Building Consensus

Q: Mr. Perot, you've talked about going to Washington to do what the people who
run this country want you to do, but it is the President's duty to lead, and
often lead alone. How can you lead if you are forever seeking consensus before
you act?

PEROT: You're talking about two different subjects. In order to lead you first
have to use the White House as a bully pulpit, and lead. Then you have to
develop consensus or you can't get anything done, and that's where we are now.
We can't get anything done. How do you get anything done when you've got all of
these Political Action Committees, all of these thousands of registered
lobbyists -- 40,000 registered lobbyists, 23,000 special interest groups, and
the list goes on and on and on. And the average citizen out here, just working
hard every day. You've got to go to the people. I just love the fact that
everybody, particularly in the media, goes bonkers over the town hall. I guess
it's because you will lose your right to tell them what to think.

The point is, they'll get to decide what to think! What you've been -- I love
the fact that people will listen to a guy with a bad accent and a poor
presentation manner talking about flip charts for 30 minutes because they want
the details. See, all the folks up there at the top said people -- the attention
span of the American people is no more than five minutes, they won't watch it.
They're thirsty for it. You ought to have a new program in this country -- if
you get grass-roots America excited about it and if they tap Congress on the
shoulder and say, "Do it, Charlie," it'll happen and that's a whole lot
different from these fellows running up and down the halls whispering in their
ears now, and promising campaign funds the next election if they do it.

Now I think that's going back to where we started. That's having a government
from the people. I think that's the essence of leadership, Rather than cutting
deals in dark rooms in Washington.

Q: Governor Clinton.

CLINTON: Well, I believe in the town hall meetings. They started with my
campaign in New Hampshire. And I think Ross Perot has done a good job in having
them, and I, as you know, pushed for the debate to include the 209 American
citizens who were part of it in Richmond a few days ago. I've done a lot of them
and I'll continue to do them as President.

But I'd also like to point out that I haven't been part of what we're
criticizing in Washington tonight. Of the three of us, I have balanced a
government budget 12 times. I have offered and passed campaign finance reform.
Offered -- pushed for and passed in public referendum obvious restrictions. Done
the kinds of things you have to do to get legislators together, not only to
establish consensus but to challenge in the change. And in 12 years as Governor
I guess I've taken on every interest group there was in my state at one time or
another, to fight the change. It can be done. That's why I tried to be so
specific in this campaign to have a mandate if elected so the Congress will know
what the American people have voted for.

Q: President Bush, one minute.

BUSH: I would like the record to show to the panelists that Ross Perot took the
first shot at the press. My favorite bumper sticker, though, is: "Annoy the
media. Re-elect President Bush." And I just had to work that in. Sorry, Helen.
I'm going to pay for this later on.

Look, you have to build a consensus but in some things -- Ross mentioned Saddam
Hussein. Yes, we tried. And yes, we failed to bring him into the family of
nations. He had the fourth largest army. But then when he moved against Kuwait I
said, "This will not stand." And it's hard to build a concensus. We went to the
U.N., we made historic resolutions up there. The whole world was united. Our
Congress was dragging its feet. Governor Clinton said, "Well, I might have been
with the minority. Let's see how sanctions work. But I guess I would have voted
with the majority." A President can't do that. Sometimes he has to act, and in
this case I'm glad we did because if we had let the sanctions work, and had
tried to build a consensus on that, Saddam Hussein today would be in Saudi
Arabia controlling the world's oil supply and he would be there, maybe with a
nuclear weapon.

We busted the fourth-largest army and we did it through leadership.

Women and Minorities

Q: All right, we're going to go on to another subject now and the subject is
priorities and the first question goes to you President Bush and Susan will ask
it.

Q: President Bush, gentlemen, I acknowledge that all of you have women and
ethnic minorities working for you and working with you, but when we look at the
circle of the key people closest to you -- your inner circle of advisers -- we
see white men only. Why and when will that change?

BUSH: You don't see Margaret Tutwiler sitting in there with me today?

Q: The key people, President Bush.

BUSH: Huh?

Q: The key people. The people ----

BUSH: I happen to think she's a key person.

Q: ---- beyond the glass ceiling.

BUSH: I think our Cabinet members are key people. I think the woman that works
with me, Rose Zamaria, is about as tough as a boot out there and can make some
discipline and protects the taxpayer. Look at our Cabinet -- you talk about
somebody strong -- look at Carla Hills. Look at Lynn Martin whose fighting
against this glass ceiling and doing a first class job on it. Look at our
Surgeon General, Dr. Novella. You can look all around and you'll see first
class, strong women. Jim Baker's a man. Yeah, I agree -- I plead guilty to that.
But look around whose -- look whose around with him there. I mean this is a
little defensive on your part, Susan, to be honest with you. We've got a very
good record appointing women to high positions and positions of trust and I'm
not defensive at all about it. What we got to do is keep working -- as the Labor
Department is doing a first class job on -- to break down discrimination, to
break down the glass ceiling and I am not apologetic at all about our record
with women. We've got, I think -- you know you think about women in government,
I think about women in business. Why not try to help them with my small business
program to build some incentives into the system?

I think we're making progress here. You've got a lot of women running for
office. As I said the other night, I hope a lot of them lose, because they're
liberal Democrats and we don't need more of them in Senate, or more of them in
the House. But nevertheless, they're out there and we've got some very good
Republican women running. So we're making dramatic progress.

Q: Mr. Perot, one minute.

PEROT: Well, I've come from the computer business and everybody knows women are
more talented than the men. So we have a long history of having a lot of
talented women. One of our first officers was a woman, the chief financial
officer. She was the director and it was so far back it was considered so odd
and even though we were a tiny little company at the time, it made all the
national magazines. But in terms of being influenced by women and being a
minority, there they are right out there, my wife and my four beautiful
daughters and I just have one son, so he and I are surrounded by women giving --
telling us what to do, all the time.

And for the rest of my minute, I want to make a very brief comment here, in
terms of Saddam Hussein. We told him that we wouldn't get involved with his
border dispute and we've never revealed those papers that were given to
Ambassador Glaspie beyond July the 25th. I suggest, in the sense of taking
responsibility for your actions, we lay those papers on the table. They're not
secrets to the nuclear bomb.

Secondly, we got upset when he took the whole thing. But to the ordinary
American out there who doesn't know where the oil fields are in Kuwait, they're
near the border. We told him he could take the northern part of Kuwait and when
he took the whole thing, we went nuts. And if we didn't tell him that, why won't
we even let the Senate Foreign Relations Committee and the Senate Intelligence
Committee see the written instructions for Ambassador Glaspie?

BUSH: I have to reply on that -- that -- that gets to the national honor. We did
not say to Saddam Hussein, Ross, you can take the northern part of Kuwait.

ROSS: Well, where are the papers?

BUSH: That is absolutely absurd.

ROSS: Where are the papers?

BUSH: Glaspie has testified and Glaspie's papers have been presented to the
United States Senate. Now please.

PEROT: If you have time, if you have time, go to Nexis and Lexis, pull all the
old news articles, look at what Ambassador Glaspie said all through the fall and
what have you, and then look at what she and Kelly and others in State said at
the end when they were trying to clean it up. And talk to any head of any of
those key committees in the Senate -- they will not let them see the written
instructions given to Ambassador Glaspie. And I suggest that in a free society
owned by the people, the American people ought to know what we told Ambassador
Glaspie to tell Saddam Hussein, because we spent a lot of money and risked lives
and lost lives in that effort and did not accomplish most of our objectives. We
got Kuwait back to the Emir, but he's still got his nuclear, his chemical, his
bacteriological, and he's still over there, right? I'd like to see those written
instructions. Sir.

Q: Mr. President, when you -- just to make sure that everybody knows what's
going on here. When you responded directly to Mr. Perot ----

BUSH: Yes.

Q: ---- you violated the rule -- your rule. Now I'm more than willing ----

BUSH: For which I apologize. When I make a mistake I ----

Q: No, it's O.K. No, no, no. I just want to make sure that everybody -- I just
want to make sure everybody understands it. If you all want to change the rules,
we can do it.

BUSH: No, I don't. I apologize for it. But that one got right to the national
honor, and I'm sorry ----

Q: O.K. But, but, Governor Clinton, you have a minute.

CLINTON: Susan, I don't agree that there are no women and minorities in
important positions in my campaign. There are many. But I think even more
relevant is my record at home. For most of my time as Governor a woman was my
chief of staff. An African-American was my chief cabinet officer; an
African-American was my chief economic development officer.

It was interesting today -- there was a story either today or yesterday in The
Washington Post about my economic programs and my chief budget officer and my
chief economic officer were both African-Americans even though The Post didn't
mention that, which I think is a sign of progress.

The National Women's Political Caucus gave me an award, one of their good guy
awards for my involvement of women in high levels of government. And I've
appointed more minorities to positions of high level in government than all the
governors in the history of my state combined before me.

So that's what I'll do as President. I don't think we've got a person to waste,
and I think I owe the American people a White House staff, a Cabinet and
appointments that look like America but that meet high standards of excellence,
and that's what I'll do.

Q: All right, next question goes to you, Mr. Perot. It's a two minute -- it's a
two-minute question and Helen will ask it. Helen.

Q: Mr. Perot, what proof do you have that Saddam Hussein was told that he could
have the oil? Do you have any actual proof? Or are you asking for the papers?

PEROT: I --

Penchant for Investigations

Q: And also, I really came in with another question is What is this penchant you
have to investigate everyone? Are those accusations correct? Investigating your
staff, investigating the leaders of the grass-roots movement, investigating
associates of your family?

PEROT: No. They're not correct. And if you look at my life for the first --
until I got involved in this effort, I was one person. And then after the
Republican dirty tricks group got through with me, I'm another person. Which I
consider an absolutely sick operation. And all of you in the press know exactly
what I'm talking about. They investigated every single one of my children. They
investigated my wife. They interviewed all of my children's friends from
childhood on. They went to extraordinary, sick lengths.

And I just found it amusing that they would take two or three cases where I was
involved in lawsuits and would engage an investigator. The lawyers would engage
an investigator, which is common. And the only difference between me and any
other businessman that has the range of business I have is I haven't had that
many lawsuits. So that's just another one of those little fruit-loopy things
they make up to try to -- instead of facing issues, to try to redefine a
person's -- that's running against them. This goes on night and day. I will do
everything I can, if I get up there, to make dirty tricks a thing of the past.
One of the two groups has raised it to an art form. It's a sick art form.

Now let's go back to Saddam Hussein. We gave Ambassador Glaspie written
instructions. That's a fact. We've never let the Congress and the foreign
relations -- Senate Intelligence Committee see them. That's a fact. Ambassador
Glaspie did a lot of talking right after July the 25th. And that's a fact that's
in all the newspapers and you pull all of it at once and read it -- and I did --
and it's pretty clear what she and Kelly and the other key guys around that
thing thought they were doing. Then, at the end of the war when they had to go
testify about it, their stories are a total disconnect from what they said in
August, September and October. So I say, this is very simple. Saddam Hussein
released a tape, as you know, claiming it was a transcript of their meeting,
whereas she said we will not become involved in your border dispute. In effect,
you can take the northern part of the country. We later said, no, that's not
true. I said, well, this is simple. What were her written instructions? We guard
those like the secrets to the atomic bomb, literally. Now I say, whose country
is this? This is ours. Who will get hurt if we lay those papers on the table?
The worst thing is it's again, it's a mistake. Nobody did any of this with evil
intent. I just object to the fact that we cover up and hide things, whether it's
Iran-Contra, Iraq-Gate or you name it, it's a serious thing.

Q: Governor Clinton, you have one minute.

CLINTON: Let's take Mr. Bush, for the moment, at his word. He's right, we don't
have any evidence, at least, that our Government did tell Saddam Hussein he
could have that part of Kuwait. And let's give him the credit he deserves for
organizing Operation Desert Storm and Desert Shield. It was a remarkable event.

But let's look at where I think the real mistake was made. In 1988, when the war
between Iraq and Iran ended, we knew Saddam Hussein was a tyrant. We had dealt
with him because he was against Iran, the enemy of my enemy may be my friend.
All right, the war is over. We know he's dropping mustard gas on his own people.
We know he's threatened to incinerate half of Israel. Several Government
departments, several, had information that he was converting our aid to military
purposes and trying to develop weapons of mass destruction. But in late '89 the
President signed a secret policy saying we were going to continue to try to
improve relations with him, and we sent him some sort of communication on the
eve of his invasion of Kuwait that we still wanted better relations. So I think
what was wrong, I give credit where credit is due, but the responsibility was in
coddling Saddam Hussein when there was no reason to do it and when people in
high levels in our Government knew he was trying to do things that were
outrageous.

Q: Mr. President, you have a moment. A minute, I'm sorry.

BUSH: Well, it's awful easy when you're dealing with 99 hindsight. We did try to
bring Saddam Hussein into the family of nations. He did have the fourth-largest
army. All our Arab allies out there thought we ought to do just exactly that.
And when he crossed the line, I stood up and looked into the camera and I said
this aggression will not stand. And we formed a historic coalition and we
brought him down. And we destroyed the fourth-largest army. And the battlefield
was searched and there wasn't one single iota of evidence that any U.S. weapons
were on that battlefield, and the nuclear capability has been searched by the
United Nations, and there hasn't been one single scintilla of evidence that
there's any U.S. technology involved in it.

And what you're seeing, on all this Iraqgate is a bunch of people who were wrong
on the war trying to cover their necks here and -- and try to do a little
revisionism. And I cannot let that stand because it isn't true. Yes we had grain
credits for Iraq and there isn't any evidence that those grain credits were
diverted into weaponry. None. None whatsoever. And so I -- I just have to say,
it's fine.

Q: We have to go on.

BUSH: You can't say there, Governor Clinton, and say well I think I'd have been
-- I've supported the minority, let sanctions work or wish it'd go away, but I
would have voted with the majority. Come on, that's not leadership.

Leadership and Crisis

Q: All right. The next question goes to Governor Clinton and Gene Gibbons will
ask it. Gene.

Q: Governor, an important aspect of leadership is of course anticipating
problems. During the 1988 campaign there was little or no mention of the savings
and loan crisis that has cost the American people billions and billions of
dollars. Now there are rumblings that a commercial bank crisis is on the
horizon. Is there such a problem, sir? If so, how bad is it and what will it
cost to clean it up?

CLINTON: Gene, there is a problem in the sense that there are some problem banks
and on Dec. 19 new regulations will go into effect which will, in effect, give
the Government the responsibility to close some banks that are not technically
insolvent, but that are plainly in trouble. On the other hand, I don't think
that we have any reason to believe that the dimensions of this crisis are
anywhere near as great as the savings and loan crisis. The mistake that both
parties made in Washington with the S.& L. business was deregulating them
without proper capital requirements, proper oversight and regulation, proper
training of the executives. Many people predicted what happened and it was a
disaster.

The banking system in this country is fundamentally sound with some weak banks.
I think that our goal ought to be first of all not to politicize it, not to
frighten people. Secondly, to say that we have to enforce the law in two ways.
We don't want to overreact as -- as the Federal regulators have in my judgment,
on good banks so that they've created credit crunches that has -- that have made
our recession worse in the last couple of years. But we do want to act prudently
with the banks that are in trouble. We also want to say that insofar as is
humanly possible, the banking industry itself should pay for the cost of any
bank failures, the taxpayers should not. And that will be my policy and I
believe we have a good balanced approach. We can get the good banks loaning
money again, end the credit crunch, have proper regulation on the ones that are
in trouble. And not overreact. It is a serious problem, but I don't see it as
the kind of terrible, terrible problem that the S.& L. problem was.

Q: President Bush, one minute

BUSH: Well, I don't -- I don't believe it would be appropriate for a President
to suggest that the banking system is not sound. It is sound. There are some
problem banks out there. But what we need is financial reform. We need some real
financial reform -- banking reform legislation. And I have proposed that and
when I am reelected I believe the first -- one of the first things ought to be
to press a new Congress, not beholden to the old ways, to pass financial reform
legislation that modernizes the banking system, doesn't put a lot of inhibitions
on it and protects the depositors through keeping the F.D.I.C. sound, but I -- I
think that -- that -- I just was watching some of the proceedings of the
American Bankers Association, and I think the general feeling is most of the
banks are sound. Certainly there's no comparison here between what happened to
the S.& L.'s and where the banks stand right now. In my view.

Q: Mr. Perot, one minute.

PEROT: Well, nobody's gotten into the real issue yet on the savings and loan.
Again, nobody's got a business background, I guess. The whole problem came up in
1984. The President of the United States was told officially it was a $20
billion problem. These crooks -- now Willie Sutton would have gone to own a
savings and loan rather than rob banks because you -- he robbed bank because
that's where the money is -- only the saving and loan is where the money was.
Yeah. In 1984, they were told. I believe the Vice President was in charge of
deregulation. Nobody touched that tar baby till the day after elections in 1988
because they were flooding both parties with crooked PAC money and it was in
many cases, stolen PAC money.

Now you and I never got a ride on a lot of these yachts and fancy things it
bought, but you and I are paying for it. And they buried it till right after the
election. Now if you believe The Washington Post and you believe this extensive
study that's been done -- and I'm reading -- right after election day this year
they're going to hit us with 100 banks -- it'll be a $100 billion problem. Now
if that's true, just tell me now. Yeah, I'm grown up, I can deal with it, I'll
pay my share. But just tell me know. Don't bury it until after the election
twice. I say that to both political parties. The people deserve that since we
have to pick up the tab. You got the PAC money, we'll pay the tab. Just tell us.

 Q: All right, Mr. Perot, the next question -- we're going into a new round
here, on category just called differences and the question goes to you Mr. Perot
and Gene will ask it. Gene?

Reforming Government

Q: Mr. Perot, aside from the deficit, what Government policy or policies do you
really want to do something about? What really sticks in your craw about
conditions in this country? Beside the deficit, that you would want to fix as
President?

PEROT: Well, if you watched my television show the other night, you saw it and
if you watch it Thursday, Friday, Saturday of this week you'll get more. So, a
shameless plug there, Mr. President. But, in a nutshell, we've got to reform our
Government or we won't get anything done. We have a Government that doesn't
work. All these specific examples I'm giving tonight, if you had a business like
that, they'd be leading you away, boarding up the doors.

We have a Government that doesn't work. It's supposed to come from the people;
it comes at the people. The people need to take their Government back. You've
got to reform Congress. They've got be servants of the people again. You've got
to reform the White House. We've got to turn this thing around and it's a long
list of specific items. And I've covered it again and again in print and on
television, but very specifically, the key thing is to turn the Government back
to the people and take it away from special interests and have people go to
Washington to serve.

Who can give themselves a 23 percent pay raise anywhere in the world except
Congress? Who would have 1,200 airplanes worth $2 billion a year just to fly
around in? I don't have a free reserved parking place at National Airport, why
should my servants? I don't have an indoor gymnasium and an indoor tennis court;
an indoor every other thing they can think of. I don't have as place where I can
go make free TV to send to my constituents to try to blame Washington -- to
elect me the next time. And I'm paying for all that for those guys. I'm going to
be running an ad pretty soon that shows -- they promised us they were going to
hold the line on spending, a tax and budget summit; and I'm going to show how
much they have increased this little stuff they do for themselves and it is
silly putty folks, and the American people have had enough of it.

Step 1, if I get up there, we're going to clean that up. You say how can I get
Congress to do that? I have millions of people at my shoulder -- shoulder to
shoulder with me, and we will see it done at warp speed. Because it's wrong.
It's just -- we've turned the country upside down.

Q: Governor Clinton, you have one minute. Governor.

CLINTON: I would just point out on the -- the point Mr. Perot made. I agree that
we need to cut spending in Congress. I've called for a 25 percent reduction in
Congressional staffs and expenditures. But the White House staff increased its
expenditures by considerably more than Congress has in the last four years under
the Bush Administration. And Congress has actually spent a billion dollars less
than President Bush asked them to spend. Now when you outspend Congress, you're
really swinging.

That, however, is not my only passion. The real problem in this country is that
most people are working hard and falling farther behind. My passion is to pass a
jobs program and get incomes up with an investment incentive program to grow
jobs in the private sector, to waste less public money and invest more, to
control health care costs and provide for affordable health care for all
Americans. And to make sure we've got the best trained work force in the world.
That is my passion. We've got to get this country growing again and this economy
strong again or we can't bring down the deficit. Economic growth is the key to
the future of this country.

Q: President Bush, one minute.

BUSH: On Government reform?

Q: Sir?

BUSH: Government reform?

Q: To -- yes, exactly, well to respond to what the -- the subject that Mr. Perot
mentioned.

BUSH: Well -- how about this for a Government reform policy? Reduce the White
House staff by a third after or at the same time the Congress does the same
thing for their staff; term limits for members of the United States Congress;
give the Government back to the people. Let's do it that way. The President has
term limits. Let's -- let's limit some of these guys sitting out here tonight.
Term limits and then how about a balanced budget amendment to the Constitution.
Forty-three -- more than that have -- states have it, I believe. Let's try that.

And you want to do something about all this extra spending that concerns Mr.
Perot and me? O.K., how about a line item veto. Forty-three governors have that.
And give it to the President and if the Congress isn't big enough to do it, let
the President have a shot at this excess spending. A line item veto, that means
you can take a line and cut out some of the pork out of a meaningful bill.
Governor Clinton keeps hitting me on vetoing legislation. Well that's the only
protection the taxpayer has against some of these reckless pork programs up
there. And I'd rather be able to just line it right out of there and get on
about passing some good stuff but leave out the garbage.

Q: All right, we have --

BUSH: Line-item veto. This is a good reform program for you.

Q: All right. A -- next question goes to Governor Clinton. You have -- you have
two minutes, Governor, and Susan will ask it.

Who Will Pay More?

Q: Governor Clinton, you said that you will raise taxes on the rich, people with
incomes of $200,000 a year or higher. A lot of people are saying that you will
have to go lower than that. Much lower. Will you make a pledge tonight below
which an income level that you will not go below? I'm looking for numbers, Sir,
not just a concept.

CLINTON: My plan -- you can read my plan. My plan says that we want to raise
marginal incomes on family incomes above $200,000 from 31 to 36 percent; that we
want to ask foreign corporations simply to pay the same percentage of taxes on
their income that American corporations play in America. That we want to use
that money to provide over $100 billion in tax cuts for investment in new plant
and equipment, for small business, for new technologies and for middle-class tax
relief.

Now, I'll tell you this: I will not raise taxes on the middle class to pay for
these programs. If the money does not come in there to pay for these programs,
we will cut other Government spending or we will slow down the phase-in of the
programs. I am not going to raise taxes on the middle class to pay for these
programs. Now, furthermore, I am not going to tell you read my lips. On
anything. Because I cannot foresee what emergencies might develop in this
country. And the President said never never never -- would never would he raise
taxes in New Jersey and within a day Marlin Fitzwater, his spokesman, said Now,
that's not a promise. So I think even he has learned that you can't say read my
lips because you can't know what emergencies might come up.

But I can tell you this. I'm not going to raise taxes on middle-class Americans
to pay for the programs I recommended. Read my plan. And you can -- you know how
you can trust me about that? Because you know, in that first debate, Mr. Bush
made some news. He had just said Jim Baker was going to be Secretary of State
but in the first debate he said, No, now he's going to be responsible for
domestic economic policy. Well, I'll tell you. I'll make some news in the third
debate. The person responsible for domestic economic policy in my administration
will be Bill Clinton. I'm going to make those decisions. And I won't raise taxes
on the middle-class to pay for my programs.

Q: President Bush, you have one minute.

BUSH: That's what worries me. That he's going to be responsible. He's going to
do -- he would do -- and he would do for the United States what he's done to
Arkansas. He would do for the United States what he's done to Arkansas. We do
not want to be the lowest of the low. We are not a nation in decline. We are a
rising nation. Now, my problem is I heard what he said. He said I want to raise
-- take it from the rich. Raise $150 billion from the rich to get it -- to get
$150 billion in new taxes, you got to go down to the buy that's making $36,600.
And if you want to pay for the rest of his plan, all the other spending
programs, you're going to sock it to the working man. So when you hear tax the
rich Mr. and Mrs. America, watch your wallet. Lock your wallet; he's coming
right after you. Just like Jimmy Carter did and just like you're going to get --
you're going to end up with interest rates at 21 percent and you're going to
have inflation going through the roof. Yes we're having tough times, but we do
not need to go back to the failed policies of the past when you had a Democratic
President and a spendthrift Democratic Congress.

Q: Mr. Perot.

CLINTON: You permitted Mr. Bush to break the rules. He said to defend the honor
of the country. What about the honor of my state? We rank first in the country
in job growth. We got the lowest spending state and local in the country and the
second lowest tax burden, and the difference between Arkansas and the United
States is that we're going in the right direction and this country is going in
the wrong direction, and I have to defend the honor of my state.

Q: We've got a wash, according to my calculation we have a wash and we go to Mr.
Perot for one minute. In other words, it's a violation of the rule, that's what
I meant, Mr. Perot.

PEROT: So I'm the only one that's untarnished at this point.

Q: Right, you're clean, you're clean.

CLINTON: Go ahead, Ross, go ahead.

PEROT: I'm sure I'll do it before it's over. The key thing is, see, we all come
up with images. Images don't fix anything. I think -- you know, I'm starting to
understand it, you stay around this long enough, you think about it -- if you
talk about it in Washington, you think you did it. If you've been on television
about it, you think you did it. What we need is people to stop talking and start
doing. Our real problem here is they have -- both have plans that will not work.
The Wall Street Journal said your numbers don't add up. And you take it out on
charts, you look at all the studies that different groups have done, you go out
four, five, six years, we're still drifting along with a huge deficit.

So let's come back to harsh reality. And what I -- you know, everybody says,
"Gee, Perot, you're tough." I'm saying, well, this is not as tough as World War
II and it's not as tough as the Revolution. And it's fair-shared sacrifice to do
the right thing for our country and for our children. And it will be fun, if we
all work together to do it.

Q: All right, this is the last question and it goes to President Bush for a
two-minute answer, and it will be asked by Helen.

Standing in the Polls

Q: Mr. President, why have you dropped so dramatically in the leadership polls
from the high 80's to the 40's? And you have said that you will do anything you
have to do to get reelected. What can you do in two weeks to win re-election?

BUSH: Well, I think the answer to why the drop, I think, has been the economy in
the doldrums. Why I'll win is I think I have the best plan of the three of us up
here to do something about it. Mine does not grow the government, it does not
invest -- have government invest. It says we need to do better in terms of
stimulating private business.

We got a big philosophical difference here tonight between one who thinks the
government can do all these things through tax and spend, and one who thinks it
ought to go the other way. And so I believe the answer is I'm going to win it
because I'm getting into focus my agenda for America's renewal, and also I think
that Governor Clinton's had pretty much of a free ride on looking at --
specifically at the Arkansas record. He keeps criticizing us, criticizing me,
I'm the incumbent. Fine. But he's an incumbent and we've got to look at all the
facts. They're almost at the bottom on every single category. We can't do that
to the American people.

And then, Helen, I really believe we -- people are going to ask this question
about trust, because I do think there's a pattern by Governor Clinton of saying
one thing to please one group and then trying to please another group. And I
think that pattern is a dangerous thing to suggest would work for the Oval
Office. It doesn't work that way when you're President. Truman is right, the
buck stops there. And you have to make decisions even when it's against your own
interests. And I've done that. It was against my political interests to say go
ahead and go along with the tax increase, but I did what I thought was right at
the time.

So I think people are going to be looking for trust and experience. And then I
mentioned it the other night, I think if there's a crisis people are going to
say, "Well, George Bush has taken us through some tough crises, and we trust him
to do that." And so I'll make the appeal on a wide array of issues. Also I got a
philosophical interest -- I've got to watch the clock here -- I don't think
we're a declining nation. The whole world has had economic problems; we're doing
better than a lot of the countries in the world. And we're going to lead the way
out of this economic recession across the world and economic slowdown here at
home.

Q: Mr. Perot ----

BUSH: So I think I'll win.

Q: Mr. Perot, you have -- sorry, excuse me, sir. Mr. Perot, you have one minute.

PEROT: I'm the last one, right?

Q: No, Governor Clinton has a minute after you. Then we have the closing
statements.

PEROT: I have one minute after you.

Q: Correct.

PEROT: I'm totally focused on the fact that we may have bank failures and nobody
answered it. I'm totally focused on the fact that we are still evading the issue
of the Glaspie papers. I'm totally focused on the fact that we still could have
enterprise zones according to both parties, but we don't. So I'm still focused
on gridlock, I guess.

And I am also focused on the fact that isn't it a paradox that we have the
highest productivity in our work force in the industrialized world and at the
same time have the largest trade deficit and at the same time rank behind nine
other nations in what we pay our most productive people in the world and that
we're losing whole industries overseas.

Now, can't somebody agree with me that the Government is breaking business' legs
with these trade agreements? They're breaking business' legs in a number of
different ways. We have an adversarial relationship that's destroying jobs and
sending them overseas while we have the finest workers in the world.

Keep in mind the factory worker has nothing to do with anything except putting
it together on the factory floor. It's our obligation to make sure that we give
him the finest products in the world to put together and we don't break his legs
in the process.

Q: Governor Clinton, one minute.

CLINTON: I really can't believe Mr. Bush is still trying to make trust an issue
after "Read my lips" and 15 million new jobs and embracing what he called voodoo
economics and embracing an export enhancement program for farmers he threatened
to veto and going all around the country giving out money in programs that he
once opposed.

But the main thing is he still didn't get it from what he said the other night
to that fine woman on our program, that the 209 people in Richmond -- they don't
want us to talking about each other, they want us to talk about the problems of
this country.

I don't think he'll be re-elected, because trickle-down economics is a failure
and he's offering more of it. And what he's saying about my program is just not
true. Look at the Republicans that have endorsed me -- high-tech executives in
Northern California.  Look at the 24 generals and admirals retired have endorsed
me, including the deputy commander of Desert Storm. Look at Sarah Brady, Jim
Brady's wife -- President Reagan's press secretary who endorsed me because he
knuckled under to the N.R.A. and wouldn't fight for the Brady Bill.

We've got a broad-based coalition that goes beyond party, because I am going to
change this country and make it better with the help of the American people.

Closing Statements

Q: All right. Now that -- that was the final, that was the final question and
answer and we now go to the closing statements. Each candidate will have up to
two minutes. The order was determined by a drawing. Governor Clinton you are
first. Governor.

CLINTON: First I'd like to thank the Commission and my opponents for
participating in these debates and making them possible. I think the real
winners of the debates were the American people. I was especially moved in
Richmond a few days ago when 209 of our fellow citizens got to ask us questions.
They went a long way toward reclaiming this election for the American people and
taking their country back. I want to say, since this is the last time I'll be on
a platform with my opponents, that even though I disagree with Mr. Perot on how
fast we can reduce the deficit and how much we can increase taxes on the middle
class, I really respect what he's done in this campaign to bring the issue of
deficit reduction to our attention. I'd like to say to Mr. Bush, even though
I've got profound differences with him, I do honor his service to our country. I
appreciate his efforts and I wish him well. I just believe it's time to change.

I offer a new approach. It's not trickle-down economics. It's been tried for 12
years and it's failed. More people are working harder for less, 100,000 a month
losing their health insurance, unemployment going up, our economy slowing down.
We can do better. And it's not tax and spend economics. It's invest and grow,
put our people first, control health care costs and provide basic health care to
all Americans. Have an education system second to none and revitalize the
private economy.

That is my commitment to you. It is the kind of change that can open up a whole
new world of opportunities to America as we enter the last decade of this
century and move toward the 21st century. I want a country where people who work
hard and play by the rules are rewarded, not punished. I want a country where
people are coming together across the lines of race and region and income. I
know we can do better. It won't take miracles and it won't happen overnight, but
we can do much, much better if we have the courage to change. Thank you very
much.

Q: President Bush, your closing statement, sir.

BUSH: Three weeks from now -- two -- two weeks from tomorrow America goes to the
polls and you're going to have to decide who you want to lead this country to
economic recovery. On jobs, that's the No. 1 priority and I believe my program
for stimulating investment, encouraging small business, brand new approach to
education, strengthening the American family and yes, creating more exports is
the way to go.

I don't believe in trickle-down government. I don't believe in larger taxes and
larger government spending. On foreign affairs, some think it's irrelevant. I
believe it's not. We're living in an interconnected world. The whole world is
having economic difficulties. The U.S. is doing better than a lot, but we've got
to do even better and if a crisis comes up I ask who -- who has the judgment and
the experience and yes, the character, to make the right decision.

And lastly, the other night on character, Governor Clinton said it's not the
character of the President, but the character of the Presidency. I couldn't
disagree more. Horace Greeley said the only thing that endures is character. And
I think it was Justice Black who talked about great nations like great men must
keep their word. And so the question is, who will safeguard this nation? Who
will safeguard our people and our children? I need your support. I ask for your
vote. And may God bless the United States of America.

Q: Mr. Perot -- Mr. Perot, your closing statement. -- Mr. Perot, your closing
statement, sir.

PEROT: To the millions of fine, decent people who did the unthinkable and took
their country back in their own hands and put me on the ballot, let me pledge to
you that tonight is just the beginning. These next two weeks, we will be going
full steam ahead to make sure that you get a voice and that you get your country
back. This Thursday night on ABC from 8:30 to 9, Friday night on NBC from 8 to
8:30 and Saturday night on CBS from 8 to 8:30, we'll be down in the trenches,
under the hood working on fixing the old car to get it back on the road. Now,
question is: Can we win? Absolutely we can win 'cause it's your country.
Question is -- really is: Who do you want in the White House? It's that simple.
Now you got to stop letting these people tell you who to vote for, you got to
stop letting these folks in the press tell you you're throwing your vote away.
You got to start using your own head.

Then the question is: Can we govern? That -- I love that one. The "we" is you
and me. You bet your hat we can govern because we will be in there together and
we will figure out what to do and you won't tolerate gridlock, you won't
tolerate endless meandering and wandering around and you won't tolerate
non-performance. And believe me, anybody that knows me understands I have a very
low tolerance for non-performance also. Together we can get anything done. The
President mentioned that you need the right person in a crisis. Well, folks, we
got one. And that crisis is a financial crisis.

Pretty simply -- who's the best qualified person up here on the stage to create
jobs? Make your decision and vote on Nov. 3. I suggest you might consider
somebody who's created jobs. Second, who's the best person to manage money? I
suggest you pick the person who's successfully managed money. Who's the best
person to get results and not talk. Look at the record and make your decision.
And finally, who would you give your pension fund and your savings account to --
to manage. And last one -- who would you ask to be the trustee of your estate
and take care of your children if something happened to you. Finally, to you
students up there, God bless you. I'm doing this for you. I want you to have the
American dream. All right. And to the American people -- to the American people,
I'm doing this because I love you. That's it. Thank you very much.

LOAD-DATE: October 20, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: President Bush being greeted by supporters last night at a
rally following the Presidential debate in East Lansing, Mich. (Jose R.
Lopez/The New York Times (pg. A20); Gov. Bill Clinton with his wife, Hillary,
and daughter, Chelsea, after the debate (Jose R. Lopez/The New York Times) (pg.
A21); Audrey Cannon, left, and Alletha Jones watching the debate last night at
the Trade Union Leadership Council in Detroit (Peter Yates for The New York
Times) (pg. A22); Ross Perot, the independent Presidential candidates, gave an
optimistic answer to supporters who greeted him yesterday in East Lansing,
Mich., where the third and final Presidential debate was held. The man at left
was unidentified. (Associated Press) (pg. A23)

TYPE: Text

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              122 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 20, 1992, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1125 words



International    A3-14

7 NEW LEADERS FOR CHINA

China's Communist Party promoted some free-market enthusiasts to the committee
that is supposed to rule for the next five years. The shake-up suggests that the
party intends to focus on economic restructuring instead of ideology.  A1

GREENS FOUNDER KELLY DIES

Petra Kelly, a founder of Germany's Green Party, and her companion, Gert
Bastian, a former member of Parliament and former Army general, were found dead
in what police said could be a suicide, a slaying or both.  A1


MANDELA ACKNOWLEDGES ABUSES

The African National Congress admitted that it tortured dissident members during
its years in exile. But Nelson Mandela did not say whether wrongdoers would be
purged as leaders.  A7

BLAMING THE MARKETEERS

Confused by the loss of an empire and frustrated by inflation, many Russians
have fixed their fear on a convenient target: traders from the Caucasus who have
taken over urban farmers markets. One result is smoldering ethnic tension.  A3

BITTER TREK FOR FLEEING BOSNIANS

Since Croatia closed its borders to Muslim refugees, the mountain crossing to
Ovcarevo has become the main route for Muslims and Croats fleeing "ethnic
cleansing" by Serbian nationalists.  A10

Leaders of Bosnia and Yugoslavia agree to fight expulsions.  A10

RAPPROACHMENT WITH HANOI

The State Department said the U.S. had moved closer to opening ties with
Vietnam. An Administration delegation won a pledge of cooperation on files on
missing servicemen during a visit to Hanoi.  A11

NUCLEAR CARGO WORRIES GERMANS

Germany's seizure of radioactive materials smuggled in from Eastern Europe has
widened fear that Communism's collapse may lead to a black market in nuclear
arms.  A8

BRITAIN RELENTS ON MINE CUTS

Facing public protests and a party mutiny, Prime Minister Major reversed ground
and reduced the number of coal mines and miners' jobs scheduled for elimination.
A9

RABIN RETHINKS HIS COALITION

After 100 days in office, Israel's Prime Minister is not yet in command of the
Government he wants and is casting around for new religious and right-wing
partners.  A14

The C.I.A. released 112 documents on the Cuban missile crisis.  A13

Spain's boom has lost its shine, but a banker remains a role model.  A4

National    A16-24, B12

THE LAST DEBATE

President Bush labored in the final debate to revive his campaign by warning
that Gov. Bill Clinton lacked the character to be President. The President gave
his most aggressive performance yet, but did not appear to deliver the
devastating blow that Republicans hoped for.  A1

HOW THEY DID

News analysis: The President changed his ways for the better, but by the end he
had plowed little new substantive ground. His job was made harder when he was
attacked by both his rivals.  A1

The President seemed more sprightly than he had in months.  A19

The debate offered a mixture of opinions and contradictory facts.  A18

THE BUSINESS OF POLITICS

It should be a banner year for purveyors of buttons and other political
paraphernalia, but poll takers and printers say that the recession and the
changing character of campaigning have put their business in the doldrums.  A1

THE BLITZ TO COME

Even as experts wonder if political advertisements are worthwhile, the campaigns
are preparing for the last days of the race. What to expect: more negative
commercials from Bush, "warm and fuzzy" images from Clinton and half-hour
programs from Ross Perot.  A19

CHICAGO PLANS A SWEEP

The Mayor of Chicago announced a plan to rid the city's housing projects of
gangs and guns, a move that followed the slaying of a 7-year-old boy as he
walked to school.  A16

QUESTIONS IN BANK CASE

A Senate committee investigating a sensitive bank-fraud case asked the C.I.A.
whether American intelligence agencies set up clandestine front companies that
may have helped Iraq's arms buildup.  A16

RIGHTS OF THE RETARDED

The Supreme Court will decide whether mentally retarded people are entitled to
the same protection against confinement in an institution that the mentally ill
have.  A16

FRUSTRATION IN MIAMI

Angered by the pace of Dade County's recovery from Hurricane Andrew, Miami area
residents are turning their frustration on county officials and the way their
local government operates.  B12

Jesse Jackson works the periphery of the Democratic campaign.  A24

Metro Digest    B1

MORGAN STANLEY TO REMAIN

Morgan Stanley Group, which had been considering moving its New York City
headquarters and as many as 4,100 employees to Stamford, Conn., will remain in
the city for at least 10 years, company officials said, after the city and state
agreed to almost $40 million in incentives over the next decade.  A1

SHRINKING FAMILIES

The share of married couples living with their own children in New York City
declined from 19.2 percent of all households in 1980 to less than 17 percent in
1990, a census analysis showed. The trend, which is not new or unique to New
York, shows that the family has been redefined.  A1

Business Digest    D1

Science    C1-10

Nature has a serious purpose for animals' play.  C1

Who coins the catchwords of science?  C1

Archeologists marvel at a newfound cave of prehistoric art.  C1

A radical drug therapy may avert heart transplants for some.  C1

New bird importation rules aim to protect some popular pets.  C4

Arts/Entertainment    C13-18

Behind "Honeymoon Killers." C13

Death of actor shakes series.  C13

Music: The Chills.  C14

Dance: From Ballet Chicago.  C13

Graham revivals.  C18

Word and Image: Earliest Americans, on "Nova." C18

"Folly," by Susan Minot.  C17

Fashion    B13

Amid Trends, Room for Individuality

Sports    B14-20

Baseball: Series features unlikely heroes.  B15

Basketball: Johnson plans to play more.  B19

Columns: Berkow on Giants.  B15

On Baseball B17

On Football B16

Hockey: So many Rangers, so little playing time.  B20

Horse Racing: Belmont season closes.  B19

Olympics: Support grows for golf in Games.  B18

Sports People B16

Obituaries    D22

Howard W. Lipman, art collector

Editorials/Op-Ed    A26-27

Editorials

Before a full house.
Justice moves halfway.
An Asian voice for democracy.
Dorothy J. Samuels: Albany.

Letters

A. M. Rosenthal: No hiding place.

Russell Baker: Voting is so old hat.

Tara Sonenshine and Jay LaMonica: Closing the loop on Iran-contra.

LOAD-DATE: October 20, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              123 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 20, 1992, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

An Asian Voice for Democracy

SECTION: Section A; Page 26; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 368 words


Few people doubt that foreign broadcasts contributed powerfully to the
democratic ferment in Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union. Why shouldn't
American radio programs do the same in the still-Communist countries of Asia and
for the unfree Burmese?

A special Congressional commission makes a persuasive case for creating an Asia
Democracy Radio or Asia Information Radio to provide the kind of coverage now
offered in the West by Radio Free Europe and Radio Liberty.

Such programming could fill a conspicuous gap at modest cost. "Radio is an
instrument of peace, not a weapon of war," declares the Commission on
Broadcasting to the People's Republic of China. "It is inexpensive and it maims
no one."

And radio is king in China: there were 200 million sets in 1989, compared with
30 million television sets. Of 350 hours of foreign broadcasting to China each
week, only 15 percent is in Chinese -- and more than half of that comes from
Taiwan, much of it hard-line propaganda.

Hence there is room for balanced, professionally prepared programming, in native
languages, that would cover internal developments in China -- and in North
Korea, Cambodia, Laos, Vietnam and Myanmar, the new name given to Burma by its
military overlords.

The commission's report follows the very different recommendations of another
high-level panel concerned with the future of Radio Free Europe and Radio
Liberty, based in Munich. That panel urged, unwisely, that these stations be
phased out and television be given higher priority than radio. But that
overvalues TV, slights radio and too readily dismisses the case for
independently managed stations that would cover day-to-day events within the
listeners' own country.

A majority on the Asia commission reasonably holds that the proposed new service
should be organized like Radio Free Europe, under a separate board, independent
of Voice of America, thus assuring diversity of voices. Part of the start-up
cost could be met, the report argues, by closing down TV Marti, a failed Cuban
service that Fidel Castro has effectively jammed. Given America's immense
political and economic stake in the Pacific, Asia Democracy Radio deserves a
trial.

LOAD-DATE: October 20, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              124 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 20, 1992, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

In Former Yugoslavia, Enough Blame for All;
Why Powell's Right

SECTION: Section A; Page 26; Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 271 words


To the Editor:

"At Least: Slow the Slaughter" (editorial, Oct. 4) recommends that the Bush
Administration send United States soldiers (in airplanes, but soldiers
nonetheless) to intervene in a situation in which this country's interests are
not spelled out. This is what Gen. Colin Powell criticizes.

Whether we send 10 or 10,000 soldiers to a foreign country, it is tantamount to
a declaration of war. The Constitution is specific about Congress's
responsibility in this area. It was Congress's loss of nerve and refusal to
demand a clear statement of purposes and American interests that got us into the
Vietnam mess.

What are our obligations in the former Yugoslavia? Are they different from
similar-seeming obligations in Cambodia or Somalia, as the Secretary General of
the United Nations asked? Are there no military forces in the European
democracies?

General Powell is correct as a military adviser in asking for a firm political
basis for military intervention, just to avoid such adventures as the Marine
deaths in Lebanon. It is a curious thing, this civilian taste for playing at
war, with other people's lives. War, in however limited form, is always to be a
last resort.

We Yankees have a saying that you do not hire a dog and bark yourself. General
Powell is barking at the right moment, and particularly at those who think
soldiers are chess pieces. We are lucky to have someone at the top of the
military who knows that these chess pieces bleed and die, and that his
professional responsibility is to have a clear reason for putting them at risk.

GABRIEL AUSTIN
New York, Oct. 4, 1992

LOAD-DATE: October 20, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              125 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 20, 1992, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

In Former Yugoslavia, Enough Blame for All;
Let's Not Butt In

SECTION: Section A; Page 26; Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 291 words


To the Editor:

"The Dead of Winter, in Bosnia" (editorial, Sept. 28) chides the United States
and its European allies for nonintervention in the slaughter in the former
Yugoslav republic. But what about the thousands we and our allies managed to
kill in Korea, Vietnam and other places?

Let's face it: There are no natural resources in the Balkans that the United
States or its allies needs. The people are poor, mostly uneducated and at best
would not be much of a market for the goods we produce. Operation Desert Storm
at least protected our oil supplies, and Korea and Vietnam were fought in the
name of democracy. A democracy, by the way, that still doesn't exist.

I was born in the Balkans (Romania) and remember the hatreds among all the
ethnic groups, including the Gypsies, by whom, we were threatened as children,
we'd be carried away!

What about Somalia and the Sudan? We're not in need of sand. The sub-Saharan
region is another area where fighting among tribes goes on. The United Nations
is trying to get food to the starving, but cannot do anything to stop the
massacres.

It seems to me that the first and second worlds have decided to let the ethnic
factions -- worldwide -- fight it out without interference. And, in a way, that
is an answer. They will never be at peace, no matter what the United Nations or
any other organization imposes on them.

Many, such as Romania and Bulgaria, have returned Communist regimes to power,
after seeing what perestroika has done to the Russians. They have been used to
the system too long to accept change suddenly, and the rest of the world is
wrong to think it can impose some other kind of government without causing
anarchy.

YVONNE R. FREUND
New York, Oct. 2, 1992

LOAD-DATE: October 20, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              126 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 21, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1011 words



International A3-13

JAPAN'S SIMMERING SCANDAL
With the smell of money and the tang of power, a meaty stew of speculation is
bubbling in Japan over just how close the ties are between political leaders and
mobsters.  A1

DOUBLE DEATHS REMAIN A MYSTERY
Petra Kelly, founder of Germany's Green Party, was shot by her companion, who
then killed himself, the police said. The two former lawmakers were found dead
in their house, with any motive a mystery.  A3



RESCUE MISSION IN BOSNIA
A United Nations rescue mission headed for the small town of Vitez where relief
workers were trapped by fighting between Croatian and Bosnian troops,
heightening fears that Croatia is set on carving out parts of Bosnia for itself.
A10
Croatia and Yugoslavia agreed on steps to ease tension.  A10

U.S. EXAMINES PHOTOS FROM HANOI
The Defense Intelligence Agency is examining up to 5,000 photographs of dead
Americans obtained from Vietnam in an effort to clear up the fate of some
missing servicemen.  A7

ALLY ASSAILS SCHWARZKOPF
The Saudi Arabian commander in the Persian Gulf war accused Gen. H. Norman
Schwarzkopf of presenting an exaggerated, self-serving account of the war that
diminishes the Saudi contribution.  A8

HONG KONG GOVERNOR VISITS CHINA
The man expected to be Hong Kong's last colonial Governor arrived on his first
official visit to Beijing, a trip not expected to bring any breakthrough in
relations.  A11

Lebanese Parliament chooses Nabih Berri as Speaker.  A5

Honecker will stand trial on 12 manslaughter charges.  A3

Russia is temporarily halting its pullout from the Baltics.  A12

Angola's rebel leader will meet with the governing party.  A13

Cairo Journal: Quake reveals faults beyond the geological.  A4

National A14-21, D21

BUSH OPENS A FINAL OFFENSIVE
Buoyed by his performance in the last of the campaign debates, the President
whistle-stopped in Georgia and hit Governor Clinton with everything he had.  A1

Touring Michigan, Quayle hammered at Clinton's "waffling." A18

THE DEMOCRATS ARE ALL SMILES
For the Democratic ticket, yesterday seemed like morning in America. The debates
were over, and nothing had yet happened that would likely inspire a reversal of
the Clinton sprint toward victory.  A1

Perot accused the press of bias against him.  A18

What the debates resolved, and what they didn't.  A19

In the end, none of the debate formats proved perfect.  A19

How Bush and Clinton would scale down the military.  A20

On the Trail: The '92 race according to Richard Nixon.  A19

ROOTS OF THE YEAR OF THE WOMAN
Even a wave of victories by female candidates next month would not bring women
to a position of dominance on Capitol Hill. Should every one of them win, the
103d Congress would still be 80 percent male. Yet women have made steady gains
in politics since the early 1970's, and this year they will make more. Those
gains have been the stuff of sweat, not spontaneous combustion.  A1
The sparks flew as Specter and Yeakel squared off in debate.  D21

BUSH AND IRAN
A White House document, little noticed until now, shows that in 1986 George Bush
endorsed a plan to conceal the details of the initiative that the Reagan
Administration had mounted toward Iran.  A14

WHO KNEW WHAT, AND WHEN?
Much remains unknown about the content and scope of intelligence documents
concerning the bank-fraud case involving Iraq. But interviews with officials
familiar with the documents show a three-way tug-of-war among the C.I.A., the
Justice Department and Federal prosecutors in Atlanta.  A15

THE POLICE AND CIVILIAN REVIEW
About 35 of the nation's 50 largest cities have some form of civilian oversight
of the police force. But even the biggest supporters of such boards are quick to
note their limitations.  A16

A KNOCK ON THE WRONG DOOR
Last Saturday night in a Baton Rouge suburb, a Japanese exchange student looking
for a Halloween party was shot to death at the home of a man whom the student
had unwittingly startled. In Japan, the slaying has reinforced an image of
America as a land ridden with guns and violence. In Louisiana, there is regret
but no shock.  A16

FINDING ON TEEN-AGE ABORTION
A nationwide study of 1,500 teen-age girls who had abortions last year found
that 61 percent of the parents knew of the abortions in advance even without any
law requiring parental notification or consent.  A16

DEATH-PENALTY DECISION
The Louisiana Supreme Court ruled that an incompetent prisoner could not be
forced to take drugs that might make him sane enough to be executed.  A21

Education Page B10

Many more people take the G.E.D. exam, but find its worth in doubt.

Student-led workshops in D.C. teach teens to combat their racial biases.

Metro Digest B1

AN AIDS-LIKE SYNDROME
When Alberto T. learned he had tested negative for the AIDS virus, the news was
a relief, until this year. This summer he found out he was one of fewer than 100
patients in the world reported to be suffering from a syndrome like AIDS, but
which has no apparent cause.  A1

ABRAMS IN SEARCH OF MONEY
Vastly out-financed by Alfonse M. D'Amato, Robert Abrams is in the thick of the
most elaborate, and desperate, fund-raising drive of his quarter-century in
politics. Even now, two weeks before the election, he is spending most of his
time raising money.  A1

Business Digest D1

Living Section C1-10

Health Page C12

Arts/Entertainment C15-22

Sports B11-18

Obituaries D21-22

Shirley Booth, actress.  D22
Werner Torkanowksy, a soloist on
violin and a conductor.  D22

Editorials/Op-Ed A22-23

Editorials

Clinton pledge vs. Clinton plan.

Open skies, friendlier skies.

How to keep business in New York.

"Yes/Oui" for Canada.

Letters

Anna Quindlen: Prevailing winds.

Douglas Coupland: America in 2092.

Helen E. Fisher: Mighty menopause.

LOAD-DATE: October 21, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              127 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 21, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Republicans;
Debating Done, Bush and Clinton Begin Final Push

BYLINE: By MICHAEL WINES,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 1116 words

DATELINE: SPARTANBURG, S.C., Oct. 20


No longer able to hope that Presidential debates would lure swarms of voters
back to his ranks, President Bush and his advisers dropped the pretense today
that campaigning as usual would win his re-election two weeks from now.

Now it is trench warfare, and the battle plan became evident today along the
railroad tracks and picture-book crossroads of small-town Georgia and South
Carolina.

Campaigning by passenger train one day after his best debate showing, an
energized Mr. Bush hit Mr. Clinton with everything he had.

To throngs that filled main streets and spilled into alleys, the President
assailed Mr. Clinton's record as Arkansas Governor, attacked his economic
proposals, warned over and over that he "flip flops" on difficult issues and
recalled the "sorry" history of his avoiding the Vietnam War draft.

Polls Shrugged Off

Mr. Bush and his aides appeared to be buoyed by the debate on Monday in East
Lansing, Mich., in which the President struck many of the themes he repeated
today. They shrugged off polls taken after the debate, some of which suggested
that Mr. Bush's performance had still not won over wavering voters.

Saying he was glad to be "in the land of the free and the home of the Braves,"
Mr. Bush told about 7,000 people at the crossroads in the center of Norcross,
Ga., an Atlanta suburb, with a few thousand others outside a roped-off security
area. "Forget about all these polls.

On this two-day swing through three Southern states, Mr. Bush is going to 10
towns and granting six television interviews. His press secretary, Marlin
Fitzwater, said he would campaign nonstop until Election Day, often speaking in
three or four cities a day.

"You have seen the future," Mr. Fitzwater said as Mr. Bush spoke in Norcross,
"and this is it."

Enthusiastic Crowds

It was evident by the time his 20-car train reached Spartanburg late this
evening that Mr. Bush was drawing some of the largest and most enthusiastic
crowds of the campaign. There were almost 15,000 people here, waiting for him
and for an elaborate fireworks display.

When Mr. Bush spoke of his own plans, it was only to contrast them with what he
called Mr. Clinton's philosophy of "tax more and spend more." When he mentioned
the economy, it was to remind people that the slowdown is not just in this
country but global, and that other nations have it worse.

"Our data show this thing is coming down to taxes and trust," said the Bush
campaign's political director, Mary Matalin. "The people are not down to that
choice stage yet."

In his four stops in Georgia and South Carolina today, Mr. Bush focused
repeatedly on what he called "a vast difference in experience," character, and
philosophy between himself and Mr. Clinton. "Character is important, and you
cannot in that Oval Office be all things to all people," Mr. Bush said to
several thousand cheering supporters in Cornelia, Ga., northeast of Atlanta.
"Governor Clinton tries to be on every side of every issue, and you cannot have
that as President of the United States."

Earlier, in Norcross, Ga., Mr. Bush's charges about Mr. Clinton during the
Vietnam War, while forceful, largely avoided the stridency of his earlier
suggestions that the Arkansas Governor was unpatriotic in opposing the war, and
focused instead on Mr. Clinton's varying explanations.

Campaign aides said later that they believed the issue of Mr. Clinton's
credibility was beginning to register with voters after weeks of effort.

"Baseball is like politics," Mr. Bush said. "On Election Day we're going to show
America that it ain't over until Cabrera swings." He referred to Francisco
Cabrera, whose pinch-hit single in the ninth inning carried the Atlanta Braves
to the World Series last week.

Ms. Matalin said Mr. Bush could still pull off a comparable feat by winning the
sizable number of voters who still have reservations about Mr. Clinton. She
assumes that Mr. Bush will capture 210 electoral votes in the normally
Republican South and West, and pick up 60 more in contested states in the
Midwest and border regions, for the 270 that are needed to win.

Republican strategists say an unusually large number of voters, perhaps a third,
have still not committed themselves to a candidate. That raises hopes that a
volatile electorate could swing to Mr. Bush as the safest choice in a year
without compelling favorites.

More important, Mr. Bush campaign's chairman, Robert M. Teeter, said Mr.
Clinton's support remained unusually soft. He said in an interview today that
perhaps a fourth of Mr. Clinton's backers were wavering.

Aides also say Mr. Perot, whom Mr. Bush dubbed "the feisty little guy from
Dallas" in one speech today, remains a wild card. With 15 to 20 percent in many
polls, "we think that helps us and hurts Clinton," Mr. Teeter said.

But the depth of the President's plight is suggested by the itinerary of this
railroad trip through Georgia, South Carolina and North Carolina, the very core
of support that Mr. Bush is supposed to have locked up. Like much of the South,
these states have left the Republican fold in 30 years only for Jimmy Carter or
Lyndon B. Johnson.

Assessment of the South

Senator Strom Thurmond, the South Carolina Republican, who was aboard the Bush
train today, predicted that the President would carry his state. But even he
allowed that Mr. Bush was trailing Mr. Clinton in Georgia and even with him in
North Carolina.

Ms. Matalin also acknowledged that the gap between the President and Mr.
Clinton, even in the Bush campaign's own internal polls, had not yet narrowed
much, but instead has only bounced up and down between about 8 and 15 percentage
points.

As recently as this weekend, after Mr. Bush's slack performance last week in the
second debate, the gap was in the double-digit range, she said. But she added
that it had dropped since then and that she expected the margin to dwindle
further.

Even as Mr. Bush rallied the faithful today, his aides worked the press corps
seeking to repair damage done to the President's foreign-policy record last
night by Ross Perot.

At Mr. Bush's first stop, his National Security Adviser, Brent Scowcroft, said
Mr. Perot "had shot from the hip" when he accused Mr. Bush of hiding the White
House instructions to coddle Iraq's leader, Saddam Hussein.

A State Department spokesman, Richard Boucher, echoed Mr. Scowcroft's view and
said the United States never suggested to Baghdad that Irag could seize part of
Iraq.

The campaign will also begin using new television commercials on Wednesday, some
offering upbeat messages about a second-term agenda and others with
man-on-the-street interviews to hammer at Mr. Clinton.

LOAD-DATE: October 21, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Hoping to match Harry S. Truman's 1948 effort, President Bush
rode the rails yesterday in Georgia. (Associated Press)

Map/Diagram: "The President's Southern Whistle Stops" shows the route through
Georgia, South Carolina and North Carolina of President Bush's campaign train
yesterday and today. (pg. A18)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              128 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 21, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

U.S. GIVEN PHOTOS BY HANOI OF 5,000

BYLINE: Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 7; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 876 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 20


The Pentagon has obtained up to 5,000 photographs of dead Americans from Vietnam
that may help clear up the fate of some missing servicemen, American officials
and researchers said today.

The photos are reported to be with the Defense Intelligence Agency, where
officials are still examining them. There is no independent way to verify their
authenticity, and it is too early to determine how many cases of missing
servicemen might be resolved with the pictures.

Although one Vietnamese official is said to have passed along the photographs,
Government and private analysts are convinced that they could not have been
removed from military archives in Vietnam without the tacit compliance of
higher-ranking officials, possibly in the Ministry of Defense, who wanted to put
an end to the long-running dispute that has blocked United States diplomatic
recognition, trade and investment.

Members of the Senate Select Committee on P.O.W.-M.I.A Affairs were told about
the photographs in closed briefings in September and October. But reports about
the pictures, showing Americans who died in military action or were killed by
their Vietnamese captors, began to surface only in recent days as a high-level
Presidential delegation made a quick trip to Hanoi to discuss the new evidence.

Praise From President

The Bush Administration praised Hanoi for its candor in declaring on Monday that
it would open its archives to search for information requested by Washington.
Officials also know, however, that critical information has been coming out for
several months.

An American analyst called the joint statement issued Monday in Hanoi a "fig
leaf" offered to the Vietnamese by John W. Vessey Jr., the retired Army general
who serves as President Bush's special envoy to Hanoi on this issue. General
Vessey returned tonight from Vietnam and is expected to brief President Bush on
Thursday.

Mr. Vessey's hurriedly assembled delegation included Senator John McCain,
Republican of Arizona, a former prisoner of war in Vietnam and now a member of
the Select Committee; Deputy Assistant Secretary of State Kenneth M. Quinn, the
State Department's representative on the issue; Deputy Assistant Secretary of
Defense Alan C. Ptak, and Ann Mills Griffiths, director of the National League
of Families.

A member of Senator McCain's staff said today that P.O.W.-M.I.A family members
would be told Wednesday about the results of the Hanoi talks.

Research on Vietnamese

According to accounts supplied by officials and analysts here and in Southeast
Asia, the first breach in the wall of security Hanoi has maintained on
information regarding Americans was made early this year by an American
researching the Vietnamese Army.

While studying Government archives, the American -- who has been identified by
several people but is not being named because it has not been possible to reach
him -- began to photograph artifacts like dog tags found in a military
collection and gave the photos to the Pentagon.

Several months later, a large number of photographs was made available to
Americans by a Vietnamese official at another documentation center.

In September, Defense Department officials briefed the chairman and vice
chairman of the Senate Select Committee, John F. Kerry, Democrat of
Massachusetts, and Robert C. Smith, Republican of New Hampshire, on the new
material. The full committee was told about the photographs earlier this month
by Defense Secretary Dick Cheney.

Were Archives Extensive?

American officials who have worked on the issue most closely say Hanoi
maintained extensive archives about American prisoners and the American bodies
recovered. Vietnam's repeated denials that it had such information frustrated
the officials, who were under constant criticism and pressure from families of
missing servicemen.

The United States, which has had a office in Hanoi since the summer of 1991 to
work on the cases of 2,265 Americans still unaccounted for, also has 50 or more
people scattered around Vietnam at certain times checking "live sighting"
reports.

For more than a decade, Vietnamese ministries have demonstrated a wide range of
attitudes toward cooperating with Washington on the issue, with hard-liners in
the Interior Ministry the most negative and Foreign Ministry officials the most
accommodating.

The military has often been a mystery, taking unpredictable or inconsistent
stands. But in September, Le Duc Anh, a maverick general with a reputation for
solving problems, became President of Vietnam under a sweeping Government
reorganization.

"I suspect he just weighed in on this," said Douglas Pike, a historian of the
Vietnamese Army and director of the Indochina Studies Program at the University
of California at Berkeley.

"Anh is a key figure," Mr. Pike said. "He is the czar on dealing with China, and
maybe this extends to other foreign policy issues. He's in an ideal position as
a military leader to fix the M.I.A. problem."

At the same time, he said, the President "is known in Hanoi as Mr. Security."
For those who may worry that relaxation of relations with Washington will bring
a blowup on the order of Tiananmen Square or Moscow in 1991, "Anh is the guy who
will see it will not happen."

LOAD-DATE: October 21, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              129 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 21, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN;
Clinton and Bush Agree on Trimming Armed Forces, but Their Paths Vary

BYLINE: By ERIC SCHMITT,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 20; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1590 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 20


President Bush and Gov. Bill Clinton agree that the United States military in
the post-cold war era should be a smaller force prepared to respond quickly to
regional contingencies with the most advanced weaponry.

But the two candidates offer slightly different paths to reach roughly similar
goals. Mr. Bush would shrink the active-duty military from 1.9 million now to
1.6 million troops by 1995. Mr. Clinton would match that cut and reduce the
force level by 200,000 more by 1997. Already, the military is shrinking by
100,000 troops a year.

Mr. Bush proposes military spending of $1.42 trillion between now and 1997. Mr.
Clinton calls for spending $1.36 trillion in the same period, a difference of
about 4 percent. Most of the difference would come from troop cuts and
reductions in the "Star Wars" anti-missile defense system.

"Our forces must be more mobile, more precise and more flexible, and they must
have the technologically advanced weapons they need to prevail and to prevail
quickly," Mr. Clinton told the National Guard Association convention on Sept.
15.

Clinton Gives Few

This line could have been borrowed from speeches by Defense Secretary Dick
Cheney or Gen. Colin L. Powell, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. Mr.
Clinton has deliberately hewed close to the Administration's position on
military spending to defuse Republican accusations that Democrats are soft on
national defense and to deflect questions about the Arkansas Governor's avoiding
the draft during the Vietnam War.

Beyond those generalities, Mr. Clinton has given only skimpy details of what his
proposed military of the future would look like, and campaign advisers say that
was done deliberately to avoid committing to troop levels that may have to be
changed later.

Because the candidates share relatively similar positions on military spending
and the size of future armed forces, national security issues have not been a
major part of the campaign debate.

Nor has Ross Perot focused closely on military reductions. In his book, "United
We Stand: How We Can Take Back Our Country," Mr. Perot calls for $40 billion in
cuts beyond those proposed by Mr. Bush (or about $20 billion less than Mr.
Clinton's). Mr. Perot would have American allies, like Germany and Japan, pay a
larger share of the cost to station American troops in those countries for their
defense.

Visions on the Future

Mr. Perot and Mr. Clinton favor lifting the ban on homosexuals in the military.
Mr. Bush does not.

Mr. Bush and Mr. Clinton do diverge in their vision of how to help former
service members, and what role the Government should play in helping America's
military industry adjust to smaller Pentagon budgets.

Mr. Bush would rely mainly on existing programs in several Government agencies
to cushion the pain for military personnel leaving the armed services, displaced
military factory workers and communities affected by base closings. By most
estimates, though, these programs are inadequate to cope with hundreds of
thousands of former service members flooding a weak economy.

Still, the Bush Administration has demonstrated a pronounced reluctance to
interfere with the free-market forces that are buffeting military contractors
and throwing thousands of people out of work. Mr. Cheney has said the Defense
Department should not be a "social welfare agency."

Relying on Lawmakers

But Mr. Clinton does not think the Government is doing enough. He favors
transferring Pentagon spending to expanded job retraining and community
assistance programs. He says he favors continued production of several major
weapon systems, like attack submarines and fighter aircraft, to keep that
technology readily available in times of crisis.

In crafting his strategy for military spending and national security, Mr.
Clinton has relied heavily on three centrist Democrats in Congress:
Representative Les Aspin of Wisconsin, chairman of the House Armed Services
Committee; Senator Sam Nunn of Georgia, chairman of the Senate Armed Services
Committee; and Representative Dave McCurdy of Oklahoma, chairman of the House
Intelligence Committee.

A Clinton Administration would cut the number of aircraft carriers to 10 from
the 12 called for under Mr. Bush's plan. Mr. Clinton has not described the
number of Army divisions or Air Force fighter wings he would want, though he
does favor building new aircraft like the F-22 fighter, C-17 transport plane and
V-22 Osprey aircraft.

Mr. Bush, meantime, had spelled out a detailed "base force" he would keep -- 12
aircraft carriers, 12 active-duty Army divisions and 26 fighter wings.  He, too,
supports modernization of existing weapons systems, including the F-22 and the
C-17.

Both candidates embrace a new buying strategy that focuses on developing
prototypes and forestalling full production until an affordable system is built
and a clear need can be demonstrated.  The military industry complains that this
approach is impractical, and neither candidate has given details on how to make
this strategy profitable.

Under both candidates, the American military would be an increasingly United
States-based force, less reliant on foreign bases and sea power, and --
particularly under Mr. Clinton's plan -- more dependent on improved sealift and
airlift to send troops and equipment to a conflict quickly.

Mr. Bush would keep 150,000 American troops stationed in Europe after 1995. Mr.
Clinton proposes reducing that force to 75,000 to 100,000 troops, a position
Congress has endorsed. Both candidates would retain some American forces in
Japan and South Korea.

Disagreeing on Jobs Lost

Clinton campaign advisers say that the Administration's plan is just a smaller
cold war force. President Bush responds that Mr. Clinton's plan cuts too deeply
into "the muscle" of American forces.

Mr. Bush's assertion that under a Clinton Presidency one million additional jobs
would be lost in the military industry misrepresents a University of New Mexico
study on which the claim was based. The author of the study, Avi Shama, a
professor of management, wrote in an article for The New York Times last month
that one million defense industry jobs would be lost under Mr. Bush plan and
nearly 1.6 million jobs would be lost under Mr. Clinton's cuts.

As with conventional forces, the candidates generally agree on how they should
reduce America's nuclear arsenal, while still keeping about 3,000 warheads for
strategic deterrence.

Mr. Bush supports missile defenses, from improved Patriot missiles to
missile-killing rockets orbiting the Earth.  Mr. Clinton endorses an improved
Patriot but would cut $15 billion to $20 billion from the Bush Administration's
proposed $37 billion "Star Wars" program, mainly from space-based weaponry. Mr.
Clinton would also slow development of a ground-based missile-defense site until
the need for such a system is clear.

Advisers from both campaigns concur that candidates have fundamentally different
views on how, or whether, the Government should help the military industry
adjust to shrinking Pentagon budgets or convert production to more commercial
goods.

The Bush Administration "is letting major production lines go cold, for
everything from tanks to planes to submarines, often ignoring the capacities
they represent," Mr. Clinton said in a speech last August to the Foreign Affairs
Council in Los Angeles.

Moreover, the two candidates differ on how to help former service members. Mr.
Clinton says he would find jobs for displaced workers by devoting Federal money
to communication, transportation, new environmental technology and other
infrastructure projects. He supports using redirected Pentagon spending for this
purpose.

This month, Congress approved a $274.3 billion military budget bill for the 1993
fiscal year that included $1.5 billion for these kinds of programs.

Mr. Cheney said the Administration had programs in place providing $7.1 billion
to help people or regions affected by military cuts. Of that $7.1 billion, which
is over two years, about $2.2 billion is in severance pay and $3.4 billion in
unemployment benefits. The Administration is spending the remaining amount on a
combination of job retraining, community assistance and improved G.I. Bill
benefits. And in a separate program the Administration has also proposed
spending an additional $1 billion over the next five years for similar programs.

But beyond that, the Administration has a questionable record when it comes to
spending money earmarked in the Pentagon budget for conversion purposes. In
October 1990, Congress ordered the Pentagon to transfer $150 million to the
Labor Department for retraining programs, and $50 million to the Commerce
Department for community assistance.

But the Labor Department did not receive the money until September 1991, and has
spent only $30 million of the $150 million. The Commerce Department did not
receive its money until February 1992 and has spent $1.9 million of the $50
million, according to Commerce Department officials.

On balance, though, campaign advisers and military analysts say the shape, size
and mission of the armed forces in the future would not be radically different
under Republican or Democratic administrations.

An assessment of Mr. Clinton's national security proposals by Georgetown
University's National Security Studies Program concluded: "A Clinton Presidency
would not fundamentally alter the current content of U.S. national security
policies."

LOAD-DATE: October 21, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Chart: "Candidates on the Issues: Differing Routes to Similar Military
Goals"

The Themes

Mr. Bush says that as the leader of the international coalition that defeated
Iraq, he should be trusted as an experienced commander-in-chief. He supports a
smaller post-cold war military ready to respond to regional contingencies with
the most advanced weaponry. Mr. Bush says his Administration has already taken
steps to ease the transition for people and areas affected by military
reductions.

Mr. Clinton acknowledges Mr. Bush's experience in national security issues, but
holds that national security is now linked closely to domestic economic
strength. He, too, supports a smaller post-cold war military with a size
adequate to respond quickly to regional conflicts. But Mr. Clinton would use
more Pentagon spending to cushion the effects of military reductions and assert
a larger Government role in helping American military industries in the
transition.

 The Proposals

Mr. Bush endorses the Pentagon's "base force" of 1.6 million active-duty troops
by 1995. He would spend $1.42 trillion between now and 1997 on the military's
budget. He supports modernizing American military technology and a an
anti-missile program that includes defenses in space.

Mr. Clinton would cut an additional 200,000 troops by 1997 and proposes spending
$1.36 trillion by 1997, about 4 percent less than Mr. Bush. Most of these
reductions would come from troops cuts and reductions in the missile defense
system, mainly those in space.

 The Scorecard

Mr. Bush faces a losing battle with a Democratically controlled Congress on
maintaining his proposed spending levels for the military. An agreement between
the White House and Congress that prevented the transfer of Pentagon spending to
domestic programs expired this year, making deeper Defense Department reductions
likely in 1993.

Mr. Clinton has deliberately stayed close to the Bush Administration's position
on military spending and strategy, largely to avoid charges that Democrats are
soft on national security. He has not described in detail the shape of his
post-cold war military, but Congress is likely to support his more aggressive
programs to assist workers and regions affected by base closings.

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              130 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 21, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Iran-Contra Document Says Bush Favored Secrecy in Hostage Affair

BYLINE: By DAVID JOHNSTON,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 14; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1124 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 20


A White House document, little-noticed before, shows that in November 1986
George Bush endorsed a Reagan Administration plan to conceal the specifics of
the Iran initiative as details of the secret arms-for-hostage arrangement began
spilling into public view.

The document, a cable from John M. Poindexter, the national security adviser, to
Secretary of State George P. Shultz, came shortly before Mr. Bush asserted that
he had urged Administration officials to tell the truth about the affair.

The message lists Mr. Bush as one of several senior officials who favored a
"close-mouthed" policy even as Mr. Shultz sought to persuade top officials to
disclose what they knew.

Focus on Campaign Issue

Mr. Poindexter's cable was one of tens of thousands of formerly classified
Government papers released by the Iran-contra Congressional investigating
committees in 1986 and 1987. At that time, Mr. Bush's role was not a central
focus of the investigations, and so the document received little attention.

But in recent months the President's role in the Iran-contra scandal, and
whether he has explained his role in full, have become campaign issues.
Democrats have pressed Mr. Bush for a fuller account of his actions during the
affair, in part as a counterweight to the Republican accusations that Gov. Bill
Clinton has shaded his accounts of how he avoided the draft during the Vietnam
War.

The Poindexter memorandum suggests that Mr. Bush's position within the ranks of
top officials as the scandal threatened to engulf the White House was somewhat
different from the way he presented it in a major speech a month later. In that
speech, intended to clear the air about the affair and his role in it, he said:
"Let the chips fall where they may. We want the truth. The President wants it. I
want it. And the American people have a right to it. If the truth hurts, so be
it. We got to take our lumps and move ahead."

In the following months and years, Mr. Bush wrote a book and along with his
staff has answered what he has estimated were 3,500 questions about the affair.
But he has never provided a detailed account of how much he knew and what he did
in an arrangement to sell arms to Iran in an effort to free American hostages
there.

There has never been any evidence that Mr. Bush was aware of another central
element of the affair, the diversion of some of the profits from those arms
sales to the Nicaraguan rebels.

Seeing Nothing new

C. Boyden Gray, Mr. Bush's legal counsel, said today there was nothing new in
the Poindexter document. "This is fully described in Chapter 19 of the
Congressional report," he said. "I cannot see any reason why there is any news."

That chapter of the report, prepared by the House and Senate committees that
investigated the affair, refers to the Poindexter cable but focuses primarily on
other Administration officials, like Mr. Poindexter himself, who provided
several incomplete and misleading accounts that culminated with the news
conference on Nov. 25 when Attorney General Edwin Meese 3d disclosed the
diversion of proceeds from the arms sales to help buy arms for the Nicaraguan
rebels.

The cable -- sent from the White House situation room and marked top secret --
does not resolve a broader question: how much Mr. Bush knew of the
arms-for-hostages affair as Vice President. Mr. Bush has repeatedly said he knew
arms were being sold to Iran and that hostages were being released but did not
view the operation as an arms-for-hostages arrangement until December 1986, when
the details were made public.

The Poindexter document implies that Mr. Bush knew enough of the Iran initiative
to be sought out by Mr. Poindexter in the internal struggle over how much should
be revealed. But it is also possible that Mr. Bush knew fewer of the details
about the affair than Mr. Poindexter, the official directly in charge, and
consequently might not have fully grasped how much would be concealed by a
posture of non-disclosure.

Reacting to Disclosures

The Poindexter memo was written on Nov. 5, 1986, two days after a Beirut weekly
magazine disclosed that Robert C. McFarlane, a former national security adviser
to President Reagan, had secretly traveled to Teheran the previous May in a
failed effort to gain the release of the hostages in exchange for weapons.

In the aftermath of the magazine disclosures, Mr. Shultz, who had long opposed
the initiative, urged Mr. Poindexter in a cable to make it clear in a public
statement that the Iran initiative was a "special one-time operation based on
humanitarian grounds."

The next day Mr. Poindexter sent his own cable to Mr. Shultz, then in Vienna for
talks with Eduard A. Shevardnadze, the Soviet foreign minister. "At some point
we will have to lay out all the facts," he wrote. "Having said that, I do not
believe now is the time," because talking about it openly might hamper efforts
to release other hostages, and because the Administration had not yet told
Congress about the program.

Mr. Poindexter added that he "remained convinced that we must remain absolutely
close-mouthed while stressing that our basic policy toward Iran, the Gulf War
and dealing with hostages has not changed."

In the next paragraph he wrote: "Today I have talked with VP. Cap and Bill
Casey," referring to Mr. Bush, Defense Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger, and
William J. Casey, the Director of Central Intelligence. "They agree with my
approach."

When all the facts were made public, Mr. Poindexter said, it was his view that
"it will be well received since it is a good story."

The Poindexter cable was among a number of classified papers sent anonymously
today to a New York Times reporter. Many of the documents, like this one, had
been previously released in edited form by the Iran-contra Congressional
investigating committees, or by prosecutors in the trials of Reagan
Administration officials charged with wrongdoing. But some had never been
disclosed.

Mr. Poindexter's message to Mr. Shultz set the stage for several top-level
meetings later in November 1986, which Mr. Bush attended, that Iran-prosecutors
examined this summer in the final phase of their inquiry into the affair. Those
meetings, cited in the June 16 perjury indictment of Mr. Weinberger, seemed to
be part of a wider effort by top Reagan advisers to try to conceal some aspects
of the affair, fearing that disclosure could lead to Mr. Reagan's impeachment.

Prosecutors obtained tantalizing leads hinting at a concerted effort to protect
the President as everyone around him denied having detailed knowledge of the
affair. But the prosecutors, lacking a witness and clear-cut evidence of a
conspiracy, ultimately abandoned their theories.



LOAD-DATE: October 21, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              131 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 21, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Review/Television;
2 Roads to the Presidential Campaign

BYLINE: By WALTER GOODMAN

SECTION: Section C; Page 22; Column 4; Cultural Desk; Word and Image Page

LENGTH: 590 words



Frontline
The Choice '92
PBS, tonight at 9
 (Channel 13 in New York)

Produced by Thomas Lennon; Michael Sullivan, senior producer; David Fanning,
executive producer; Richard Ben Cramer, correspondent.

"The Choice '92" is less about issues than about careers. Richard Ben Cramer,
author of "What It Takes," a book about the 1988 Presidential candidates,
interweaves the stories of President George Bush and Gov. Bill Clinton from
their childhoods to just yesterday to show how "they clawed to the top of our
political heap." The contrasts are striking, but so are the similarities. (Ross
Perot does not figure in this two-hour "Frontline" special, which was almost
complete before he re-entered the race a few weeks ago.)

Viewers who have not had enough this season of how the two main candidates made
their ways into politics can obtain a brisk recapitulation tonight, with the
help of family members, friends and pictures of them on the rise. Mr. Cramer
portrays Mr. Bush as a loyal party man who despite his own inclinations came out
strongly against the Civil Rights Act of 1964, when he was running for the
Senate in Texas. Later, a friend recalls, he expressed regret at taking "some of
the far-right positions that I thought I needed to get elected." He said, "I
hope I'll never do it again." John Sears, an aid to President Richard Nixon --
who helped the Bush career -- says, "I don't think George Bush's positions are
central to who he is."

Issues seem to have been more urgent for Mr. Clinton, who came of age in the
1960's. Mr. Cramer reports that as a college student, shown here in a sparse
beard, Mr. Clinton was deeply opposed to the Vietnam War and stayed out of it by
"working the system, sometimes baldly, every angle."

The program's account of the two men's twists and turns as they made their way
upward are revealing not only about them but about what Americans demand of
their leaders. Both suffered losses that apparently taught them the importance
of adapting to political exigencies. Adaptation seems to have come more easily
to Mr. Bush, but Mr. Clinton, too, proved an adaptable politician as he moved
closer to his state's business interests. An Arkansas critic says, "Bill Clinton
will never over-commit, not ever."

Mr. Cramer's conclusion that both have been reinventing themselves as they go
along speaks to the nature of American politics, where the price of success
often includes moderating one's convictions and distorting one's personality.
That may be lamentable, but it takes a remarkable figure to resist the pressures
of democracy. "The Choice '92" leaves the impression that neither of this year's
main contenders is that remarkable.

World in Focus
 Channel 31, tomorrow at 10 P.M.

WNYC-TV begins a new 13-week series of half-hour discussions of foreign affairs
tomorrow night with Lawrence Eagleburger, the Acting Secretary of State,
answering questions about "U.S. Foreign Policy in the Post-Cold War Era." The
sharpest exchanges between Mr. Eagleburger and his inquisitors -- Margaret
Osmer, the moderator; James Hoge, editor of Foreign Affairs magazine, and Leslie
Gelb, a New York Times columnist -- are over America's action or inaction
regarding Bosnia.

The series, which is produced by the Council on Foreign Relations, promises more
big names in international diplomacy, including, next week, the Egyptian Foreign
Minister, Amre Moussa, and later, Shimon Peres, the Israeli Foreign Minister.
Let's hope they are treated no more gently than Mr. Eagleburger.

LOAD-DATE: October 21, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              132 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 21, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

INSIDE

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 4; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 72 words


Doubts About the G.E.D.

Holders of general equivalency degrees seem no better off than high school
dropouts. Education, page B10.

U.S. Studies M.I.A. Photos

The Pentagon hopes photos provided by Vietnam will help clear up the fate of
some men, officials said. Page A7.


Greens Founder Was Slain

The German authorities said that Petra Kelly, founder of the Green Party, was
slain by her companion. Page A3.

LOAD-DATE: October 21, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: October 22, 1992, Thursday

CORRECTION:

A headline and an entry in the front-page "Inside" summary yesterday about
photographs of Americans obtained by the Pentagon from Vietnam described them
incorrectly in some copies. They were photographs of dead Americans, not
missing.


TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              133 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 22, 1992, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Jim Garrison, 70, Theorist on Kennedy Death, Dies

BYLINE: By BRUCE LAMBERT

SECTION: Section B; Page 12; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1104 words


Jim Garrison, who as District Attorney in New Orleans made startling assertions
of a widespread conspiracy and cover-up in President John F. Kennedy's
assassination, died yesterday at his home in New Orleans. He was 70 years old.

The New Orleans coroner, Dr. Frank Minyard, a longtime friend, said the exact
cause of death would be determined in a routine autopsy today. Mr. Garrison had
been bedridden with heart disease.

His widely disputed accusations, which were revived in the recent hit film
"J.F.K.," drew worldwide attention when he first made them in 1967. He asserted
that Lee Harvey Oswald, whom the Warren Commission identified as the lone
assassin in the President's 1963 death, was not the killer and had "never fired
a shot."

Announcing that he had "solved the assassination," Mr. Garrison accused
anti-Communist and anti-Castro extremists in the Central Intelligence Agency of
plotting the President's death to thwart an easing of tension with the Soviet
Union and Cuba, and to prevent a retreat from Vietnam.

In 1969 he prosecuted Clay Shaw, a New Orleans businessman, as a conspirator.
But the 34-day trial was widely described as a circus, and the jury acquitted
Mr. Shaw after deliberating less than an hour.

Adviser on 'J.F.K.'

Many public officials and assassination experts dismissed Mr. Garrison's
theories as bizarre, irresponsible and an effort to get publicity. But interest
in his accusations continued among assassination buffs as doubts grew about the
accuracy and completeness of the official findings.

Suddenly last December, Mr. Garrison burst back into national prominence with
the release of Oliver Stone's movie, "J.F.K."

The movie, based largely on Mr. Garrison's views, portrays him as a quixotic
hero fighting an evil establishment involving the Government, the military, the
mob, politicians and spies. Kevin Costner played the District Attorney.

The film grossed $195 million in box office receipts and an undisclosed amount
in sales and rentals of videotape cassettes.

Mr. Garrison served as an adviser to the film, which drew heavily from "On the
Trail of Assassins," one of three books he wrote about the case. In conjunction
with the release of the movie, Time Warner published a paperback edition of the
book, which promptly jumped to the top of best-seller lists.

Mr. Garrison also landed an acting role in the film, playing Chief Justice Earl
Warren, the head of the commission whose very conclusions Mr. Garrison had
denounced as "totally false."

Indicted in '73

The period between the original events and the release of "J.F.K." were troubled
years for Mr. Garrison. Initially he sought to try Mr. Shaw on new perjury
charges, but the courts stopped him from proceeding.

Then, in 1973, Mr. Garrison himself was indicted on Federal charges of taking
bribes to protect illegal pinball gambling. Conducting his own defense, he won
acquittal.

But the trial hurt him politically and left him only a month to campaign for his
fourth term as the New Orleans District Attorney. He lost that bid for
re-election by 2,221 votes, ending his 12 years in that office. The victor was
Harry Connick Sr., father of the singer Harry Connick Jr. Mr. Garrison next ran
for State Supreme Court judge and lost.

Resurrecting his public career in 1978, he won election to a seat on Louisiana's
Court of Appeal for the Fourth Circuit. He remained on the bench until last
year, when he quit three weeks before the mandatory retirement age of 70 because
of failing health.

An imposing figure, Mr. Garrison was 6 feet 6 inches tall, spoke in a booming
voice and had a slightly walleyed look.

His Kennedy assassination case took many turns. Johnny Carson devoted an entire
"Tonight" show to interviewing Mr. Garrison and talking about his accusations of
a guerrilla band, mysterious figures on the grassy knoll at Dealey Plaza in
Dallas, the possibility of shots from a sewer, photographic analysis and the
involvement of the Dallas police, Federal Bureau of Investigation, C.I.A.,
Secret Service and Texas oil millionaires.

Strange Characters

The Clay Shaw trial involved strange characters. One key witness died under
mysterious circumstances. Others refused to repeat on the stand the statements
that Mr. Garrison's investigators had attributed to them. One witness, a
psychologist, testified that he had regularly fingerprinted his daughter to make
sure a spy had not taken her place.

Several students of the Kennedy assassination said that even though Mr.
Garrison's investigation might have been seriously flawed, he served as a
positive force in focusing attention on the inadequacies of the Warren
Commission and in pressing for the release of many still-confidential documents.

Congress passed legislation on Sept. 30 to authorize the release of hundreds of
thousands of pages of secret Government documents regarding Kennedy's death. The
bill, which President Bush is expected to sign, would create an independent
commission to review the papers and release all but those that compromise
national security or invade a person's privacy.

James C. Garrison was born in Denison, Iowa and later legally changed his first
name to Jim. He was a graduate of Tulane University Law School.

He served in the National Guard, Army and Army Reserve and served in Europe
during World War II. In 1951 he briefly went on active duty.

Newspaper reports in 1967 said he was under psychiatric care from 1950 to 1955
and quoted a military assessment saying that he was discharged as unfit because
of "a severe and disabling psychoneurosis of long duration" that "has interfered
with his social and professional adjustment to a marked degree." He neither
confirmed nor denied the report.

As a relatively obscure assistant district attorney for the Orleans Parish, Mr.
Garrison was known for bar hopping along Bourbon Street, often wearing a white
dinner jacket. Then, in 1962, he resigned suddenly, denounced Mayor Victor
Schiro as being soft on crime and challenged the incumbent District Attorney,
Richard Dowling, for his post.

Mr. Garrison derided Mr. Dowling as "the great emancipator; he let everybody go
free." Saving his campaign money for a last-minute barrage of television
commercials, Mr. Garrison was the upset victor.

As the first local politician to make effective use of television, he made
frequent raids on French Quarter vice dens and gambling joints, accompanied by
an entourage of cameras, technicians and reporters.

He is survived by his wife, the former Leah Elizabeth Ziegler; three sons, two
daughters, a sister and one grandchild.


NAME: Jim Garrison

LOAD-DATE: October 22, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Jim Garrison. (Associated Press, 1989)

TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              134 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 22, 1992, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

U.S. Archivists to See Hanoi's Files on Missing

BYLINE: By ERIC SCHMITT,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 10; Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 504 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 21


American archivists will travel to Vietnam at the end of this month to begin
reviewing documents and photographs from Hanoi's files to help resolve questions
about the fate of missing American servicemen, Administration officials said
today.

Hanoi announced on Monday that it would open its archives to search for
information requested from Washington. Vietnam's decision came after senior
Administration officials confronted Hanoi's leadership with information the
Pentagon obtained from Vietnam's archives in recent months, including as many as
5,000 photographs of dead Americans.

Separately, a team of 63 American specialists began a monthlong field visit
today to 11 Vietnamese provinces to hold interviews and examine sites where
American aircraft are believed to have crashed, in connection with 78 cases of
missing servicemen. The field visit, the 20th involving American and Vietnamese
personnel since 1988, was planned last month.

John W. Vessey Jr., the retired Army general who serves as President Bush's
special envoy to Hanoi on this issue, returned Tuesday night from a quick visit
to Vietnam to press for broader access to the files. General Vessey was expected
to brief Mr. Bush on Friday morning on the results of the trip.

Vessey to Brief Bush

While General Vessey brought back some new information from his latest trip,
Administration officials said the broader significance was gaining Hanoi's
commitment to open its archives, which could provide "new leads and
corroborating evidence to what we already have."

One Administration official said Vietnam would collect information from archives
across the country and make the information available to American archivists
assigned to military teams in Hanoi and Bangkok.

General Vessey was also expected to brief Mr. Bush on the internal Vietnamese
political considerations that resulted in Hanoi tacitly approving the transfer
of Vietnamese records over the last several months to an American researcher,
who in turn passed the information to the Pentagon.

Administration and congressional officials said General Vessey would also relay
to Mr. Bush Hanoi's linkage of the broader archival access to diplomatic
recognition by Washington.

Many Photos 'of Debris'

General Vessey met today with Acting Secretary of State Lawrence S. Eagleburger,
but State Department officials declined to comment on the briefing until General
Vessey discussed his trip with Mr. Bush.

An Administration official said today that "only a limited number" of the 5,000
photographs given to the United States so far have been useful.

"A lot of them are just pictures of a lot of debris on the ground," the official
said. "But if we can piece together from the pictures where and when the plane
crashed, we can check our records to see what plane was lost on that date and
place."

There are 2,265 Americans still listed as unaccounted for in Indochina, though
American officials say the number of truly unresolved cases is less than 200.

LOAD-DATE: October 22, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              135 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 22, 1992, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

THE MEDIA BUSINESS: ADVERTISING;
In One Show, Ads of the 40's Look at 90's

BYLINE: By STUART ELLIOTT

SECTION: Section D; Page 22; Column 3; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 705 words


THERE is a television program that regularly addresses advertising- and
marketing-related issues like the overcommercialization of American culture and
the influence of sponsors on programming.

Surprise No. 1: The program, "Homefront," is not a PBS documentary but a weekly
ABC series -- in the nighttime soap opera genre, no less.

Surprise No. 2: "Homefront" is set not in the 1990's but in the years
immediately after World War II.

Since "Homefront" began its second season on Sept. 17, most of the plot lines
involving its large cast of characters, who live in the mythical town of River
Run, Ohio, have centered on those topics. The next episode will be broadcast at
9 tonight Eastern time.

Concentrating on advertising and marketing subjects is not deliberate, the
creators and producers of the series say. Rather, it reflects the Zeitgeist of
postwar America, when pent-up consumer demand fueled an explosion in mass
marketing. Yet it also exemplifies a contemporary phenomenon of the interplay
between advertising and popular culture.

"We don't set out to make modern parallels," said Bernard Lechowick, a creator
and executive producer of "Homefront." "But the modern parallels have paid off."

On the series, a young woman named Ginger Szabo, portrayed by Tammy Lauren,
struggles with the demands of her job as the "girl" singer on a popular radio
show -- this before television -- sponsored by a locally marketed tomato juice.

When she tells the sponsor of her plans to marry, he snarls: "The Lemo Tomato
Juice girl is a hot tomato, a cool cucumber, a ripe peach. How would I sell
tomato juice with a ball and chain on my cans?"

Mr. Lechowick said: "The sponsors controlled program content in a way we would
consider unethical today. We've read where the word 'saffron' was banned because
it was thought to have sexual connotations."

Another character, a young outfielder for the Cleveland Indians named Jeff
Metcalf, portrayed by Kyle Chandler, battles for a lucrative
cigarette-endorsement contract with a jealous teammate who sabotages his
on-field performance. Viewers saw a faux 40's ad that deftly echoed the puffery
of the era: "Doctors recommend Trenton cigarettes because they're better for
you. I smoke 'em 'cause they taste good."

And when Jeff wound up appearing on a baseball card, packed inside loaves of
bread, a boy asked him for an autograph by confiding, "My mom told me it's just
a cheap gimmick to sell Vitawheat bread."

All this is not to suggest that "Homefront" is an "Omnibus" for the 90's. Since
it is driven by the demands of episodic network television, any food for thought
is served up amid typical nighttime-soap preoccupations like thwarted romance.
After all, "Homefront" is produced by Lorimar Television, creator of soapy
series like "Knots Landing."

Still, "Homefront" has tackled substantive issues like racism and anti-Semitism.
The device of setting the series in the ferment of the postwar period enables it
to address modern-day concerns in the same way that "M*A*S*H," set during the
Korean War, commented on the Vietnam War in the 70's.

In the household ratings race, "Homefront" ranks an anemic 68th out of 98
series. Yet a significant 37 percent of its audience is from an important
demographic group, women aged 18 to 49. That has drawn an impressive roster of
advertisers like Campbell Soup, Cover Girl, Diet Coke, Helene Curtis, Kellogg,
Lever Brothers, Maybelline, Nabisco and Nutrasweet.

No 40's versions of those brands are likely to turn up on the series, said Lynn
Marie Latham, a second creator and executive producer of "Homefront," because
ABC prefers that actual products not appear. So brands are invented, like Lemo,
Trenton and Vitawheat, or names of defunct properties are used, like Look
magazine.

The advertising-related plots will continue later this season. Mr. Lechowick and
Ms. Latham plan for the radio-related plot lines to segue into the start of
television.

A full-time "Homefront" employee handles 40's research, Ms. Latham said, so
costumes and sets can be infused with the verisimilitude that enhances
believability.

"Our next project will be set in the future," she added, "so nobody can tell us
we've made a mistake."

LOAD-DATE: October 22, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: On the ABC series "Homefront," Tammy Lauren portrays Ginger
Szabo, the singing spokeswoman for a local brand of tomato juice. (Capital
Cities/ABC)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              136 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 22, 1992, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Corrections

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 40 words


A headline and an entry in the front-page "Inside" summary yesterday about
photographs of Americans obtained by the Pentagon from Vietnam described them
incorrectly in some copies. They were photographs of dead Americans, not
missing.

LOAD-DATE: October 22, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Correction

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              137 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 22, 1992, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

The Cold War: Get Over It

SECTION: Section A; Page 26; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 521 words


Despite all the public preoccupation with the economy, George Bush and Bill
Clinton have had plenty to say about foreign policy. The problem is that most of
it looks backward. By failing to talk about America's future role in the world,
whoever wins on Nov. 3 is missing the chance to claim popular support for needed
change.

Mr. Bush is trying to take credit for being in the right place at the right time
when the cold war ended. And he is reaching even further back, to reopen the
wounds of Vietnam. But he has said little about the world of the future.

Mr. Clinton, to his credit, has talked about promoting democratic values in the
world, not just playing geopolitical chess. But he's been too cautious about
cutting wasteful weapons, and too eager to promote arms sales. Together they are
addressing foreign policy of the 20th century instead of summoning support for
realities of the 21st.

The President, not wrongly, is still tidying up the old agenda: negotiating deep
cuts in nuclear arms and a chemical weapons ban. But he's been slow to head off
new troubles. These include helping ex-Communist states through a perilous
transition . . . stanching the bloodletting in Bosnia . . . and preventing the
proliferation of all weapons, not just those of mass destruction. And he's had
difficulty defining what America now stands for abroad.

Mr. Clinton's first ventures into foreign policy made him look like a man
walking into a minefield, looking for familiar ground. He criticized past Bush
blunders, like aiding and arming Iraq and toasting the tyrants of Tiananmen, but
shied from offering departures of his own.

Recently, in a splendid initiative, he called for "a pro-democracy foreign
policy," de-emphasizing military in favor of political and economic means.
That's best pursued in concert with others -- "a global alliance for democracy,"
he calls it -- and through the United Nations.

It's a sound start, but Mr. Clinton needs to curtail consumption and wasteful
weapons if he's going to reverse America's stagnating economic performance. He
urges "the courage to change" but without yet calling for the necessary
sacrifices or changes in public attitude.

For instance, there is no necessary conflict between guarding against external
dangers and meeting domestic needs. The bloated Bush defense budget is a
senseless extravagance that would bleed domestic plans. Yet Mr. Clinton would
cut it by a mere $60 billion over five years.

He takes issue with Democrats "who see defense cuts as largely a piggybank to
fund domestic wish lists." Yet he rightly proposes that "Every dollar we save by
downsizing our armed forces and defense industries will be reinvested during our
transition to a post-cold-war economy."

His party wisely wants to "press for strong international limits" on
conventional arms sales to troubled regions. Yet Mr. Clinton sold out that
platform pledge in his haste to endorse the sale of F-15's to Saudi Arabia and
F-16's to Taiwan.

The cold war will haunt the campaign, and the country, until Mr. Bush and Mr.
Clinton turn their vision and voices forward.

LOAD-DATE: October 22, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              138 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 22, 1992, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

If Clinton Wants a Democratic Foreign Policy

SECTION: Section A; Page 26; Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 581 words


To the Editor:

Few would quarrel with "The Clinton Doctrine" by A. M. Rosenthal (column, Oct.
6), which welcomes Gov. Bill Clinton's commitment to a more democratic foreign
policy. More troubling is the unholy mix of sanctimony and cynicism with which
Mr. Rosenthal -- and Governor Clinton -- reduce an important principle to a
self-serving slogan.

Stung by past charges that they were dovish on defense, Democrats are looking
for a way to criticize President Bush from the right. So they accuse him of
coddling Mikhail S. Gorbachev and Saddam Hussein.

In fact, Mr. Bush continued Ronald Reagan's policy, which they too now advocate.
A little history will make clear what that is. Up to Vietnam, the United States
response to third world revolutions had been largely defensive: to support
regimes with our money, arms and sometimes our troops. After that debacle -- and
other unfavorable developments across the third world -- we decided it would be
cheaper and more effective to support counterrevolutions.

Leftist third world governments made their share of mistakes. But they also
faced armed rebels that we collected in an assortment of beleaguered democrats,
ardent nationalists, ethnic separatists, former Communists, religious
fundamentalists and former colonialist collaborators. We sponsored wars in
Afghanistan, Angola, Nicaragua, to name a few.

Presidents Reagan and Bush are hardly guilty of having propped up Mr. Gorbachev.
Our massive arms buildup did much to push the Soviet Union into terminal
economic crisis. When our European allies wanted to meet Soviet reform with
economic aid, we blocked this. Meanwhile, through Radio Free Europe, Radio
Liberty, the National Endowment for Democracy, the American Federation of
Labor-Congress of Industrial Organizations and no doubt the Central Intelligence
Agency, we supported the Soviet Union's breakup. Mr. Bush's facade of caution
allowed him to strike lopsided arms agreements with a declining government.

The Reagan-Bush policy deserves credit for victory and the chaos it has brought.
Mr. Rosenthal supports both Russian and Baltic nationalism. He seems not to
notice that they are in conflict, with the Baltics disenfranchising Russians,
and the Russians threatening the Baltics. Eastern and Western Europe are now the
breeding ground of ethnic strife and a growing fascist movement.

The Clinton doctrine would intensify this crusade with Radio Free Asia and Radio
Free China. It isn't clear how India or China can break up peacefully or what
will happen to the mosaic of minorities across that continent and the world. In
greater tolerance lies the beginning of wisdom. Meanwhile we show little regard
for democratic movements that challenge our financial interests -- for example,
in Mexico and Brazil.

If Mr. Clinton really wants a democratic foreign policy, it will have to be more
than a self-serving crusade. He will have to open American policy to true reform
of the United Nations Security Council, the International Monetary Fund and the
World Bank so that these reflect a diversity of interests and needs, rather than
a projection of United States power.

He will have to address the twin problems of the environment and development,
not only for the world's rich but also for its poor. Only when we demonstrate
our commitment to freedom from hunger, disease and despair will our campaign for
democracy be a reality that is worthy of the name.

DAVID KEPPEL
Essex, Conn., Oct. 7, 1992

LOAD-DATE: October 22, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              139 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 22, 1992, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

If Clinton Wants a Democratic Foreign Policy;
Courage of Dissent

SECTION: Section A; Page 26; Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 201 words


To the Editor:

In the debate over Gov. Bill Clinton's anti-Vietnam War activities there is a
fundamentally important point being missed by both sides: Most of us who were
vehemently against the war in Vietnam were not demonstrating against either our
country or the men who were forced to fight in what for them was an
incomprehensibly brutal and personally devastating experience.

On the contrary, our vehement antiwar activity was motivated specifically by the
belief that it was the war itself that was destroying our country and that the
American combat troops in Vietnam were the primary victims of that war.

Given the choice between perpetuating the moral and spiritual integrity of our
country and saving the political face of its political administrators, we chose,
against considerable odds, the integrity over saving face.

Therefore, from our point of view, refusing to participate in the Vietnam War
and demonstrating against its continuation were acts of courage, compassion and
patriotism, rather than the acts of cowardice and treason that the Bush-Quayle
campaign tries to portray.

SANDOR B. BRENT
Professor of Psychology
Wayne State University
Detroit, Oct. 9, 1992

LOAD-DATE: October 22, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              140 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 23, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

BUSH SAYS PHOTOS ARE MAJOR BREAK

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 3; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 857 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 22


President Bush said today that the acquisition of thousands of Vietnamese
photographs of the bodies of American servicemen was a "major breakthrough" in
accounting for missing Americans. But he said he would have to determine
"exactly how major" before deciding to move toward diplomatic recognition of
Hanoi.

The President also said, in an interview with CBS News, that he would like to
see Vietnam become democratic, and seemed to suggest that this might be a factor
in his decision, or related to it. "We're not that far along," he said.

As the Pentagon continued its analysis of nearly 5,000 photographs obtained from
Vietnamese military archives, including many pictures of crash sites, a few
families of missing Americans have been notified that there is now substantial
evidence that their relatives died in Vietnam, officials said. One of the
missing now known to have perished in enemy hands was an Air Force officer who
had been unaccounted for since parachuting into North Vietnamese territory in
1968.

Case of 2 Combat Pilots

The officer, Maj. Joseph C. Morrison of the Air Force, parachuted from an F4-D
fighter plane over North Vietnam on Nov. 25, 1968, along with Capt. San D.
Francisco.

Both officers established radio communication with United States forces from the
ground, indicating they were alive. The Pentagon said that they landed about 700
yards from a North Vietnamese encampment.

Contact with Captain Francisco was lost in half an hour, and he is still listed
as unaccounted for. But Major Morrison escaped and was able to resume
communication the next day with rescuers trying to pin down his location. Bad
weather prevented a rescue, however, and contact with Major Morrison was lost.

The case of Major Morrison -- now listed as Colonel Morrison because promotions
continued to accrue while he was missing -- was never explained by Vietnam. It
was one of the "discrepancy cases" presented to the Vietnamese for early
resolution by John W. Vessey Jr., a retired Army general who serves as a special
Presidential envoy to Hanoi.

Officials said that about two-thirds of the pictures are duplicates, and others
are often grainy and hard to decipher. More important, investigators said, will
be the correlation of photographs to Pentagon files and archival documents Hanoi
has promised to open to American inspection.

"From the descriptions that I have read about these photographs, they are unique
in number," said Roger Shields, the Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense in
charge of P.O.W-M.I.A. accounting at the end of the war. "But over the years, we
have had many other photographs come into our possession, some through public
sources, showing men dead with their aircraft, or ostensible grave sites. We
knew these photos existed. This large group just demonstratets that the
Vietnamese did this systematically.

"We had told them so often we were interested in accounting that they knew this
was important," the former Pentagon official said. Some relatives of servicemen
unaccounted for think Hanoi intended to use the information to bargain for
American aid.

The United States lists 2,265 servicemen as unaccounted for in Vietnam, Laos and
Cambodia since the Vietnam War. Of this number about 1,100 are officially listed
as "killed in action" but their bodies have not been recovered.  The rest are
listed as "missing in action," although officials believe there is scant chance
that any survived.

Over the last few years, a list of 130 to 135 names has been compiled of
"discrepancy cases." Hanoi could close these files because the men, who were
reliably believed to have survived crashes or other military action, probably
fell into Vietnamese custody. Officials think most if not all of them are dead,
but need firm evidence to close the cases.

U.S. Mission to Vietnam

The President will be briefed on Friday on the results of a high-level American
mission sent to Vietnam last weekend to discuss the issue. The interdepartmental
delegation was led by Mr. Vessey. President Bush said today that he believed
that the Vietnamese still knew more than they were telling Americans and that it
would be precipitous to move too fast in establishing diplomatic relations.

'We're not going to do this until I can say in in total conscience, clear
conscience to the missing-in-action families and P.O.W. families, 'Here is a
full accounting,' " said Mr. Bush, who was heckled in July as he tried to
address a family group's annual convention.

"But I'd like to see full relations," the President said today. "I'd like to see
that nation become democratic and fit into Asean and and come along in the
future." Asean is the free-enterprise Association of Southeast Asian Nations,
which Hanoi wants to join.

Although the resolution of cases of American servicemen still unaccounted for
nearly two decades after the United States withdrew from Vietnam remains the
major roadblock to diplomatic ties and American aid, Vietnamese exile groups,
some members of Congress and human rights organizations are beginning to
advocate increased pressure on Vietnam to move toward democracy.

LOAD-DATE: October 23, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Senator John McCain of Arizona, a member of the Senate Select
Committee on P.O.W.-M.I.A. Affairs and a former prisoner of war, will brief
President Bush on an American mission to Vietnam last week. He showed Vietnamese
photos from the war at a news conference Wednesday in Phoenix. (Associated
Press)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              141 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 23, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Richard P. Hunt, 70, a Journalist In the Middle East and South Asia

BYLINE: By BRUCE LAMBERT

SECTION: Section B; Page 7; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 378 words


Richard P. Hunt, a retired foreign correspondent for newspapers, radio and
television, died on Wednesday at his home in Manhattan. He was 70 years old.

He died of complications of cancer, his family said yesterday.

Mr. Hunt was best known for his reporting from the Middle East for The New York
Times and later for NBC News radio and television, and from Singapore, the base
from which he covered the wars in Vietnam and Cambodia for NBC News.

He interviewed heads of state, including King Faisal of Saudi Arabia, the Shah
of Iran and King Hussein of Jordan shortly after King Hussein came to power as a
young man.

When civil war broke out in Lebanon in 1958 and the United States Marines
landed, the entire Middle East was in crisis. In a diary, Mr. Hunt chronicled
the frustrations of his six-day odyssey from Beirut to Baghdad.

It was a tale of finessing a visa on a Muslim holiday, canceled plane rides,
resourceful taxi and bus drivers, negotiations with stubborn border guards and
rebel chieftains, dusty roads that disappeared for miles in the desert and
getting directions from a Bedouin camel herdsman. Upon arrival, he was
confronted with demands for an Arabic translation of his reports for censors to
read. No translator was available and the rule was finally waived.

Mr. Hunt began reporting at local paper in Geneva, N.Y., in 1950. He later
joined The Associated Press in Albany, where he became the bureau's chief
political correspondent.

He joined The New York Times in 1955, where he covered city news, state politics
and Sub-Saharan Africa. He was at NBC News from 1964 to 1980, the last several
years as director of its Northeast bureau, covering the United Nations and the
Three-Mile Island nuclear plant disaster.

He came out of retirement for a few years in the mid-1980's to serve as the news
editor of the MacNeil-Lehrer television news program.

Born in Streator, Ill., Mr. Hunt grew up in Buffalo. He graduated from Yale
University in 1942. In World War II, he served as a lieutenant on a Navy
destroyer in the Pacific.

His marriage to Carla Fitch ended in divorce.

He is survived by his son, Christopher of Palo Alto, Calif.; a daughter, Abigail
Hunt of Manhattan, and two brothers, Reed and P.J., both of Buffalo.


NAME: Richard P. Hunt

LOAD-DATE: October 23, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Richard P. Hunt. (The New York Times, 1956)

TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              142 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 23, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Dispute Threatens U.S. Plan on Violence

BYLINE: By FOX BUTTERFIELD,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 12; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1124 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 22


The Department of Health and Human Services is planning a five-year effort to
combat violence in America the way it would fight an epidemic of smallpox, using
public health techniques to supplement the criminal justice system.

But the Government's plans, known loosely as the violence initiative, have come
under sharp attack by a crusading Maryland psychiatrist and some prominent
blacks who say the effort is racist and genocidal.

The dispute has put the Secretary of Health and Human Services, Dr. Louis W.
Sullivan, who is black, in an uncomfortable position and threatens financing for
some research and community-based demonstration projects that specialists say
show promise in reducing violence.

'I Will Not Apologize'

In a strongly worded speech to a group of child psychiatrists today, Dr.
Sullivan denounced the attacks on his plan as "false and inflammatory
accusations" by extremists who have "grossly and irresponsibly mischaracterized"
the work of his department.

"I will not apologize for doing what I can to reduce the number of young lives
that are being tragically destroyed by violence," Dr. Sullivan said.

Dr. Peter Breggin, a Bethesda, Md., psychiatrist who has led much of the
opposition to the plan, said in a telephone interview that looking for
biological or genetic markers, as some critics have suggested was part of the
plan, was "very racist" and "without scientific foundation."

"The violence initiative is denying racism, poverty and how tough it is for
children living in the inner city," he said.

Responding to such criticism in a talk to the American Academy of Child and
Adolescent Psychiatry today, Dr. Sullivan said none of the research done by his
department supported the idea that there is a "crime gene" or a genetic basis
for crime.

But Dr. Sullivan said that to build support among blacks for the Government's
work, he would appoint a "special blue-ribbon panel" to oversee the research,
headed by Franlyn G. Jenifer, the president of Howard University.

The fight over the plan reflects a sensitive statistical fact: a
disproportionate percentage of homicides are committed by blacks, about seven
times the rate, per capita, committed by whites, according to the Public Health
Service. Similarly, blacks are more often victims of murder.

Homicide is the leading cause of death for black men between the ages of 15 and
34, the Public Health Service figures show. A young minority male has a greater
probability of being killed on the streets of a city than a soldier had on a
tour of duty in Vietnam.

Dr. Sullivan said it was concern over such statistics, and a realization that
the United States as a whole has become "the most violent country in the
industrialized world," that led him to push for greater involvement by the
Department of Health and Human Services. "This problem is too great to be left
to the criminal justice system," he said in an interview today.

Instead, following the recommendation of a growing number of doctors,
psychiatrists, criminologists and law-enforcement experts, Dr. Sullivan has
suggested using the public-health approach. It relies on analyzing the causes of
an epidemic, then acting to prevent those likely to be at risk from becoming
infected.

While the experts agree that no single cure is ever likely to be found to
eradicate violence, they say a number of steps can be taken to reduce it
gradually, just as intensive efforts have lowered the rate of automobile
accident deaths and decreased the number of Americans who smoke.

But one problem in treating violence like a disease, critics say, is that
suggesting that some people are natural carriers may stigmatize blacks.

Most of the research and programs would be sponsored by the Federal Centers for
Disease Control and the National Institute of Mental Health. Many of the
projects would be expansions of work already under way. In the 1991 fiscal year,
the institute spent $42.7 million on violence-related research; less than 5
percent was devoted to biological causes of violence, the kind of work that has
drawn the most criticism.

One of the strongest critics of the new research plan, Representative John
Conyers Jr., Democrat of Michigan and chairman of the Congressional Black
Caucus, said today: "My worst fear is that they will unscientifically correlate
race or social class with violent behavior. That would lead to discriminatory
policies."

Ronald Walters, chairman of the political science department at Howard
University and a member of a group called The Committee to Stop the Federal
Violence Initiative, said, "We perceive this as being a particular threat to the
black community because of its focus on inner-city youths."

Professor Walters said he objected to treating violence as a disease, as called
for by using the public-health approach. "If there is a reason for this kind of
research, the aim is to find a drug," he said. "And if you begin using drugs to
pacify young black males, as is often done with ritalin for hyperactivity,
you're creating a regime of social control."

The Department of Health and Human Services' plan, Professor Walters said, has
come about because the Bush Administration has no interest in allocating
resources to overcome the economic and social problems of the inner cities.

Whole Program Threatened

Such accusations have put Dr. Sullivan on the defensive and led some specialists
in the agencies that comprise the Department of Health and Human Services to
worry that the whole program may be canceled.

Dr. Sullivan himself today insisted there was "no violence initiative with a
capital V and a capital I." Instead, he called the document a "planning process
for a possible future initiative."

The plan would have a proposed budget of about $400 million spread out over the
next five years. Most of the research and programs would be sponsored by the
Federal Centers for Disease Control and the National Institute of Mental Health.
Many of the projects would be expansions of work already under way.

Since 1983, for instance, the disease centers have financed research examining
whether there is a statistical link between the presence of guns in society and
the frequency of violent death. One study compared Seattle and Vancouver,
British Columbia, two cities with similar histories, climate and social and
economic characteristics but with different gun-control policies.

The study found that they had nearly the same rates of burglary, robbery and
assault, or similar levels of aggressiveness. But homicide was 60 percent higher
in Seattle than in Vancouver, and murder by firearms was 500 percent higher,
apparently because handguns are much easier to obtain on the United States side
of the border.

LOAD-DATE: October 23, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              143 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 23, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Ross Perot;
Perot Presents His Autobiography, Part II, in 30-Minute TV Program

BYLINE: Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 20; Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 364 words

DATELINE: DALLAS, Oct. 22


Ross Perot portrayed himself as a self-effacing civic and corporate hero tonight
in the second half of a television autobiography that highlighted the formative
years of his computer company, his work on behalf of American prisoners of war
in Vietnam, his company's rescue of two employees held hostage in Iran, and his
philanthropy for education projects.

The 30-minute presentation, the fourth of its kind during Mr. Perot's revived
Presidential campaign, was broadcast on ABC, opposite the fifth game of the
World Series. It cost $370,000.

Last Saturday, in the first half of his television biography, he discussed his
childhood in Texarkana and his days in the Navy. Mr. Perot, who has not
campaigned in public since Monday's Presidential debate, has scheduled two other
30-minute spots for Friday and Saturday nights. Both will focus on his character
and biography, said Mr. Perot's press secretary, Sharon Holman.

In tonight's presentation, as in the first half of the biography, Mr. Perot
provided rambling answers to questions posed by Murphy Martin, his campaign
media consultant.

"Money is the most overrated thing in the world," said the multi-billionaire,
who has said he will spend $60 million of his own money on his campaign. "You
need enough money to take care of your family, but beyond that, the only
worthwhile use of having money beyond that point, is to do constructive things
for others."

He spoke of the "three musketeers" philosophy he instilled at Electronic Data
Systems Corporation: "one for all and all for one, and we stuck together." He
said he boosted morale by treating entry-level employees like family and giving
them the same health benefits he gave himself. And he said he operated without
regard to an employee's sex, race, education or background. His management
motto, he said, was, "I care about what you can do and what you've done lately."

Mr. Perot did not discuss reports that had emerged early in his campaign about
his sometimes autocratic management practices, including the private
investigations of corporate rivals, prohibitions within E.D.S. against facial
hair, and his preference for employees who were married.


LOAD-DATE: October 23, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              144 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 23, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1079 words



International A3-11

VODKA IS HAUNTING RUSSIA
The Russian authorities say the problems associated with too much vodka-drinking
-- crime, absenteeism, lost production, sickness -- are worse than they were
before Mikhail S. Gorbachev's campaign against alcohol in the 1980's.  A1

The best vodka is made from the purest grain alcohol.  A10

GLIMMERS OF HOPE IN SOMALIA
Relief workers in Somalia see signs of hope for famine victims: one town's daily
death toll has dropped and rains are feeding newly planted fields. But civil war
continues to rage in other parts of the country.  A1

BUSH TO DECIDE VALUE OF PHOTOS
President Bush said he would have to determine the importance of thousands of
wartime photos from Vietnamese archives before deciding to move toward
diplomatic recognition of Hanoi.  A3

EMPEROR'S VISIT REVERBERATING
A visit to China by the Emperor of Japan is stirring domestic resentment against
the Chinese Government: Beijing is being accused of neglecting to demand
apologies and compensation from Tokyo.  A3

SYRIA REJECTS ISRAELI PLANS
Syria dismissed Israel's latest peace proposals as "nothing new," as Arab and
Israeli negotiators effectively began marking time until the American
Presidential election.  A6

BILLIONAIRE PREMIER FOR LEBANON
A Muslim billionaire with strong connections to Saudi Arabia was named Prime
Minister of Lebanon in a move intended to help the country out of its worst
economic crisis since independence 49 years ago.  A7

JOINT EFFORTS FOR SARAJEVO
Repair crews from both sides in the Sarajevo siege are working together to
restore electricity to 70 percent of the city and water to a still wider area.
A9

The U.S. gave the U.N. evidence of human rights abuses by Serbs.  A9

U.N. PACT FOR KURDISH AID
The U.N. Secretary General has approved an agreement with Iraq that is being
described as "a green light" to resume relief shipments to Kurds northern Iraq.
A11

Kayelitsha Journal: Installing toilets and adding people.  A4

National A12-23

TWIN TARGETS FOR BUSH
Continuing his campaign tour, the President attacked not only Governor Clinton
but also Ross Perot, whom Mr. Bush had been treating with kid gloves.  A1

Behind the Bush stump speech: a party in transition.  A20

Plans for a Baker speech on domestic policy were scrapped.  A20

Bush won't receive the tax bill before Election Day.  A14

Bush, a memo and Terry Waite's mission to Lebanon.  A14

The campaign has now led Bush to promote the Osprey.  A14

Where Bush and Clinton stand on education.  A22

CLINTON TWEAKS HIS FOE
Stumping again in the West for Republican and independent support, Governor
Clinton noted a newspaper report that said officials had searched his mother's
passport files. "It turns out," he said, "that the State Department was not only
rifling through my files but actually investigated my mother -- a well-known
subversive." A21

Eagleburger expanded the inquiry into the Clinton-file search.A21

It has become the year of satellite-dish politics.  A21

In a further TV autobiography, Perot portrayed himself a hero.  A20

The power of the religious right is being tested in Colorado.  A22

MISSISSIPPI DESEGREGATION PLAN
The trustees of Mississippi's eight-campus public university system proposed a
desegregation plan that would close one of the state's three historically black
colleges and merge another with a predominantly white university.  A1

RACE AND VIOLENCE
The Government is planning a five-year effort to combat violence by using public
health techniques to supplement the criminal justice system. But the plan has
come under attack by some prominent blacks, who condemn it as racist.  A12

THE SHUTTLE BLASTS OFF
Columbia roared aloft with six astronauts on a science mission whose main goal
is to deploy a $4 million, two-foot satellite and inaugurate a new kind of
booster rocket.  A16

'THE IDEAL EXCHANGE STUDENT'
Yoshihiro Hattori, the Japanese exchange student shot to death by a startled
homeowner near Baton Rouge last weekend, danced his way through the brief two
months he spent in America.  A12

TAMOXIFEN AND THE RISKS
Thousands of healthy women taking part in a large-scale trial to see whether a
potent drug can prevent breast cancer are being inadequately informed of the
risks, critics told a Congressional hearing.  A23

Experts found no evidence of AIDS as a vaccine contaminant.  A16

A defect in a third chromosome was linked to Alzheimer's.  A16

The death of 1,470 children was laid to an aspirin-warning delay.  A12

Law Page B16

Interfaith divorce: a parting conflict over the children's religion.

At the Bar

Metro Digest B1

POLITICAL BATTLE AND DINKINS AIDE
In a drama played out against a backdrop of New York City mayoral politics,
Randy Daniels, a newly appointed Deputy Mayor, and a former female subordinate
traded charges and countercharges yesterday over her allegations of sexual
harassment.  A1

ALBANY POWER IN A BATTLE
After 24 years in the Senate, Ralph J. Marino, whose budget wrangling unraveled
Mario M. Cuomo's Presidential ambition, according to the Governor, is fighting
for political survival in his affluent Long Island district against an unlikely
combination of wealthy conservative Republicans and a youthful and popular
Democratic county legislator, James F. Gaughran, calling for change in Albany.
A1

DISPOSABLE DIAPERS WIN
The war over how to cover American baby bottoms has ended in a rout. Exhausted
by their failure to convince parents that the nation's landfills have turned
into reeking mountains of disposable diapers, many of the most zealous
environmentalists have simply stopped trying.  A1

Business Digest D1

Weekend C1-33

Film: Antonioni series.  C1

Art: Basquiat at the Whitney.  C1

Fall antiques show.  C1

Sports B8-13

Obituaries B6-7

Red Barber, Hall of Fame baseball broadcaster.  B7

Editorials/Op-Ed A32-33

Editorials

Robert Abrams for New York.

Christopher Dodd for Connecticut.

Topics: Jim Garrison, survivor.

Letters

A. M. Rosenthal: Call in the D.A.

Anthony Lewis: Time for Justice.

Fedor Burlatsky: Castro wanted a nuclear strike.

Jerome E. McElroy and Herman Goldstein: Ending police abuse.

LOAD-DATE: October 23, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              145 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 23, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Review/Art;
Three Shows Celebrate the Spirit of Fluxus

BYLINE: By HOLLAND COTTER

SECTION: Section C; Page 19; Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1176 words


"Be President. Elect Yourself," urges a hand-printed placard mounted on a stick
inside the New Museum of Contemporary Art, in SoHo. It's a thought, given the
current campaign. But the placard, suitable for carrying in a demonstration, is
just one of hundreds of objects and ideas that vie for attention in three
entertaining and bracing shows that celebrate the 30th anniversary of the art
movement known as Fluxus.

Fluxus was never, strictly speaking, a movement at all. It began as the
collective spirit of an international group of young artists, writers and
musicians in the early 1960's. Those in New York were influenced by John Cage
and Marcel Duchamp, and sought anarchic alternatives to Abstract Expressionism
and the powerful gallery system that prevailed at the time. Fluxus art ranges
from toylike objects made of found materials, to written proposals for projects,
to staged "events" in which little or nothing appears to happen. Basic to Fluxus
is a belief in the use of chance in art, in the connection between art and
everyday life, and in the creative role of the viewer in making art.

In part because it was anti-authoritarian, and in part because some of its
adherents were quarrelsome, Fluxus never established an institutional base. Yet
it was immensely influential. It helped give birth to a number of major art
forms, including video art, performance art and Conceptual art. And under the
guidance of George Maciunas, it established SoHo as an art community in the
60's. The alternative space and the artist-owned cooperative building were
basically Fluxus inventions.

Of the three current exhibitions, the superbly mounted "Fluxus: A Conceptual
Country," at Franklin Furnace in TriBeCa, gives a clear, multi-textured look at
the movement's early days. Nearly everything here was produced in the 60's, and
with most of the original artists included one gets an idea of the range of
sensibilities involved. There's a fair share of Dada whimsy, as in Yoko Ono's
one-sentence direction for a performance piece ("Listen for a heartbeat"),
Jackson Mac Low's repetition of a Hare Krishna chant on gridded payroll paper,
and a "Fluxworker" jacket in the form of a white lab coat.

There's also a distinct if sporadic political edge. Emmett Williams's stage
directions for an anti-racist performance piece, "White for Governor Wallace,"
and Dick Higgins's "1,000 Symphonies," its paper scorched by machine-gun blasts,
are reminders that the Vietnam War and the civil rights movement provided the
historical context in which Fluxus artists worked. More surprising is a curious
strain of morbidity -- in Christo's plastic-swathed rose and Milan Knizak's
burned red "Body Shirt," for example -- of a kind familiar in the work of many
younger artists today.

A second exhibition, "10 Years on Broadway: Fluxus, 1982-1992," at the Emily
Harvey Gallery in SoHo, provides an update on the movement. A few of the minor
weaknesses of the Fluxus enterprise are apparent -- namely humor that gets
either too obvious or too arcane -- but there's also a lot of stimulating work.
It includes Takako Saito's exquisite wooden "Mystery Box"; Ray Johnson's mail
art, Alison Knowles's "Finger Book," Ken Friedman's proposal for an Eiffel Tower
in space, and Ay-O's installation "Black Hole," in the building's basement, a
memorable experience but one not recommended for the claustrophobic.

Unexpectedly poignant in the show's context is Charlotte Moorman's "Needle
Cello: Shadow of My Cello" (1989). Moorman, who as a topless cellist provided
Fluxus's most indelible image, died last year after a long bout with cancer. The
cut plexiglass shape of her instrument covered with the needles she used for
morphine injections is both awful and heartbreaking, bringing the darker
implications of this movement's delight in the ephemeral directly to the fore.

As it turns out, however, there is no such darkness to be found in the New
Museum's "Flux Attitudes," a delightful, energetic, hands-on circus of a show,
organized by Susan Hapgood and Cornelia Lauf, with a manic installation by
Rirkrit Tiravanija. It offers new work by orginal Fluxus members as well as by
younger artists, and a continuing program of performances.

Some of the work is just for viewing, like David Medalla's huge paintings of New
York poets. Most of it, however, is interactive. Vik Muniz offers a loose "Zen
Domino" jigsaw puzzle with hundreds of pieces, all indistinguishably white;
Alice Hutchins's magnetized metal table sculpture, "State of the Union," invites
adjustment but tends to fall apart with an alarming clatter. Finally, for the
acquisitive there's art to keep. Marc Travanti's cards printed with epigrammatic
sentences ("Inflict injury on oneself to win the enemy's trust," he counsels on
one) are free for the taking, as are Geoffrey Hendricks's dirt samples with the
instructions "Mix with water and apply to hands feet, face or body. Smear on
face of politician of choice."

Most of the work was made especially for the show, and the curators had asked
artists to address the 1992 American elections. Some do, as in the case of Tony
Conrad, who made the placard plugging self-election. Others deal with different
issues. Liz Larner's bacterial cultures in petri dishes make a chilling
statistical statement about breast cancer.

Even the mundane politics surrounding the organization of "Flux Attitudes"
itself can be followed in a display of letters exchanged by the curators and
artists. The curators' attempt to point up the anti-commodity stance of Fluxus
by requesting that all work have a zero-dollar valuation for insurance purposes
delighted some artists and enraged others.

The ideal of making an art without monetary value -- an art that is non-elitist,
obtainable by everyone, makeable by anyone -- is where Fluxus began, and the
movement's renewed visibility in the recessionary 90's is right on schedule. It
seems already to be having an effect on some new art around it; the "Spatial
Drive" exhibition also at the New Museum is much in its debt. Fluxus's wit,
absurdist radicality and cooperative approach to art-making have always
flourished in clamorous and uncertain times, and these three enlivening shows
feel like a breath of fresh autumn air.

"Flux Attitudes" remains at the New Museum of Contemporary Art, 583 Broadway,
near Houston Street, SoHo, through Jan. 3. "Fluxus: A Conceptual Country"
remains at the Franklin Furnace Archive, 112  Franklin Street, TriBeCa, through
Nov. 14. "10 Years on Broadway: Fluxus, 1982-1992" remains at the Emily Harvey
Gallery, 537 Broadway, near Spring Street, SoHo,  through Nov. 14.

The Franklin Furnace exhibition is to be shown at the Madison (Wis.) Art Center
from Dec. 5 through Jan. 31; the University of Iowa Museum of Art in Iowa City
from March 27 through May 23; the Montgomery (Ala.) Museum of Fine Arts from
July 14 through Sept. 1, and the Mary and Leigh Block Gallery at Northwestern
University in Evanston, Ill., from Sept. 23 through Dec. 5, 1993.

LOAD-DATE: October 23, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Wolf Vostell's "Untitled" (1974), part of the exhibition
"Fluxus: A Conceptual Country," at Franklin Furnace in TriBeCa. (M. Heitner)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              146 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 24, 1992, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

HANOI SAID TO VOW TO GIVE M.I.A. DATA

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1071 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 23


President Bush said today that Hanoi had agreed to turn over to the United
States all documents, pictures and personal effects relating to American
servicemen during the Vietnam War. Administration officials said the pledge was
likely to lead to a review of American policy toward Vietnam.

The move is the most decisive and far-reaching Vietnam has made in nearly two
decades to meet American demands for the fullest possible accounting of the
missing. For years, Vietnam denied that there was any more to show or tell, and
Washington refused to establish diplomatic relations with the Hanoi Government
and blocked international aid to one of Asia's poorest countries.

"Today, finally, I am convinced that we can begin writing the last chapter of
the Vietnam War," Mr. Bush said in the White House Rose Garden. "It was a bitter
conflict, but Hanoi knows today that we seek only answers without the threat of
retribution for the past."

He said the United States would increase assistance to Vietnam -- initially
about $25,000 more for flood relief, according to reports from Hanoi -- and
would begin helping the Vietnamese find and identify their own combatants
missing in action.

Vietnamese leaders are no longer asking for the $4.2 billion in reparations they
long insisted President Nixon promised in 1973, an Administration official said
today.

President Bush did not mention the possibility of diplomatic recognition of
Vietnam or a lifting of an American-led international embargo, but there is
strong speculation that he might move to normalize relations with Vietnam before
his term ends in January.

The President's announcement was welcomed by aid organizations, scholars and
business leaders who have advocated an end to the isolation of Hanoi.

John McAuliff, executive director of United States-Indochina Reconciliation
Project and coordinator of private and religious efforts to assist Vietnam, said
today that it was the hope of many that the next Administration would take steps
"as dramatic as the unprecedented willingness of the Vietnamese to open their
military archives and their countryside to foreign investigators."

Skepticism and Suspicion

Some members of the families of the missing were skeptical of Hanoi's intentions
or said they suspected political motives on the part of President Bush, whose
campaign appears to need all the boosts it can get.

"If the Vietnamese have given us 5,000 photographs, what else have they been
keeping from us?" said Dolores Apodaca Alfond, head of the National Alliance of
Families and sister of a missing pilot.

She was referring to a trove of photographs now being analyzed by the Defense
Intelligence Agency. Pentagon officials said today that the photos had been
collected by the Government over the last several months and were not a direct
result of Hanoi's new pledge.

As he spoke this morning, the President was flanked by his special envoy to
Hanoi, John W. Vessey Jr., a retired Army general and former Chairman of the
Joint Chiefs of Staff, and by Democratic and Republican senators who have been
investigating the cases of missing Americans through a Senate committee.

Researchers Bound for Hanoi

At the Pentagon today, officials were cautiously optimistic that they had
reached a turning point in nearly 20 years of investigations. The United States
still lists 2,265 Americans unaccounted for in Indochina. More than half are
known to be dead, but their bodies have not been recovered. The others are
listed as missing, but officials assume that virtually all are dead.

Pentagon officials said the material turned over to Washington so far was just
the beginning. The United States and Vietnam have agreed that American
archivists and Pentagon experts will begin research on the missing in Hanoi at
the end of this month.

Pentagon officials said today that some of the 4,800 photographs were given to
the Pentagon by individual Vietnamese, but that most were funneled through an
American researcher working in Hanoi, ostensibly on a book about the Vietnamese
Army.

Officials said that the researcher, Theodore Schweitzer, had come to them
offering to share information that he could not get published elsewhere. The
Pentagon agreed to pay his expenses and provide him with a computer and other
assistance.

Mr. Schweitzer began work in February or March. But it was not until the summer
that the Pentagon became aware of the importance of the material being
collected, and the role of Vietnamese officials, who were apparently placing
pictures, documents and artifacts at the American's disposal.

Pentagon officials stress that the photograph cache poses countless new
questions and suggests many new leads for further research. They are eager to
test Vietnamese promises of more archival material. Among the pictures are
hundreds of copied identification cards and newspaper clippings, demonstrating
how meticulously Hanoi kept files on the Americans.

No Evidence of Living Prisoners

So far, officials said, there have been no indications in the new material that
living Americans remained in captivity after prisoner exchanges in 1973. Of 135
"discrepancy cases" presented to Vietnam over the last several years as the
easiest to resolve, 2 have been effectively closed through photographic
evidence, and the families of a fighter crew shot down in 1968 -- Maj. Joseph C.
Morrison and Capt. San D. Francisco -- have been notified. A third family has
also been shown pictures, but officials would not identify the case.

Major Morrison's daughter, Cindy, said tonight in an interview with ABC News
that the Pentagon showed her family the pictures last month.

"We know for sure that he is dead, and that is a relief," she said.

American officials say Hanoi's decision to give up archival material was
motivated by economic and strategic concerns. Senator John McCain, Republican of
Arizona and a former prisoner of war, who accompanied General Vessey to Hanoi,
told reporters that the Vietnamese "are desperate for economic assistance."

The United States now blocks aid to Vietnam from the World Bank and
International Monetary Fund. An Administration official said that this kind of
assistance -- allowing large and badly needed public projects like roads,
airports, power plants or ports to be constructed -- is needed if Hanoi is to be
able to complete its ambitious plans for economic development.

LOAD-DATE: October 24, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              147 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 24, 1992, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section 1; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 997 words



International 2-5

JAPAN'S EMPEROR VISITS CHINA

Opening the first visit to China by a Japanese monarch, Emperor Akihito
acknowledged that Japan's wartime occupation had "inflicted great suffering on
the people of China." But he stopped short of the apology demanded by many
Chinese.  1

HANOI PROMISES ALL FILES

President Bush said Vietnam had agreed to give the United States all documents,
pictures and personal effects relating to Americans who fell into Vietnamese
custody during the war in Indochina.  1

The families of missing G.I.'s alternate between hope and despair.  2

FRANCE CONVICTS 3 IN BLOOD CASE

A French court convicted three former health officials on charges of
distributing tainted blood that infected more than 1,250 hemophiliacs with the
virus that causes AIDS. Already 273 of them have died.  1

3 MAIN FOES MEET IN BOSNIA

Commanders of the three main forces in the Bosnian war met for the first time at
the Sarajevo airport and began talks that the United Nations hopes will clear
the way for a winter relief operation.  3

1997 WILL COME, CHINA WARNS

China warned Britain that if it pushed ahead with plans for broader democracy in
Hong Kong, Beijing would dismantle them and install its own government when it
takes control in 1997.  3

POPE SAYS HE WILL GO TO ISRAEL

The Pope accepted an invitation to visit Israel. Emotionally, he spoke of his
"burning desire to one day be able to be a pilgrim in that region, and above all
the Holy Land and Jerusalem." 3

VOTE IS NEAR ON QUEBEC'S STATUS

Canadians will vote Monday in a referendum to determine whether to confer
special status on the country's French-speaking minority in Quebec and thereby
thwart a separatist campaign. Polls have shown the "no" side leading.  5

Maputo Journal: Art galleries flourish in a war-weary capital.  4

National 6-10

PEROT STEPS UP THE PACE

Amid some signs that the Presidential race was tightening, Ross Perot announced
the purchase of another big block of television time and said he would make
personal appearances in New Jersey and Pennsylvania tomorrow.  1

Bush campaigned in two states, and also on two fronts.  10

Bush plans a pre-election rush of environmental rules.  10

Clinton's talks turned unpartisan and Presidential.  9

Behind Clinton's plan to collect from international companies.  9

Despite the recession, fund raising is at record levels.  8

Poverty-stricken Gary, Ind., feels abandoned by the candidates.  8

On the Trail: Clinton and an aspiring debater.  9

THE STIRRINGS OF AN UPSET

Suddenly the heretofore safe notion that the Democrats next month would win both
of California's Senate seats seems much less than certain. Bruce Herschensohn,
an avowed "constitutionalist" who would eliminate or cut back virtually every
Federal agency, is rallying against Barbara Boxer.  1

THE TIME OF OUR LIVES

Tonight you get an extra hour, courtesy of the return to standard time. Not only
that: because of leap year and a one-second adjustment to the nation's master
clock, 1992 has 86,401 extra seconds, making it the longest year in two decades.
Not that you'd ever notice.  1

THE CAPITAL SHUTTERS UP

The District of Columbia shut down most of its local government, seeking to
balance its budget by embarking on one of the toughest employee furlough
programs in the country. The one-day shutdown was the first of 12 that will be
imposed over the next 12 months.6

COCAINE EMERGENCIES SOAR

The Administration reported that the number of people entering hospital
emergency rooms with adverse reactions to cocaine had reached a record level.  6


A MISSION ACCOMPLISHED

Six astronauts ejected a mirrored Italian satellite from the space shuttle
Columbia, and an attached rocket lofted it into orbit nearly 4,000 miles above
Earth.  7

Atlanta Journal: Is this an international city?  6

Religion Notes: Many people vote according to faith.  7

The big California earthquake that wasn't.  6

An S.A.T. cheater was sentenced to jail for perjury.  6

Metro Digest 25

DINKINS ASSESSES APPOINTMENT

Mayor Dinkins and his top political advisers met to assess the risks of allowing
Randy Daniels, the newly appointed Deputy Mayor, to keep his job. Mr. Dinkins
appeared to have seized on two clear tracks: distancing himself from the
politically explosive allegations of sexual harassment that have been made
against Mr. Daniels, and leaving Mr. Daniels with the task of responding to
criticism.  1

Business Digest 35

Consumer's World 12

Ordering takeout? Chew on this first.

For book lovers, browsing by mail.

Covering yourself against an unhappy landing.

Guidepost

Arts/Entertainment 13-18

Fire at Salinger home.  13

Theater: "Power Pipes." 18

Film: "Frozen Assets." 16

Music: Carnegie Jazz Band.  13

Classical reviews.  17

Joan Baez back to her roots.  17

Dance: Butoh with a difference.  13

Two reviews.  18

Sports 30-34

Baseball: Braves breathe new life.  31

Braves face Cone, a familiar face.  32

Basketball: Knicks' Mason looks good at small forward.  33

Columns: Anderson on managers.  31

On Pro Hockey 34

Football: A Giant refuses to go out in public.  31

Unbeaten Washington State plays U.S.C.  33

Hockey: Rangers tie Canadiens.  31

Islanders beat Capitals.  34

Obituaries 11

Edward F. Denison, an economist.

William Masselos, pianist.

Janet Viertel, a photographer of underwater life.

Editorials/Op-Ed 22-23

Editorials

Pressure for school board reform.

Spying on Bill Clinton's mother.

Canada makes baseball history.

Karl E. Meyer: Inside the C.I.A.

Letters

Russell Baker: Those vile few.

Adam Gopnik: Saul Steinberg's New York.

LOAD-DATE: October 24, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              148 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 24, 1992, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Hanoi Photos Leave Families of U.S. M.I.A.'s Astir

BYLINE: By JANE GROSS

SECTION: Section 1; Page 2; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 798 words


Barbara Cleary O'Connor wants to know precisely what happened 20 years ago when
her husband disappeared without a trace over Hanoi during the final few minutes
of what was to have been his last mission as an Air Force pilot.

"Was he hit by anti-aircraft fire? she said yesterday from Wayland, Mass., where
she lives with her second husband. "Did he eject? I know it sounds gruesome to
want all the details, but I do. In that 15 minutes, I want to know exactly what
happened."

Mrs. O'Connor's son, Sean Cleary, had a somewhat different wish as he digested
the news, announced yesterday by President Bush, that the Vietnamese Government
has pledged to release all photographs, documents and other information relating
to the 2,265 Americans still listed as unaccounted for in Indochina.

"We would like to be handed my father's body so he can be buried on American
soil," said Mr. Cleary, 24 years old, an assistant basketball coach at Manhattan
College in New York City. "And at Arlington National Cemetery, which was my
father's wish."

Ulterior Motives Suspected

The Cleary family, and others like them across the country, alternated between
hope and skepticism yesterday, confident that the events of recent days were in
fact a breakthrough in their two-decade nightmare of uncertainty but wary of
trusting the Vietnamese Government, which had disappointed them before.

"There's no question this is a big move," Mrs. O'Connor said. "But they have
made promises in the past and not kept them. After 20 years, it would be
ridiculous not to have some hesitation."

A few families were not merely skeptical but also persuaded that the Vietnamese
Government and the Bush Administration had ulterior motives. In that category is
Kate Rothacker of Mission Viejo, Calif., who is convinced that her brother, shot
down during a secret Air Force mission, is alive in a Laotian prison camp.

According to Ms. Rothacker's scenario, the Vietnamese Government, eager for
trade with the United States and aware of Mr. Bush's dismal election prospects,
is offering only a portion of what it knows.

"My worry is that this will give the country a sense of closure without looking
to other hiding places," she said.

While some families cling to hope that their loved ones are still alive and held
captive, far more seem certain that they died instantly or shortly thereafter.
But that conviction does not still the need for formal notification of death,
for irrefutable facts and, most of all, for remains that they can lay to rest.

"What I need is the period at the end of the sentence," said Jeff Hudgens, 28,
who works for an electronics company in San Jose, Calif., and barely remembers
his father, Maj. Edward M. Hudgens, shot down on a search and rescue mission
over Laos in 1970. "Myself, personally, I have no doubt he's dead. But I don't
have that final proof, O.K., 'Here's the remains,' or, 'Here's a picture of what
happened.' Something to know. Now we don't know, we just think."

No Reunion Illusions

Sean Cleary, too, holds out virtually no hope for his father, but needs the case
closed definitively.

"I'm 99.9 percent sure," he said. "But as long as there's that .1 percent --
it's human nature."

With a guilty stammer, Mr. Cleary said that "to be completely honest," he does
not even wish that his father were alive.

"Some people, you say that, and they're taken aback," he said. "But what he
would have had to live through, I don't want that."

His sentiments were shared by several wives of missing servicemen, some of them
remarried and thus alarmed at the prospect, however far-fetched, that their
first husbands might be alive, and others reconciled to their lives as widows
and without illusion about what such a reunion might be like after all these
years.

"It would be living hell," said Mary Lynn Tuft of Auburn, Calif., who was
married to her first husband, Thomas E. Pettit, for less than two years when his
helicopter disappeared off the radar screen in 1967.

While Mrs. Tuft quickly remarried, and had a son who is now 21 years old, she
has remained in close touch with her grieving in-laws. It is for their sake that
she hopes the archives yield information about her first husband.

Pentagon officials said yesterday that three families had so far been shown
photographs from the nearly 5,000 already turned over by the Hanoi Government.
According to the National League of Families of American Prisoners and Missing
in Southeast Asia, a Washington lobbying group, two of those families are the
next of kin of Maj. Joseph C. Morrison and Capt. San D. Francisco, Air Force
pilots whose F-4D fighter plane was shot down over North Vietnam in 1968.

The Pentagon would not identify the third family and the league said it did not
know.

LOAD-DATE: October 24, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Capt. Peter Cleary of the Air Force standing by his plane in an
undated photograph. He was listed as missing in action on Oct. 10, 1972, after
flying over Hanoi on what was to have been his last combat mission. (Evan
Richman for The New York Times); Sean Cleary, who would like to bury his father,
Capt. Peter Cleary, on American soil. (Vic DeLucia/The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              149 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 24, 1992, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Administrator Chosen to Run U.S. House

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Page 7; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 222 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 23


The bipartisan leadership of the House of Representatives, seeking to heal an
institution wracked by a season of scandal, today appointed a professional
administrator who will oversee the chamber's non-legislative functions.

The tasks of the new administrator, Lieut. Gen. Leonard P. Wishart 3d, retired,
will include supervising the issuing of the lawmakers' paychecks and controlling
most postal operations. In those roles he will replace the infamous House bank,
which produced the year's biggest political imbroglio, and the internal post
office that became enmeshed in additional controversy.

The administrator's office, which will handle many functions previously
performed by politically chosen House officers, was established by a bill that
lawmakers passed this year after the scandals. Speaker Thomas S. Foley and
Representative Robert H. Michel spent months interviewing candidates for the job
before they found one they could agree on.

Their choice is a 58-year-old Newark native and West Point graduate who holds a
master's degree in nuclear physics from the University of Virginia. General
Wishart served in Vietnam in 1966-67 and commanded the First Infantry Division
from 1986 to 1988. His most recent military position was as deputy commander of
the Army's training center at Fort Leavenworth, Kan.

LOAD-DATE: October 24, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              150 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 24, 1992, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Life Sentence for Scourge of Chinatown

BYLINE: By STEVEN LEE MYERS

SECTION: Section 1; Page 27; Column 4; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1003 words


They fashioned themselves after gangster movies, young Vietnamese refugees with
spiked hair, dark sunglasses and dressing in black suits. They carved their turf
on Canal Street in Chinatown but quickly built a reputation for robberies,
extortion and murder throughout the city, in Brooklyn, Queens and the Bronx, and
as far away as Georgia and Canada.

They called themselves Born to Kill, and for more than three years,
law-enforcement officials and prosecutors say, they seemed intent to live up to
their name, preying on Asian merchants, shopkeepers and restaurateurs with a
ferocity that shocked the police and even the older, established Chinese gangs.

But now the gang's presence -- and the fear it created -- has largely evaporated
from the narrow, bustling streets of Chinatown. Its members, dispersed and
disorganized, are rarely seen at their old haunt and headquarters, the Tung Nam
Har shopping mall on Canal Street. The police say that reports of robberies and
extortions on Canal Street have fallen.

And yesterday, culminating an investigation and prosecution that began more than
a year ago, a Federal judge in Brooklyn sentenced the 36-year-old leader of Born
to Kill, David Thai, to life in prison for conspiring and committing murder,
attempted murder and a string of robberies and extortions. The judge, Carol
Bagley Amon of Federal District Court in Brooklyn, also sentenced another
ranking member of the gang, Minh Do, to 12 years in prison for robbery and
extortion.

May Rival the Mafia

In the city's growing Asian communities, particularly those in Brooklyn and
Queens, violent gangs like Born to Kill have in recent years created criminal
enterprises that police officials say may come to rival the Mafia. Fighting over
turf, they have terrorized, almost exclusively, immigrants from China and
Southeast Asia. And even as prosecutors say they have crippled Born to Kill and
another Vietnamese gang, the Green Dragons, they acknowledge that other gangs
are already vying for their turf and profits.

Still, Federal prosecutors and law enforcement officials said that the
prosecution of Born to Kill had significantly slowed, if not stopped, Asian gang
activity. They hailed the life sentence of Mr. Thai -- it followed the
sentencing of four other members last week -- as the ultimate blow to a gang the
prosecutor, Alan Vinegrad, described as "violent, ruthless and remorseless."
They say its leadership has now been devastated, its flurry of violence ended.

"We've crippled the B.T.K.," said William D. Oldham, a detective on the city's
Major Case Squad who with Daniel Koumer, an agent for the Federal Bureau of
Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms, mounted an investigation that has resulted in the
arrest of 22 gang members. "They don't have the leadership. They don't have the
presence anymore."

Evidence of Fury of Crimes

Mr. Thai and six other ranking members of Born to Kill were convicted last March
under the Racketeering Influenced Corrupt Organizations Act -- a weapon Federal
prosecutors have successfully used to gut the leadership of the Mafia, most
notably the head of the Gambino crime family, John Gotti, whose trial took place
at the same time in the same courthouse. (Mr. Gotti and Mr. Thai rode together
each morning on the bus from the jail.)

In a three-month trial, the prosecutors presented evidence of a fury of crimes
from January 1989 to August 1991, always against Asians, the extortion of dozens
of businesses on Canal Street, the robbery, extortion and eventually the murder
of the owner of a jewelry store on Canal Street, and trips to Connecticut,
Georgia and Tennessee to terrorize shopkeepers there.

Prosecutors relied heavily on a 19-year-old who agreed to testify against his
own gang, plus the 38 tapes of conversations between Mr. Thai and other gang
leaders. They also used testimony from dozens of victims.

"The force of this gang and the vulnerability of the victims was such that he
thought he could do anything and get away with it," Mr. Vinegrad said of Mr.
Thai's leadership. "He was wrong."

Enforcer for Flying Dragons

Mr. Thai emigrated from Vietnam in 1975 after Saigon fell. According to city and
Federal prosecutors, he first joined a Chinese gang, the Flying Dragons, as an
enforcer. He formed Born to Kill in 1988 after breaking away from the Flying
Dragons. The gang took its name from a slogan some American soldiers painted on
their helmets during the Vietnam War.

At its peak, Born to Kill had 50 to 100 members, mostly in New York City, but
with branches in New Jersey, California and Texas.

Detective Oldham said the break in the case came in February 1991 when Tinh Ngo,
a member arrested on a minor charge, agreed to cooperate and for six months
recorded conversations with Mr. Thai and others.

On August 12, 1991, detectives and Federal agents raided Mr. Thai's modest house
in Melville, L.I., arresting Mr. Thai and three of his lieutenants and seizing
handguns, silencers and materials for making bombs.

Doesn't Mean Collapse

Dr. Ko-Lin Chin, a professor of criminology at Rutgers University who wrote a
book on the underworld in Chinatown, said the arrests and convictions of the
leadership of Born to Kill had eased the fears of many in the Asian community.
"There's no question this is a major assault on the gang," he said, "but it
doesn't mean the gang has collapsed."

When he interviewed 70 gang members this summer for a research project, he
encountered many Born to Kill members. "They are still around," he said. "When
the opportunity arises they may want to regroup themselves."

Charles N. Walsh, who heads the Asian gang task force for the Queens District
Attorney, Richard A. Brown, said there had been a marked increase in gang
activity in Queens over the last year. Born to Kill might re-form, as the Green
Dragons appear to be doing, he said. And other Vietnamese gangs like Gum Sing,
which is based in Brooklyn, are vying to fill the gaps left behind, especially
in Queens.

LOAD-DATE: October 24, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              151 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 25, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

The Whines of War

BYLINE: By Joel Brinkley;  Joel Brinkley is an editor in the Washington bureau
of The New York Times and the author of a novel, "The Circus Master's Mission,"
about the Nicaraguan contras.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 11; Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 868 words



HONORED AND BETRAYED
Irangate, Covert Affairs, and the Secret War in Laos.
By Richard Secord with Jay Wurts.
Illustrated. 405 pp. New York:
John Wiley & Sons. $24.95.

SANCTIMONY is hardly an unusual tone for a political apologia of the sort
Richard Secord offers in "Honored and Betrayed." But the retired Air Force major
general, a central figure in the Iran-contra affair, tests his readers' patience
by telling us over and again in this autobiography how much better off the
nation might have been, had its leaders taken his advice.

If only Presidents Lyndon B. Johnson and Richard M. Nixon had fought the Vietnam
War the way he recommended, the United States might not have lost.

If only President Jimmy Carter had used Mr. Secord's model for supporting the
Shah in his final days in power, Iran might not have fallen.

If only President Ronald Reagan had followed Mr. Secord's advice in pursuing the
Iran initiative, it might have succeeded.

And when the first details of what came to be known as the Iran-contra affair
began tumbling into the public domain, if only the White House had handled the
problem his way -- that is, if President Reagan had simply read the speech Mr.
Secord wrote for him -- then the American public might have seen the whole
episode as a grand diplomatic achievement, not an ill-conceived covert blunder.

"I'm putting on my old hat," the retired general says he told a weak-kneed
Lieut. Col. Oliver L. North in November 1986, as the White House was struggling
to contain the spreading stain of scandal. "As near as I can tell there is not a
goddamned general within a mile of this place, and there has to be one because
we're all going down the tubes!"

"Yes, sir!" Colonel North is quoted as responding as he "saluted with a grin."

About half of this book is Mr. Secord's account of the Iran-contra affair. It is
an interesting narrative, though it contains little startling new information.
His principal aim is to counter the heavy criticism directed at him by
Congressional committees, journalists and others in 1987. He takes every
opportunity to poke at all of them. He is pugnacious and indignant. Still, his
counterargument is weak.

Mr. Secord set up and directed the covert program to supply the Nicaraguan
contras when Congress was trying to end American aid to the rebels. He also
helped direct shipments of arms to Iran. During the Congressional hearings on
the Iran-contra affair in 1987, the darkest question directed at Mr. Secord, a
private citizen then, was whether he had been profiteering from the arms sales.
In "Honored and Betrayed" he offers indignant denials. But the facts he marshals
are often incomplete, and some of his arguments are tortured.

The first half of the book recounts Mr. Secord's life before the Iran-contra
controversy. He had an unquestionably important military career. He was promoted
to major general far faster than most of his West Point peers. And for those who
can accept the author's account on his own highly charged, carefully selected
terms, this is an involving tale. His collaborator, Jay Wurts, has managed to
assume Mr. Secord's puff-chested manner with convincing authority.

Mr. Secord was among the first military officers assigned to Vietnam in 1962 and
continued serving in Southeast Asia off and on through the decade, including a
long assignment as an intelligence operative in Laos. Not surprisingly, given
his charge-ahead approach to the Iran-contra affair, Mr. Secord's main complaint
about the American military experience in Vietnam is that his superiors did not
fight the war smart enough or hard enough.

He says President Nixon did finally take his advice in December 1972. The
Christmas bombing that year, by Mr. Secord's assessment a gloriously successful
operation, was based on a proposal he and his Pentagon colleagues drafted a few
months earlier. "It is too much to say that the '12 days of Christmas' won
America's peace in Vietnam," he declares, "but it certainly hastened the
inevitable and, I believe, saved vastly more allied and enemy lives than it
cost." This was the argument voiced at that time by President Nixon and his
national security adviser, Henry A. Kissinger, to counter the firestorm of
criticism the Christmas bombing stirred.

MR. SECORD is less charitable about some of the men he served under during the
Iran-contra affair. By his account many were weak-willed bumblers.

He does not criticize President Reagan head on, though he directs withering
scorn at his "handlers." George Bush, he says, was far more involved in the
Iran-contra affair than Mr. Bush has ever acknowledged, but Mr. Secord offers
little evidence to support that charge.

Some other Washington figures are the subjects of direct scorn, or condemnation
by faint praise. Colonel North, for example, is described as "a pleasant young
major" when Mr. Secord first met him in 1981, "a dependable scheduler and
coordinator." This opinion seems to have changed little in later years.

Mr. Secord says he tried to save all these people from themselves. But as he
looks back, the lesson he has taken from the entire experience seems to be: "No
good deed goes unpunished."

LOAD-DATE: October 25, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Richard Secord listening to his lawyer, Thomas C. Green, at the
Iran-contra hearings in 1987. (Associated Press)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              152 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 25, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

OCT, 18-24;
Washington, Hanoi and Realpolitik

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2; Column 5; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 244 words


The announcement last week of Vietnam's pledge to release all photographs and
other archival material on missing American servicemen illustrates the new
dynamics of the post-cold war era, as well as the old dynamics of American
politics.

President Bush said the Vietnamese move -- confirmed in a mission to Hanoi last
weekend led by retired Gen. John Vessey -- was a breakthrough, but "only a
beginning" toward normalizing relations and ending the trade embargo of Vietnam.

His announcement had the unmistakable feel of domestic politicking, not least
because Hanoi's new openness is actually months old.

It has already quietly released nearly 5,000 photos of dead Americans, former
prisoners, crash sites and the like -- the bulk of them duplicates, but some
resolving a few M.I.A. cases.

The new flow of material is largely thanks to the go-between efforts of a
historical researcher, Ted Schweitzer, whose successful private forays into
Vietnamese military museums led to his being hired by the Pentagon as a
consultant. General Vessey in Hanoi exacted an explicit pledge to formalize the
working arrangement already under way.

Both sides have much to gain. Vietnam, no longer Soviet-backed, needs outside
help to modernize the country, but Washington is blocking loans. The United
States wants to outflank Japan, which is about to break ranks and offer Hanoi
aid. American companies don't want to lose out on what could be a new Asian
tiger.

LOAD-DATE: October 25, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: John W. Vessey Jr. (Associated Press)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              153 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 25, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THE NATION;
Lily-Livered Neo-Wilsonian! The New Political Tag Game

BYLINE: By THOMAS L. FRIEDMAN

SECTION: Section 4; Page 4; Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 948 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


AS the saying goes, you can't tell the players without a scorecard, but what if
the game changes and the scorecard stays the same? That is the situation this
political season, when the labels "conservative" and "liberal" no longer seem to
fit the players, but no one has quite come up with new ones.

"These labels now disinform rather than inform," said Senator Daniel Patrick
Moynihan, a veteran of many political wars. "We are headed for a new political
language to describe a new political terrain -- one in which we are not the
economic colossus of the world, which we have been for a century, and one in
which we are not locked in a struggle with totalitarianism, which we have been
for half a century."

Fear not. Ideologues and pundits are already busy sewing new uniforms, and it
may not be long before you hear about "neo-Wilsonians" taking the field against
"realists" and "Trumanites" in Democratic foreign policy debates, while "Murphy
Brown traditionalists" and "libertarians" slug it out on the Republican side.

Don't like those labels? Then wait five minutes. White House wags have just
labeled the young Republican interns in the Bush campaign as "mini-cons," and
Pat Buchanan as a "neo-Calhounist," a reference to Mr. Buchanan's isolationist,
state's-rights agenda evocative of John C. Calhoun's.

From 'Kook' to 'Nut'

The New Republic coined "homo-cons" to describe gay conservatives, and its
editor in chief, Martin Peretz, came up with "paleo-liberals" to describe those
diehard, pro-quota, shun-the-use-of-force Democrats who he fears will try a
comeback in a Clinton Administration.

Spy magazine topped everyone, though. It has just presented its own political
spectrum for the 1990's, describing the players from far left to far right as
follows: "kook," "progressive," "concerned," "moderate," "right-thinking,"
"patriot," "nut."

The political agenda that made sense of the terms "conservative" and "liberal"
was set in stone by the New Deal. The question then was what roles should a
market economy and the welfare state play in providing every American a decent
standard of living and in moderating cyclical economic downturns. Liberals
favored more government, conservatives less.

Today some new questions are on the table. In domestic policy the question is:
what is the proper role of government in dealing with an American economy that
no longer seems structurally equipped to remain competitive in a globally
intertwined world?

In foreign policy, the old question was how best to respond to the Soviet Union.
Today the new question is how best to respond to a world in which nations are
simultaneously fragmenting ethnically and politically while consolidating
economically. That is, how best to respond to a world in which ethnic-cleansing
zones and free-trade zones exist side-by-side?

For these questions, several Democratic schools of thought are now in session.
In foreign policy, the most prominent group in the Clinton campaign is the
"neo-Wilsonians." This term applies to Democrats who want foreign policy focused
more on values and spreading democracy, but who also believe that it can't be
overly moralistic or averse to the use of force to resolve complex crises like
Bosnia. Also in the Clinton camp are "neo-Trumanites," who share the
neo-Wilsonians' sober internationalism, but are a little bit more hard-headed.

That Annoying 'Label Lag'

Anthony Lake, Mr. Clinton's top foreign policy adviser, who years ago got tabbed
as a dove for opposing the Vietnam war, argues that the labels "dove" and "hawk"
are meaningless today, when the issues are totally different and a neo-Wilsonian
like himself advocates a limited use of force to deal with situations like the
Balkans. Mr. Lake may be experiencing what will be the most common political
malady of the 1990's: "label lag." As he put it: "The world has changed and to
carry a label that contradicts your views is very irritating."

In both parties there also are "realists," who think America should be involved
only in foreign policy problems that touch on immediate strategic interests, and
"isolationists," who don't believe in foreign policy at all.

In domestic affairs, there is a "libertarian school" among Republicans, led by
Jack Kemp, that argues for individual choice on personal questions, like
abortion and schools, and for laissez-faire economics. Its adherents should find
themselves opposed by cultural "traditionalists," prominent among them Pat
Robertson, who say Government should have a role in shaping family values and
moral choices. In between will be the "problem solvers" -- a Jim Baker-Gerald
Ford group of Republican pragmatists who favor limited tax increases, limited
welfare and limited family values, but are motivated by solving problems, not
reaching ideological goals.

On economic issues, Mr. Clinton is straddling two Democratic camps. One is the
"Wall Street liberals," who argue that the economy is not merely in a cyclical
trough but a structural decline that can be reversed only by improving
productivity and competitiveness. They want to use market forces to carry out
this agenda, while also focusing keenly on longer-term deficit reduction. The
other school, which might be called the "Japan liberals," favors
Government-directed industrial policies like those that have made Japan such a
competitive dragon, and is willing to be slightly less aggressive about the
deficit to protect social programs and growth.

Still don't like those labels? You may not be alone.

Senator Moynihan, referring to the Republicans who in 1884 deserted their
candidate to vote for Grover Cleveland, said, "Put me down as a mugwump."

LOAD-DATE: October 25, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              154 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 25, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Profiles of the Crew Aboard the Shuttle

SECTION: Section 1; Page 31; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 627 words



James D. Wetherbee -- Mission Commander

Commander Wetherbee, a 39-year-old Navy pilot, is flying his second shuttle
mission in less than three years. He was the pilot of the Columbia when it
orbited the Earth for 11 days (a record until Columbia's 13-day flight in July),
and has logged more than 3,500 hours of flight time in civilian and space agency
aircraft since being designated a naval aviator in 1976.

Commander Wetherbee is a native of Flushing, Queens. He received a bachelor's
degree in aerospace engineering from the University of Notre Dame in 1974, and
received his commission in the Navy in 1975.

He and his wife, Robin, have two children, Kelly, 6, and Jennifer, 5.

Michael A. Baker -- Pilot

Captain Baker, 38, is the pilot on his second shuttle mission. He also served as
a pilot on a nine-day mission on the Atlantis in August 1991. He has logged more
than 3,600 hours of flying time since completing naval flight training in 1977,
and has been an astronaut since 1986.

Captain Baker was born in Memphis but considers Lemoore, Calif., where his
parents live, his hometown. He received a bachelor's degree in aerospace
engineering from the University of Texas in 1975.

He and his wife, Deidra, have two children, Lesley, 12, and Jane, 10.

Steven Glenwood MacLean -- Canadian Payload Specialist

Dr. MacLean, 37, is taking part in his first shuttle mission. He was designated
a payload specialist during the Canex-2 series of Canadian space experiments in
1985.

Dr. MacLean was born and raised in Ottawa. He received a bachelor's degree in
1977 and a doctorate in 1983, both in physics from York University in Downsview,
Ontario.

He and his wife, Nadine, have one son, Jean-Philippe, 2.

 Tamara E. Jernigan -- Mission Specialist

Dr. Jernigan, 33, the crew's youngest member, is flying her second mission on a
shuttle. She has logged more than 218 hours in space since becoming an astronaut
in 1986.

Dr. Jernigan was born in Chattanooga, Tenn. She received bachelor's and master's
degrees in physics and in engineering science from Stanford University in 1981
and 1983, respectively. She then received a master's degree in science from the
University of California at Berkeley in 1985 and a doctorate in space physics
and astronomy from Rice University in 1988.

Dr. Jernigan is single.

William M. Shepherd -- Mission Specialist

Captain Shepherd, 43, is flying his third shuttle mission since 1988 and has
logged 203 hours in space. While on the Discovery, he helped deploy the Ulysses
spacecraft, sent to explore the polar regions of the Sun.

Captain Shepherd is a native of Oak Ridge, Tenn., but considers Babylon, L.I.,
his hometown. He received a bachelor's degree in aerospace engineering from the
Naval Academy in 1971, and both an ocean engineer's and master's of mechanical
engineering degree from the Massachussetts Institute of Technology in 1978.

Captain Shepherd is single.

Charles Lacy Veach -- Mission Specialist

Mr. Veach, 48, is a former Air Force pilot making his second shuttle mission
since becoming an astronaut in 1985. During his first mission, Mr. Veach was
responsible for the operation of special telescopes and cameras that recorded
previously unattainable observations of the Earth's atmosphere. He has logged
more than 5,000 hours in flight.

Mr. Veach was born in Chicago but considers Honolulu his hometown. He received a
bachelor's degree in engineering management from the Air Force Academy in 1966.
Following his commission as an Air Force pilot in 1967, he served on numerous
wartime air campaigns, including a 275-mission combat tour in Vietnam.

He and his wife, Alice, have two children, Marshall, 20, and Katherine, 18.

NAME: James D. Wetherbee; Michael A. Baker; Steven G. Maclean; Tamara E.
Jernigan; William M. Shepherd; Charles Lacy Veach

LOAD-DATE: October 25, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              155 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 25, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Central Link in Release of Hanoi M.I.A. Photos: A U.S. Researcher

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 10; Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 715 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 24


At the center of a major breakthrough in American efforts to resolve cases of
servicemen missing since the Vietnam War is an American researcher who served as
a conduit for Hanoi and was paid by the Pentagon as a consultant.

Those who know the researcher, Theodore Schweitzer, say they are not surprised
that a man they describe as an adventurer should be identified this week as the
principal link in the transfer to Washington of a trove of Vietnamese
photographs and documents on American servicemen.

That windfall of material and Hanoi's pledge to turn over all documents,
pictures and personal effect relating to American servicemen led President Bush
to announce on Friday that the United States could begin to write "the last
chapter of the Vietnam War," an accounting that Administration officials say
could lead to a normalization of relations after 20 bitter years in which
Vietnam repeatedly denied it had any more information on the missing.

But Mr. Schweitzer, working in Hanoi's military museum archives since February,
uncovered and passed on to Washington, apparently with Vietnamese Government
approval, enough material to significantly speed up the resolution of many cases
of missing Americans.

'Old Indochina Hand'

The 50-year-old Mr. Schweitzer, who has spent much of his adult life in
Southeast Asia or on projects involving Vietnam, has been working in Hanoi since
February or March on a book about the Vietnamese Army. Officials say he made
contact with the Pentagon and offered to share information that he could not get
published elsewhere.

Pentagon officials call him a valuable consultant whom they have supplied with
computers and an expense account. They describe him as an "old Indochina hand"
who happened to be in the right place at the right time, and say they have no
qualms about the authenticity of the material they are receiving.

In interviews with representatives of international organizations or government
agencies that knew of his work, others offered differing accounts of Mr.
Schweitzer's activities in southeast Asia over more than a decade, but they
declined to be quoted directly. They wondered how he gained the confidence of
Hanoi, where few American scholars get open-ended privileges to work.

Many of his former associates also declined to speak for the record about Mr.
Schweitzer, who appeared at the Pentagon and the White House Rose Garden this
week. The Pentagon, which coordinated all queries about him, declined requests
for interviews with Mr. Schweitzer, although he did appear briefly on an ABC
News broadcast Friday, speaking only about his work in Hanoi.

Campaign for Medicines

Over the years, he has told of undercover intelligence missions in Vietnam
during the war and of an assignment to burn American Embassy records in Phnom
Penh in the face of the advancing Khmer Rouge. Government intelligence agencies
will not comment on agents and operations as matter of policy. But the Pentagon
said this week that it did not know of him until he approached officials this
year through intermediaries.

The Vietnamese knew him as the head of an independent campaign in the 1980's to
supply medicines to the country, for which they were grateful. Born in Missouri,
Mr. Schweitzer married a Thai and worked in the early 1980's in the southern
Thai port of Songkhla for the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.

In an interview with an Italian television network in 1988, Mr. Schweitzer left
the impression that he was still working for the refugee group. In fact, he had
left the agency more than seven years earlier.

He did receive commendations from the United Nations organization for risking
his life to save Vietnamese boat people from pirates. But officials working in
Thailand at the time said that he had "embroidered" the facts in recounting his
exploits on behalf of Vietnamese boat people for a "Drama in Real Life" article
in Reader's Digest in January 1986.

                             --------------------


Hanoi Urges Normal U.S. Ties

HANOI, Vietnam, Oct. 24 (Reuters) -- The Vietnamese Government urged the United
States today to normalize diplomatic relations and stop linking such ties to a
resolution of the fate of American servicemen missing from the Vietnam War.

LOAD-DATE: October 25, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              156 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 25, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Very Private Candidate In a Very Public Race

BYLINE: By KIRK JOHNSON,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 40; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1534 words

DATELINE: FARMINGTON, Conn.


Brook Johnson, with his jacket off and his gold horse cuff links gleaming,
looked back over his shoulder in the car he uses for campaigning and did a
cackling imitation of an old woman.

"Johnson wouldn't know -- he's a millionaire," Mr. Johnson crowed in a tone of
scorn, mimicking the character in a radio commercial for Senator Christopher J.
Dodd. That one ad, more than Mr. Dodd's more conventional attacks on Mr.
Johnson's business career or the attacks on Mr. Johnson's motives in running for
the Senate, hit home, he said.

Mr. Johnson is a millionaire who cringes at the very word. He clearly enjoys the
trappings of wealth, from having his own polo mounts to his BMW to his homes in
London and Florida. But the image he projects, in private and on the campaign
trail as Mr. Dodd's Republican challenger, is less the genteel horse-country
aristocrat than the flinty shop-floor scrapper made good, with all the
resentments still rattling around inside him.

"Everything I have I earned," Mr. Johnson said in an interview. "And remember
where Chris Dodd was. He was in Willimantic with his father, a United States
Senator, and my Dad was working on the second shift at the American Thread
Company in the same town."

Enigmatic Clues

It is from such small moments that one gets a clue to the spirit and character
of Mr. Johnson, who has never before run for public office, or for that matter
been involved in politics at all. And clues, for the most part, are about all
you get. Even his choice of political heroes offers little help in defining the
man who wants to be Connecticut's next senator. They are, in Mr. Johnson's
order: Winston Churchill, John F. Kennedy and Ronald Reagan.

He climbed the corporate ladder in the rough and tumble world of textile
manufacturing, "getting my hands dirty," as he puts it. He enlisted in the Army
at the height of the Vietnam War in 1968.

Unknown only six months ago by Republican leaders even in his own hometown of
Greenwich, he chose, for his first leap into public life, a statewide run
against a two-term Senator from one of Connecticut's most prominent public
families. Mr. Dodd's father was Thomas J. Dodd, who served in the Senate from
1959 to 1971.

It is a story that would seem made for politics, and yet Mr. Johnson refuses to
discuss some things, like his private business, and dismisses other subjects,
like his military service, as irrelevant. In a year in which the Presidential
candidates have seemed at times obsessed with Vietnam-era Angst, Mr. Johnson
simply waves off his own enlistment, saying "it was a long time ago."

Scorning Publicity

And he has at times seemed as openly scornful of reporters and free publicity as
he is of his millionaire image, failing to show up for interviews that might
help flesh out his public persona, and meetings with editorial writers who will
make recommendations to their readers about whom to vote for. The New Haven
Register, for example, endorsed President Bush last Sunday -- presumably
indicating fertile ground for a Republican Senate candidate -- but Mr. Johnson
snubbed the paper on Monday.

The paper's editorial page editor, Charles P. Kochakian, said a campaign aide
called five minutes before the 10:30 A.M. meeting to say Mr. Johnson could not
make it. It was the second time, Mr. Kochakian said, that a meeting with Mr.
Johnson had fallen through at the last minute.

"I've been covering politics for 20 years and I've never seen anything like it,"
said Steve Kotchko, news director for the Connecticut Radio Network. "Usually
these guys are running to you."

Mr. Kotchko said he twice tried to get Mr. Johnson to appear on a 30-minute
interview program that is distributed to more than 20 radio stations around the
state. The candidate simply failed to show up the first time; the second time,
after Mr. Kotchko said he had spent a day calling the campaign once every hour,
an aide said the interview couldn't be arranged. Mr. Kotchko said this week he
will have to explain to his listeners what happened, if only to avoid appearing
biased because Mr. Dodd has been on the show and Mr. Johnson has not.

If time were on Mr. Johnson's side, such attitudes might be an asset, a sort of
take-me-as-I-am anti-politician's bravado. But for a campaign that began from a
standing start only six months ago, Mr. Johnson's scheduling troubles and
sometimes abrasive manner have turned what would have been a fast-paced ride to
Nov. 3 in the best of circumstances into what sometimes seems more like a
runaway train.

"It hasn't been bumpy," said Richard Foley Jr., the State Republican Party
chairman. "It's been a roller coaster."

Starting From Scratch

Starting from scratch with a candidate not even known in his own party, Mr.
Foley said, has required the campaign to build an organization, develop contacts
and get Mr. Johnson and his ideas known, all at a full-tilt scramble; not to
mention persuading people to vote for him. Mr. Foley said he expects that by
Election Day at least 90 percent of voters will at least know who Mr. Johnson
is, and that Mr. Johnson will pull off an upset victory and win. Time is the
enemy, Mr. Foley said.

Time does not seem to be helping chip away Mr. Dodd's wide lead in the polls.
According to a statewide poll by the University of Connecticut's Institute for
Social Inquiry released on Friday, Mr. Dodd's lead held steady through the last
few weeks. The poll said 51 percent of the 505 registered voters questioned said
they planned to vote for Mr. Dodd, compared with 30 percent for Mr. Johnson, and
19 percent undecided. The poll had a margin of error of plus or minus 5
percentage points. A poll earlier in the month showed Mr. Dodd with a 20-point
lead.

But Mr. Johnson, who is 46 years old, said he is used to uphill fights. He grew
up struggling, he said, partly because his family did not have a lot of money,
and partly because his father apparently thought that struggle produced
character. Born in Willimantic, a sagging old industrial town in eastern
Connecticut that was once at the heart of the state's now moribund textile
industry, he worked his way through college at North Carolina State University,
where he graduated with a degree in textile engineering.

After the Army, where he served mostly in Europe, Mr. Johnson went back to
school under the G.I. bill at the London School of Economics. His career since
then, like his father's, has been entirely in textiles, mostly at Collins &
Aikman, a Tennessee-based company where Mr. Johnson rose from sales trainee to
division president in 15 years.

Unwelcome Questions

Those are the years Mr. Johnson most likes to talk about, and those are years on
which his television commercials are based, that his company, while he worked
there, created thousands of manufacturing jobs. What happened after he and other
executives bought Mr. Johnson's division and turned it into a private company in
1987 is private and the now-public candidate resents even being asked about it.
It would help his competitors, he said.

He also does not like to be asked why, according to voting records in his home
town of Greenwich, he showed so little interest in politics until this year,
only voting twice in the last 10 elections. The demands of his business kept him
out of town a lot, Mr. Johnson has said.

"The business world is one where you operate without public scrutiny on every
decision, and where authority flows from the top down," said State Senator
William H. Nickerson, a Republican from Greenwich who supports Mr. Johnson. In
politics, Mr. Nickerson said, everything works by building consensus and almost
every act is public. "I think he's made an extraordinary transition from those
two different worlds," Mr. Nickerson said.

What Mr. Johnson does like to talk about is the Federal deficit. In attacking
Mr. Dodd, he has said that term limits, a balanced budget amendment, and
campaign spending limits intended to curtail the need for special-interest
donations would all dovetail to help reduce the nation's $4 trillion debt, which
Mr. Johnson argues could be erased entirely in six years.

Mr. Johnson and Mr. Dodd do agree on many issues. Both support abortion rights,
although Mr. Johnson believes that parents or guardians of minors should be
notified. Both oppose military intervention in the turmoil in central Europe.
Both also favor overhauling the nation's legal system to cut down on lawsuits
that raise medical malpractice insurance and clog the court system.

Such broad agreement doesn't help voters distinguish between the two men, and so
probably only helps the better-known Mr. Dodd. But Mr. Johnson is still upbeat
about what he has described from the beginning as his longshot chance of an
upset victory.

If he loses, will he run again for another office? He's not sure. As his car
rolled through the northwest Connecticut hills, Mr. Johnson paused and looked
out the window.

"Whether or not I'll run for another office, or get involved as an individual,
as a citizen trying to reform government, I want to do something," he said.
"It's an obligation of all of us who aren't politicians to take our spot at the
wheel."

NAME: Brook Johnson

LOAD-DATE: October 25, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

SERIES: Connecticut's Senate campaign: First of two profiles.

GRAPHIC: Photo: "Everything I have I earned," said Brook Johnson, the Republican
candidate for the United States Senate in Connecticut. Mr. Johnson is angry that
his opponent, Senator Christopher J. Dodd, says his status as a millionaire
would impede his ability to relate to the needs of his constituency. (Steve
Miller for The New York Times)

TYPE: Biography; Series

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              157 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 25, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

What Capote Said About Kerouac

SECTION: Section 13LI; Page 17; Column 6; Long Island Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 156 words


In "At Northport Watering Hole, Kerouac Was Just Another Drinker" [Sept. 13],
Patrick Fenton neglected to mention Truman Capote's flip dismissal of Kerouac's
work as follows, "That's not writing, that's typing." While this evaluation was
not without merit, I must agree with Mike McGrady, quoted by Fenton as having
declared Kerouac "important." Certainly, "On the Road" was a faithful depiction
of youthful despair over the order of things as they saw it. McGrady's praise is
not to be taken lightly, coming as it does from a serious journalist ("A Dove in
Vietnam") and mastermind of the boffo sex spoof "Naked Came the Stranger." I
would add that Capote was a bit of a poseur himself, his enormous gifts
notwithstanding. His professed invention a new genre, the fictional biography
(or whatever exactly he called it) with "In Cold Blood" was really a veiled
excuse for not having to be accurate.

EWIN RITCHIE
Elmont

LOAD-DATE: October 31, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              158 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 25, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Al Gore's Double Life

BYLINE: By Alex S. Jones;  Alex S. Jones, who won a Pulitzer Prize for reporting
in 1987, left The New York Times this month to begin work with his wife, Susan
E. Tifft, on a biography of the Ochs-Sulzberger family.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 40; Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 4931 words


On a balmy August night in Waco, Tex., as moths swarm around the floodlights
above a sea of banner-waving Democrats, Al Gore is on a stem-winding,
give-'em-hell roll. Standing in shirt sleeves on an improvised stage, Gore whips
the assembled thousands hard as he charges the Bush Administration with ruining
the economy. "What time is it?" he yells, echoing the rhetorical flourish he
first used during his acceptance speech at the Democratic National Convention.
Waving his arms like an orchestra leader, he leads the crowd in a shouting,
chanting denunciation of George Bush and Dan Quayle: "It's time for them to go!"

And then, after the slight pause of a speaker who knows how to connect with his
audience, Gore moves to the meat of his message: "Do you have the courage to
change?" he cries, punching the air as sweat pours off him. "You have to have
the courage to change. You have to reach out for something different."

It is a good night for Gore, who seems entirely at home with this rural,
blue-collar crowd. And yet, the next morning, a very different Gore is on
display. Standing beside Bill Clinton at an impromptu news conference at a power
station outside Waco, Gore looks wooden and startlingly aloof; his arms dangle
awkwardly like a department store mannequin, and his demeanor is so icily
serious that he could easily pass for a Secret Service agent.

When Gore's turn comes at the microphone, he seems a world away from the
effortlessly eloquent and persuasive politician of last night's rally. His voice
slows, as though he were speaking to an audience that was a little dim. His tone
sounds preachy, ultra-earnest, like a man who wants desperately to be believed,
but is not really sure how. "George Bush and Dan Quayle taking credit for a
clean environment is like a weatherman taking credit for a sunny day and then
looking for another four-year contract," he stiffly tells the campaign press
corps, sounding more like a professor than a candidate on the stump.

After the news conference, several reporters can be heard muttering that, like a
campaign version of Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde, it is hard to be sure which of the
two Al Gores is going to appear: the relaxed, open, even fiery Gore, who has
emerged in recent years, or the self-conscious, distant introvert who seems to
live behind a Plexiglas shield that even close friends cannot fully penetrate.

It is oddly endearing for a politician of Gore's stature to be handicapped by
what is, in part, a problem of communication. But, as Gore himself explains, on
these stiff occasions he cannot hear the remoteness in his own voice; he is
tone-deaf to his own flat notes. Perhaps it is because Gore has lived so many
years inside his own head that he does not hear the music of speech the way more
extroverted personalities, like Bill Clinton, Ronald Reagan and the majority of
other politicians, do.

People who know Gore well almost always say the same thing in describing him: he
is a lot more complicated than he seems. A straight arrow who, by his own
admission, smoked marijuana for years, a deeply religious man who does not
hesitate to go for the political jugular -- as he proved in his opening
statement at the Vice-Presidential debate -- Gore is clearly a man of different
parts. According to his wife, Tipper, who has a master's degree in psychology
from George Peabody College in Nashville, Gore is, even now, as a candidate for
high office, in the process of integrating the contradictory sides of his
personality.

Out on the campaign trail, the personality switches can be jarring. For
instance, riding on his campaign bus down a Texas highway, there is the Gore who
does not hesitate to indulge his taste in cheerfully vulgar humor. "Look at
this, Dad," says his 19-year-old daughter, Karenna, as she slaps a supermarket
tabloid in front of her father. Gore glances at the tabloid and giggling like a
high-school kid, gives a dramatic reading of the sad saga of "the gassy granny,"
a German grandmother who had been so embarrassed by a burst of flatulence in
church that she jumped off a cliff.

But a few weeks later in Kennebunkport, Me., a different Gore shows up at a
fund-raising event -- a distant, awkward candidate who gives a perfunctory
speech and seems to wish he were elsewhere. "You could see the lips pursing,"
said Ralph Hall, executive editor of The York County Coast Star in Kennebunk and
an old friend of Gore's.

GORE ALLOWS that he is sometimes out of sync with those around him. He says he
is a man whose natural inclination is to deal with the world intellectually, who
likes nothing better than to withdraw into himself and think his way through a
problem. His reputation in Washington has been that of a technology and
public-policy wonk. Now he is firmly pushing himself to become a more sentient
being, a man not afraid to put his emotions in full public view.

Indeed, few other candidates for high office have gone so far as the 44-year-old
Gore in placing their psyches on display. In his best-selling book, "Earth in
the Balance: Ecology and the Human Spirit," the Senator describes having "to
look inside myself and confront some difficult and painful questions about what
I am really seeking in my own life, and why."

Gore had found in what he calls "the global environmental crisis" a metaphor for
his own unrest, "an inner crisis that is," he writes, "for lack of a better
word, spiritual." He browbeats himself equally for his failure to live an
environmentally responsible life (e.g. using his car's
chlorofluorocarbon-spewing air-conditioner on the way to make a speech about how
CFC's should be banned) and for more personal failings ("my own tendency to put
a finger to the political winds and proceed cautiously"). And he pledges that he
will no longer be party to "the failures of candor, evasions of responsibility
and timidity of vision that characterize too many of us in government."

But Gore is still clearly torn between his idealism and political pragmatism.
During the campaign, Vice President Quayle, among others, has attacked him as an
"environmental extremist." Gore says that he recants "not a single word" of his
aggressive environmental program. But he also concedes that he has had to
soft-pedal some environmental proposals, like his call for stringent
fuel-efficiency standards, in places like Michigan. Gore says that while the
environment is still the centerpiece of his personal campaign message, his
larger objective is to do all he can to help Bill Clinton win the election.

"The pressures of a campaign are different from the pressures of serving in
office," he says. "I have to admit that knowing what national campaigns are
like, I might well have been more vulnerable to the timidity that these national
campaigns demand of a candidate, but I like to think I would have written
exactly the same book."

MANY AMERICANS, WHO HAD formed their dominant impressions of Gore during his
disappointing run for the Presidency in 1988, were introduced to the other Gore
in July at the convention. Speaking in front of projected images of his
9-year-old son, Albert 3d, he described the opening day of the baseball season
in 1989, when he thought his son had been killed. "I want to tell you this
straight from my heart," Gore said. "That experience changed me forever."

Outside Memorial Stadium in Baltimore after the game, Albert had darted in front
of a car and been knocked 30 feet in the air, then dragged across the pavement
for 20 feet more. By the time his father got to him, he was lying in a gutter
without pulse or breath; his eyes were open in what Gore described in the speech
as "the empty stare of death."

As Gore held his son, he was plunged into a grief so immeasurable and despairing
as to be fathomable only to those who have lost a small child. More than three
years after that afternoon, during an interview, he involuntarily flinches as
though hit in the stomach upon hearing the story of another little boy who had
not been so lucky as Albert, who has now fully recovered.

After the convention speech, some critics suggested Gore had traded on his son's
pain and a private family issue to further his own political ambitions,
especially when he compared the resurrection of the Democratic Party to the
recovery of his wounded son. But the Gores remain unapologetic. "That happened
to us, in public, and we dealt with it in public," Tipper Gore says. "We kept as
much private as we could, but it's become a part of our lives, and it's part of
who we are and very much a part of who Al is, and I think that it was courageous
of him to reveal that. He's very much a different person in many ways because of
that trauma, and if you want to know him, you have to know what happened."

Although Gore describes his son's accident as the catalyst, the ground had been
well prepared for another side of his personality to emerge. In 1984, he had
been cast into a depression by the death of his sister, Nancy, his only sibling,
from lung cancer. Nancy, who was 10 years older, had been protective of him, and
she had been heavily involved in his four Congressional campaigns, as well his
successful run for the Senate in 1984 (she died without ever knowing he had
won).

Four years later, Gore's dismal performance in the Presidential race came as a
cruel shock to a man who had lived, by and large, a charmed life. With his
clean-cut good looks, Harvard education and impressive pedigree as the son of a
famous United States Senator, Gore had rarely encountered doors that were closed
to him. "I had just lost a Presidential election, having given it everything
that I had, and encountered the limits of my capacity to persuade people of
policies I felt so deeply needed to be followed," he recalls.

After the voters spurned him, Gore had thrown himself with his usual
obsessiveness into studying the environment, an issue he had become interested
in soon after entering the House of Representatives. Soon he had resumed his
normal frenetic pace of meetings, hearings, luncheons and preparations for
another possible run for the Presidency.

But then came his son's accident. Immediately Gore canceled his entire calendar,
and he and Tipper spent the next month at Albert's side at Johns Hopkins
Children's Center in Baltimore. "All these things that had loomed so large, not
only in my daily life, but in my whole set of priorities, all of a sudden didn't
amount to a hill of beans," Gore says.

And surprisingly, Gore found himself a little less disconnected from the world.
"There was an outpouring of empathy and compassion from people I didn't know,
from people I did know but didn't really know -- people who ran the elevators at
the Capitol and the subway car from the Senate Office Building to the Capitol,
police officers, janitors, secretaries, staff in the Senate. People who I
suddenly came to understand had, in many cases, gone through experiences worse
than the one my family had gone through and were carrying these heavy burdens in
their hearts, without giving any indication outwardly that I had picked up --
partly because I wasn't paying attention."

For a man who had always kept much of his emotional life tightly contained, the
public suffering of his family became a release. For the first time, he allowed
his feelings of vulnerability to come out, and, as he recounts it, the
explorations of those feelings gradually expanded into reconsideration of his
entire life. In the months that followed, Gore began work on "Earth in the
Balance," writing it himself at night in his parents' Capitol Hill apartment.

In the summer of 1991, Gore announced that he would not enter the race for the
Presidential nomination. "I would like to be President," he said in a statement,
"but I am also a father, and I feel deeply about my responsibility to my
children." While Gore insists that he was thinking solely of the needs of his
family in the aftermath of his son's ordeal, skeptics contend that he may also
have been thinking about President Bush's huge popularity from the gulf war.
Around the same time, a number of Democrats considered leading candidates for
the nomination, including Lloyd Bentsen, Richard Gephardt and Jay Rockefeller,
had also decided not to run.

This May, Warren Christopher, a lawyer with long experience in Democratic
politics who was heading up Clinton's Vice-Presidential search committee, met
with Gore to sound him out about who he thought would be good for the ticket.
"We talked for nearly an hour," Christopher recalls, and Gore spoke
enthusiastically about a number of possible candidates. Christopher says that
only in the last two or three minutes of the conversation did he ask about
Gore's own interest. "It was a very guarded, reluctant response, and he said
that was something he would have to think about for a long time," Christopher
says. But Gore did not rule it out.

A month later, Christopher called Gore in Rio de Janeiro, where the Senator was
issuing daily attacks at the Earth Summit on the Bush Administration's
environmental policies. Christopher wanted to know if Gore would be willing to
place his name on a short list for the nomination. Gore told him he would let
him know the following day. As far as Gore was concerned, his son and entire
family had healed considerably during the year he had spent not running for the
Presidency. "I thought about it," Gore says, "and I reframed the question to
take the personal ambition part out of it, because I didn't want to do it in
that sense. I didn't expect it. I didn't seek it. When I said yes, the question
to which I answered yes was, 'Were you willing to give your country a better
chance to change?' -- not 'Do you want to run for Vice President?' "

And how would he respond to those who might roll their eyes at such
high-mindedness?

"Well, I don't care," Gore replies without hesitation.

WHEN GORE'S FATHER, the 84-year-old former United States Senator Albert Gore
Sr., learned that Bill Clinton had chosen his son to be the nominee for Vice
President, he told a reporter, "We raised him for it." This is in part true. But
Al Gore's upbringing -- and the expectations that came with it -- have also been
an obstacle to his political achievements. Which may be why Gore resents the
suggestion that he was ever put in early training for a political career.

"That's not true," Gore responds heatedly when confronted with his father's
remark. "When I was growing up, I don't ever remember a time when either of my
parents said: 'Don't you want to go into politics? Don't you think you would
like to do this or that.' I don't ever remember a time."

Despite protestations that his childhood was normal, Gore seemed to grow up much
faster than most of his peers. "When I talked with him, I almost had to look at
him to see whether I was talking to a child or an adult," recalls Eleanor
Smotherman, Gore's second-grade teacher in Carthage.

One reason for Gore's accelerated maturity may have been that throughout his
childhood, he lived in two worlds that could hardly have been more different. As
the son of a prominent senator, Gore spent half of each year in the Fairfax
Hotel on Massachusetts Avenue in Washington. The Fairfax, now the Ritz-Carlton,
was then mainly a residential hotel and was owned by a Gore relative. When Gore
was growing up in the 50's, his father and mother, Pauline, were at the center
of the capital's high society. Big things were expected of the elder Gore, who
was a serious contender for the Democratic Vice-Presidential nomination in 1956.

During holidays and Congressional recesses in the summer, Senator and Mrs. Gore
returned to Tennessee and, as an inseparable team, spent most of their time on
an endless round of appearances, speeches and constituent fence-mending.
Usually, young Al was left in the care of Alota and William Thompson, the tenant
farmers who ran the Gores' spread outside Carthage, a small town about 50 miles
east of Nashville. In stark contrast to the elegantly appointed Fairfax, the
Thompson home had no indoor plumbing and was heated by a single coal-burning
fireplace. Al shared a bed with the Thompsons' only child, Gordon.

At the age of 5, when he began living part time with the Thompsons, Gore adopted
a pattern he would repeat, instinctively filling a void created by the many
absences of his parents. The Thompsons, he found, offered the unconditional love
his own parents did not provide. Alota, a nurse, became like a second mother to
Al. "She loved him as much as she did me," recalls Gordon, who now lives just
down the road from Gore's farm.

Gore, essentially, adopted the Thompsons as a second family, demanding to stay
with them whenever his parents were not around. Their home became a kind of
emotional citadel, a refuge from the larger world, where great expectations
awaited him. Even then, he was entranced by politics. Gordon recalls his friend
sitting transfixed in front of the television watching a political convention.
"He was real interested in it, and he knew a lot about politics, even when he
was small," he says.

When Gore was 13, he found a second surrogate family in the Carthage area. Donna
Armistead, who was nearly 16, was the attractive, tomboyish sister of one of
Gore's friends. Despite their age difference, Gore was bold enough to invite her
to a drive-in movie. Double-dating with her brother, they talked all night in
the back seat. The next day, he asked her to see no one else, and she agreed.
Their relationship endured throughout Gore's high-school years and, as with the
Thompsons, he effectively joined her church-going family.

"What he didn't get from his family he picked up from my own," recalls
Armistead, who now works for a Nashville physician. "I guess he kind of got a
nurturing that he was lacking."

After spending summers in Carthage with Donna and a group of buddies he'd worked
with for years in the corn fields, he returned to Washington each fall to attend
St. Albans, one of the nation's most exclusive schools. Armistead remembers
that, throughout his high-school years, Gore usually wrote her twice each day
and called every Saturday night at 7:30 from St. Albans.

But Gore kept the two worlds he occupied very much separate. Not once did he
ever invite Donna Armistead to St. Albans. Indeed, Reed E. Hundt, one of Gore's
friends at St. Albans, was not even aware of Armistead's existence. "I never
knew about her," he said. And though he developed strong friendships with a
tight-knit group his own age who lived near the Gore farm, he rarely talked to
them of his Washington life.

At a party around the time of Gore's graduation from St. Albans, he met Mary
Elizabeth Aitcheson, known since childhood as Tipper after a favorite nursery
rhyme. Tipper, like Donna, was outgoing and warm, but as the
private-school-educated granddaughter of a prominent banker, she traveled in a
different world. After a few dates, Tipper and Al had already begun talking
about how many children they would have. That summer Gore broke off his
relationship with Armistead, who a year later burned hundreds of his letters on
the eve of her wedding. Though Gore and Tipper did not marry until after
college, they have been together ever since that summer 27 years ago.

Despite their apparently traditional marital roles, both Gore and Tipper
describe their relationship as a partnership of equals. A child of divorce,
Tipper says her broken home, and Gore's political one, made both of them eager
for a more stable, conventional family life. She embraces motherhood, and her
fierce protective instincts show themselves on the stump. For instance, when
Hillary Clinton sagged after a woman reporter demanded to know how her daughter,
Chelsea, felt about reports of her father's infidelity, Tipper almost threw her
body in front of Hillary to rebuke the reporter for asking such an intrusive
question.

Out on the campaign trail, Mrs. Gore is an outspoken feminist who resents being
cast as a decorative political wife. A former professional press photographer,
she takes pictures at every campaign stop, prompted by a desire to have
something to do onstage besides smiling and waving. Indeed, she is one of her
husband's closest political advisers.

Tipper Gore is probably best known for her 1987 book, "Raising PG Kids in an
X-Rated Society." The book, a parental call to arms against violent and sexually
explicit material in rock recordings, prescribes movielike ratings for the
record industry. The response was furious. Tipper found herself under attack for
advocating censorship -- a charge she denies. Because of the record-labeling
campaign, Tipper's image as a prim bluestocking has been hard to live down. Many
reporters covering the Gores are surprised to find her smart and tartly funny.

BY HIS OWN ADMISSION, Gore feels deeply ambivalent about the family he grew up
in, a family he describes in his book as "determinedly political." His whole
life, in fact, can be seen as a series of alternating steps toward and away from
his parents -- and all they represented.

Although Gore bought the farm directly across the Caney Fork River from his
parents' farm in Carthage, bringing his own children there summer after summer,
he has carefully structured his own family to be different from the one in which
he grew up. Unlike Gore's mother, who was out campaigning with her husband most
of the time, Tipper Gore is only a part-time campaigner, putting her energies
into being the mother of three girls and a boy: Karenna, 19, Kristin, 15, Sarah,
13, and Albert, now 10. And when Gore decided to run for his father's old
Congressional seat for the first time, he forbade the elder Gore from making
even one speech on his behalf.

Albert Gore Sr. was born on a farm near Carthage and lived as a boy on another
farm in an area known as Possum Hollow. But after a youth of hardscrabble
farming he elected to become a teacher. Eventually he became the Superintendent
of Schools and entered politics. An ardent supporter of the New Deal, Gore
served in the House from 1939 to 1953 and in the Senate from 1953 to 1970. By
his own admission, Senator Gore was a strict disciplinarian with his son. "I
was, I won't say stern, but I was an insistent taskmaster," the elder Gore
recalls. "He worked and worked hard."

Pauline LaFon was the daughter of a West Tennessee merchant whose general store
went bust in the Depression. She worked as a waitress at the Andrew Jackson
Hotel coffee shop in Nashville to put herself through Vanderbilt Law School,
where she was one of the first female graduates. After briefly practicing law,
she married Albert Sr. in 1937. When her husband declared himself for Congress a
year later, they left newborn daughter Nancy at home during the day and, in the
start of a lifelong tradition, campaigned together.

Although Gore idolized his parents as a child, his prickliness about his father
today is apparent. "Al has never wanted to be bossed by his father," says
Pauline Gore, Mrs. Gore is sensitive to her son's feelings about being upstaged
by his father. At the Democratic convention she had to restrain her husband, who
had rushed up on stage after his son's acceptance speech, extending both arms in
a gesture of triumph as though he himself had just gotten the Vice-Presidential
nomination that had eluded him.

"Pauline pulled my coattail twice," says the elder Gore, "and one of my
grandchildren whispered to me, 'Grandpa, I like your shyness.' "

The senior Gore remembers that even at an early age, his son was keenly
interested in politics. Albert Sr. recalls a night when he and his wife were
about to leave their Fairfax apartment for a formal White House reception. As
the couple were leaving, their son, then about 10 years, called out: "Dad, save
that outfit. I might need it someday."

But by the time he got to Harvard, Gore thought he would become a writer or,
perhaps, a lawyer-journalist, like Fred Graham, who was a close friend of his
sister Nancy. He spent one college summer as an office boy at The New York
Times, and began returning less frequently to Carthage. He and Tipper, who also
went to college in Boston, would talk about making movies, or living by the sea,
where she would paint and he would write.

Like millions of those of their generation, the Gores both smoked marijuana.
Indeed, during his Presidential bid, Gore announced that, as a college student,
he began smoking marijuana, a practice he continued later in the Army and as a
reporter at The Tennessean in Nashville. The pre-emptive confession was all but
ignored.

Gore was also in sync with his generation in his opposition to the Vietnam war.
Yet despite his beliefs, he elected to enlist in the Army after graduation from
Harvard in 1969. He feared that avoiding the draft would hurt his father's
prospects of being re-elected to the Senate. But he asserts that his main
motivation was to insure that no boyhood friend of his from Carthage wound up
going in his place.

The Senator's bitter defeat in 1970 was an acute disappointment for his son.
Gore had campaigned tirelessly for his father, even posing in his Army uniform
for a widely published photograph with Albert Sr. But in one of the first
negative television campaigns, Albert Gore's Republican opponent, William E.
Brock, was able to turn the tide with blistering attacks on the Senator's
opposition to the war and school prayer. Election night, Pauline Gore recalls,
was one of the few times she ever saw her son cry.

Two months after the election, Gore was sent to Vietnam, where, thanks to his
writing talents, he landed a job as an Army journalist. Ralph Hall, another Army
journalist, remembers long discussions with Gore about the war. "We were
basically conscientious objectors while in the Army," he says. "But we felt the
military was an obligation, even though we disagreed with what was going on."

Gore returned from Vietnam utterly disillusioned with the political process that
had engendered the war. "He was more restless," Tipper recalls. He took graduate
courses in religion at Vanderbilt to have a place to think through the questions
that Vietnam had raised. "I think it was a purification," Tipper says.

He had decided he no longer had any interest in conventional politics. When his
parents tried to coax him into attending Democratic Party functions, he
declined.  While studying religion, he also worked as a reporter at The
Tennessean in Nashville. In 1974, he entered Vanderbilt Law School, but
continued writing for the newspaper.

Gore had always said his primary reason for getting into journalism was to
change things. But he gradually began to believe that real power would come only
through holding political office. When John Seigen thaler, The Tennessean's
publisher and a major force in state Democratic politics, told Gore the Carthage
Congressional seat was up for grabs, he was interested. "It just came home to me
that if I was ever going to do it, now was the time," Gore recalls. "Not 10
years from now. Not one week from now. Now." He hung up the phone, turned to
Tipper and said, "I think I'm going to run for Congress." And then he
immediately dropped to the floor and began doing push-ups to get in shape for
the race.

Even Gore's critics acknowledge that he has been, over the last 16 years -- four
terms in the House and eightyears in the Senate -- one of the hardest-working
people on Capitol Hill. Gore has never forgotten the charge that one reason his
father lost was that he suffered from "Potomac Fever," had lost touch with the
people he represented. Gore learned that lesson well, and has tried to return to
Tennessee most weekends to hold town meetings. (Since 1976, Gore has presided
over more than 2,000 such meetings.) "He was a better listener than I was," his
father says.

In Washington, Gore proved to be a man in a hurry to attain a position of
influence and was soon holding hearings, mostly on toxic waste and other
environmental issues. As a former reporter, he had a sharp sense of what made a
story, and he got more than his share of headlines, which prompted some
resentment in the clubby atmosphere of Congress.

When a group of powerful Democratic fund-raisers urged him to run for the
Presidency in 1988, he decided to do it. Today Gore contends that a big part of
his motivation for making that race was simply raw ambition for higher office.
When he was lambasted in the press for his wooden delivery and tendency to keep
his distance from other people, he was hurt and perplexed. His defeat --he
withdrew from the race after losing badly in the New York primary -- stunned
him.

In this new period of self-examination following his son's accident and the
writing of his book, Gore asserts that he has liberated himself from the burdens
of the past. He says he is now free to be totally himself -- perhaps an overly
optimistic assessment for a professional politician, especially for a
front-running candidate for Vice President of the United States. Vice
Presidents, after all, are expected to support the policies of their bosses
under all circumstances, and Clinton has not embraced all of Gore's
environmental positions.

But Gore says one reason he put his environmental ideas -- and his pledge to
fight for them -- in black and white was to make sure that he would be
embarrassed if he slipped back into overcautiousness. "That's growth," he says.
"That's a good thing to do. And if that makes it harder for me to be
hypocritical in the future, that's fine."

NAME: Al Gore

LOAD-DATE: October 25, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Despite his privileged upbringing, Gore had to forge his own
identity. At age 3 with his mother, father and sister. (Ed Clark/Life Magazine)
(pg. 40); At a rally in Athens, Tex. (Doug Milner for The New York Times)(pg.
41); Al and Tipper Gore at their home in Arlington, Va. When she called for
warning stickers on record albums, she was labeled a prim bluestocking. But
during the campaign, she has come across as smart and tartly funny. (Photograph
by Claudio Edinger/Gamma-Liaison for The New York Times)(pg. 42); When Albert
Gore 3d had a serious accident, his parents spent a month at his side.
(Photograph by Allan Tannenbaum/Sygma)(pg. 44)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              159 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 26, 1992, Monday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Republicans;
As Polls Shift, Bush Grabs Even Small Chance of Surge

BYLINE: By ANDREW ROSENTHAL,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 14; Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 842 words

DATELINE: BILLINGS, Mont., Oct. 25


Just when they were starting to resign themselves to a loss, President Bush's
aides now sense that this is a moment of uncertainty in the 1992 campaign, with
numbers shifting in the polls and Mr. Bush taking on new energy in his
campaigning.

Although Ross Perot seems to be the main beneficiary of the change in public
opinion, Bush aides are trying to use even the smallest opportunity to create
momentum for their candidate.

So with just nine days until the election, his chief of staff, James A. Baker
3d, now traveling with him full time, Mr. Bush devoted most of one of his
dwindling supply of days to two states that have six electoral college votes
between them: Montana and South Dakota.

Reading Polls in Best Light

On his way the President stopped off in Detroit, to focus on the sort of thing
that Gov. John Engler of Michigan was calling "data bits" -- ever-thinner slices
of the voting public, modest policy proposals and fine details of the electoral
map.

There, at the annual conference of the International Association of Chiefs of
Police, Mr. Bush pulled out a weapon that helped him in 1988 but has been
relatively little seen this year -- law and order. He fine-tuned his crime
proposals slightly and took credit for passage of a law, which he had little to
do with, that makes the armed theft of cars a Federal crime.

And his campaign sent Mr. Engler into the press briefing room to proclaim that
the Republicans had delved into internal and public polls showing that Mr. Perot
was eating into Gov. Bill Clinton's lead and found that, instead, Mr. Bush was
"closing" on the Democratic Presidential nominee.

Clearly uncomfortable, Mr. Engler acknowledged that internal Republican polls
essentially reflected the results of published surveys, which show no movement
for Mr. Bush. But he said that when the polls were dissected into "likely
voters" and then into unspecified "competitive legislative districts," Mr. Bush
had gained a point or two.

Returning to Tried and True

Although such movement would be of no statistical significance, Mr. Engler said
these "data bits" could be glued together into a national picture. "When we push
that likely voter component, that's where we're seeing movement," Mr. Engler
said.

The Republican Governor was immediately asked why his remarks were any different
from Democratic assertions of a last-minute "surge" for Gov. Michael S. Dukakis
in 1988. "This is real," Mr. Engler snapped. "His wasn't."

But the reasons for this kind of fine-tuning seem clear. Montana and South
Dakota may seem like slim pickings, but at this point in the race, Mr. Bush is
willing to devote time to any state that seems winnable, no matter how small. In
a larger sense, holding onto the Republican's 12-year strength in the Rocky
Mountain spine is central to his hopes of re-election.

These also are times when a candidate returns to what is tried and true. And for
Republicans, crime speeches, preferably delivered in the company of police
officers, as today's speech was, clearly fall into that category.

Mr. Baker's presence on the campaign trail after weeks of remaining in the White
House out of the public eye underscored the sense of urgency evident among Mr.
Bush's entourage. But Mr. Baker remained camera shy, turning his back and
attempting to hide his face this evening to get out of the camera shot as a
supporter handed Mr. Bush a hunting rifle as a gift on his arrival here.

In Detroit today, just as Mr. Bush accused Mr. Dukakis in 1988 of coddling
criminals, he accused Mr. Clinton of being soft on crime, listing a series of
statistics suggesting that violent crime had increased during Mr. Clinton's
years as Governor of Arkansas.

Careful not to offend his audience, Mr. Bush said law-enforcement agencies bore
no responsibility for that. "You're supposed to handcuff criminals, not tie the
hands of police," Mr. Bush said, pounding his fist on the lectern.

Mr. Bush announced that he was signing a bill making it a Federal crime to
commit "carjacking" in which a driver is injured or killed when a car is
commandeered. Mr. Bush asserted that he had "fought for" that bill, but in fact
he did not begin talking about the issue until Sept. 28, when a bill on
carjacking was already well on its way through Congress, and he did not send up
his own version until two days later.

In Sioux Falls, S.D., at the Sioux Empire Fairgrounds, Mr. Bush once again
assailed Mr. Clinton over the Vietnam draft and his antiwar activities in
England 23 years ago. Mr. Bush said that, by contrast, he had upheld the voters'
trust in his personal and professional life.

"We believe in -- and we try to live -- family, faith, friends and all of that,"
he said.

But much of his speech was devoted to the attack on Mr. Clinton -- and on the
news media -- that seems to grow more strident at each stop. "There's something
there; they've lost it," Mr. Bush said, gesturing at his traveling press corps
in Sioux City this afternoon as his audience chanted, "Down with the press!"


LOAD-DATE: October 26, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: President Bush admiring an gift presented to him by
Representative Ron Marlenee, right, in Billings, Mont. James A. Baker 3d looked
on. (Jose R. Lopez/The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              160 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 26, 1992, Monday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Candidate's Record;
Perot Shows Penchant For Seeing Conspiracy

BYLINE: By MICHAEL KELLY

SECTION: Section A; Page 12; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1188 words


Ross Perot's charges of Republican dirty tricks follow a long-established
pattern of espousing elaborate, unproved conspiracies often directed against
himself.

On numerous occasions, most recently in the third Presidential debate, Mr. Perot
has described assassination conspiracies directed against him and his family by
enemies as varied as the North Vietnamese, the Black Panthers and Texas drug
dealers. Dallas law-enforcement officials interviewed by reporters have said
they do not believe the plots ever existed.

Over the years, Mr. Perot has shown a great appetite for conspiracy theories
from both the far-left and the far-right wings of American politics, lending an
open ear to theories of secret global cabals, to Byzantine tales of vast
criminal enterprises undertaken with secret Government approval, to talk of
organized evil that stretches across continents and over decades, or even
centuries.

Mr. Perot's son-in-law and general counsel, Clayton Mulford, acknowledged last
month that the Perot political organization had hired an investigations firm in
California to run background checks on various campaign volunteers.

Mr. Perot's most flamboyant assertion that there had been conspiracies directed
against himself came on Oct. 19, in the third debate of Mr. Perot, Bill Clinton
and George Bush, when Mr. Perot maintained that the Vietnamese had in 1969 sent
a team of Black Panther members to kill him, and that, later, agents of Texas
drug dealers had also tried to kill his family.

Regardless of what the law-enforcement officials believe, Mr. Perot has, by many
accounts, for years been deeply concerned with what he says have been plots to
kill him and his family. A former private security consultant who worked for Mr.
Perot for several years, and who spoke on condition of anonymity, said Mr.
Perot's north Dallas estate was protected with a security system worthy of a
military installation, including a system of cameras and movement sensors that
fed information to private security officers keeping a 24-hour vigil in a
command post on the property.

The security consultant also described Mr. Perot as obsessed with the sense of
constant threat to himself and his family, to the point where he would sometimes
prowl the grounds himself, armed with an automatic rifle.

In the debate, Mr. Perot said: "The Vietnamese had sent people into Canada to
make arrangements to have me and my family killed. The most significant effort
they had one night is five people coming across my front yard with rifles."

Private Security Force

Mr. Perot told ABC News that he did not report the incident to the police and
that his own security men had handled it. He credited a guard dog with chasing
the assassins away. "He worked them like a sheep dog," Mr. Perot said.

But ABC World News Tonight, which investigated the story, found much reason to
doubt it. "Listen to me," said Paul McCaghren, who headed Dallas police
intelligence operations in 1969. "It didn't happen. It did not happen."

Mr. McCaghren explained: "Well, there were only about eight people here that
belonged to the Black Panther Party. Two of those people worked for us and they
told us every day what was happening."

No group could have tried such a serious assassination attempt on Mr. Perot
without law enforcement officials hearing of it, he added. "If five members of
the First Baptist Church with rifles had come onto his lawn, we would have found
out about it."

Mr. Perot is no stranger to a number of people who have spent years in the
murky, convoluted world of conspiracy theories.

Daniel Sheehan, the head of a left-wing Washington-based group called the
Christic Institute, has said that Mr. Perot was receptive to his theory that
United States officials were involved in an intrigue of drugs and weapons sales
in Southeast Asia and Central America.

Mr. Sheehan and several colleagues say Mr. Sheehan played a central role in
convincing Mr. Perot in 1984 that Richard L. Armitage, a top Department of
Defense official, was involved in a vast, shadowy drugs-and-guns smuggling
scheme that Mr. Sheehan called The Enterprise. The accusations against Mr.
Armitage have been dismissed as false by a number of present and former
Government officials, and an inquiry by the Federal Bureau of Investigation
resulted in no criminal charges.

Mr. Sheehan brought a Federal lawsuit based on his theory against Mr. Armitage,
a number of Nicaraguan rebel leaders and various former officials of the Armed
Forces and the Central Intelligence Agency. The suit asserted that all these men
were part of a group called the Secret Team, which conspired to form a gigantic
criminal enterprise smuggling drugs and weapons, laundering money, and financing
covert actions in Central America and the Middle East.

In 1988, Federal District Judge James L. Kinf dismissed the suit as baseless,
accused Mr. Sheehan of knowingly perpetuating a fraud and fined the Christic
Institute $1 million, a verdict upheld by the Supreme Court.

But in 1986, the suit was still active, and on Oct. 21 of that year, Mr. Sheehan
received a telephone call from a friendly Texas businessman.

The businessman, he recalled, said: "Hello, this is Ross Perot. I've heard that
you've got all kinds of important information about some really bad actors. I've
got wind of the same stuff and we need to talk about it."

A few months later, Mr. Perot arranged to meet Mr. Sheehan at the United States
Naval Academy in Annapolis, Md., where Mr. Perot was giving a speech. Mr.
Sheehan says that he and Mr. Perot talked for some time and that Mr. Perot then
flew him in his private jet back to Texas.

All told, Mr. Sheehan remembers at least six occasions in which he and Mr. Perot
discussed the matter. Mr. Perot also visited an associate of Mr. Sheehan's, a
freelance investigator, to pursue it further. James Squires, Mr. Perot's former
spokesman, has acknowledged one meeting, the flight to Texas.

Mr. Sheehan said Mr. Perot had proposed taking the information about Mr.
Armitage and other suspected conspirators to George Bush, who was Vice President
then. "I told him that was a bad idea, because it was pretty clear George Bush
was part of the conspiracy, too," Mr. Sheehan said.

Instead, he said, he persuaded Mr. Perot to take the accusations to the F.B.I.
Director, William Webster, which Mr. Perot did. An investigation found no
evidence of criminal wrongdoing on the part of Mr. Armitage.

James (Bo) Gritz, a former Green Beret Colonel and the author of a right-wing
conspiracy theory that describes the world as controlled over several centuries
by a cabal of international financiers, most of them Jewish, also claims to have
met with the man he calls simply Ross.

Mr. Gritz, in a telephone interview, described meeting Mr. Perot at least once
and speaking to him on the telephone other times to elicit support for Mr.
Gritz's failed attempts in the early 1980's to find and rescue American
servicemen in Southeast Asia. Mr. Perot did not agree to finance the missions,
but has always been friendly and receptive, Mr. Gritz said.


NAME: Ross Perot

LOAD-DATE: October 26, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: A crowd estimated at more than 20,000 turned out yesterday at a
speedway in Flemington, N.J., to hear Ross Perot campaign; In appearances in New
Jersey and Pennsylvania, Ross Perot gave the Northern crowds a taste of his
straight talk and folksy sayings. Supporters waited for Mr. Perot to arrive in
Flemington, N.J., where he played to discontent with Washington, charging that
politicians has lost touch. (Edward Keating/The New York Times)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              161 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 27, 1992, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Behind the Scenes;
Source of Dirty Tricks Assertions Claims Life of Intrigue

BYLINE: By SETH MYDANS,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 18; Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 548 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES, Oct. 26


The man at the center of new dirty-tricks accusations in the Presidential
campaign is the owner of a dress shop in an isolated Arizona town who says he
had a lurid international career as a secret agent.

The man is Scott Barnes, who Ross Perot said on Sunday was one of the people who
told him Republicans were planning campaign dirty tricks aimed at Mr. Perot's
family and business.

Mr. Barnes described himself in an interview in June in Prescott, Ariz., as an
expert in covert operations who was at the time carrying out investigations of
family members of President Bush, apparently for the Perot campaign.

Disappeared Last Month

An Arizona reporter who came to know Mr. Barnes said today that Mr. Barnes
abandoned his business and his debts about a month ago and disappeared, saying
he was going to Vietnam to hunt for missing American servicemen.

But before that, said the reporter, Steve Lee of The Prescott Courier, Mr.
Barnes had spent much of his time in the back room of his nearly empty dress
shop on the telephone with, he said, Mr. Perot and various Government and
intelligence officials.

In his statements Sunday, Mr. Perot said Mr. Barnes told him that the Republican
Presidential campaign was planning to publish a doctored photograph of Mr.
Perot's daughter Carolyn in an apparent attempt to embarrass the Texas
billionaire.

Mr. Perot said this information, along with tips that the Bush campaign intended
to disrupt his daughter's wedding, caused him to drop out of the Presidential
race on July 16.

He told the CBS television program "60 Minutes" that after his withdrawal, Mr.
Barnes was approached by the Bush campaign to wiretap Mr. Perot's offices.

Members of the Bush campaign have dismissed the assertions as groundless.

Vivid Storyteller

Mr. Perot said on "60 Minutes" that he had never met Mr. Barnes personally.
Asked about their relationship last June, Mr. Barnes said, "I regard him as a
friend; I prefer to leave it at that."

Mr. Barnes, 38 years old, is a vivid storyteller who weaves strings of names,
dates and details together with evasions and startling accusations as he
describes an undercover life that he says has taken him to "Israel, Laos, Syria,
China, Costa Rica, you name it."

In the interview, he said his association with Mr. Perot began after he spotted
living Americans in the jungles of Laos in 1981, only to have the information
suppressed by a Government that fears the truth about servicemen who are missing
in action. Mr. Perot has made a project of backing the search for missing
servicemen.

After that, Mr. Barnes said, he moved around in the shadowy world of covert
operations, working among other things for the Israeli intelligence agency
Mossad and in other work connected with the Central Intelligence Agency.

Most recently, he said, from his base in the Arizona desert town of 25,000
people, he had been investigating Bush family members in an operation that was
somehow connected with the Perot campaign. A spokeswoman for Mr. Perot, Sharon
Holman, said: "At no time ever has Ross Perot investigated the children of
President Bush. This is absolutely false information."

Mr. Lee, the reporter, said Mr. Barnes's stories were "very difficult to verify
but just as difficult to disprove."

NAME: Scott Barnes

LOAD-DATE: October 27, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              162 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 27, 1992, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Books of The Times;
A Legacy of War: Barrage of Words

BYLINE: By HERBERT MITGANG

SECTION: Section C; Page 17; Column 3; Cultural Desk; Word and Image Page

LENGTH: 1049 words


Gen. H. Norman Schwarzkopf's recent autobiography, "It Doesn't Take a Hero," was
a first draft of history, a colorful and colored pre-emptive strike in print.
But it has by no means stopped other interpretations of the political, economic,
diplomatic and military aspects of the Persian Gulf war, as is obvious by a new
round of books questioning its policies, conduct and aftermath. Pentagon
censorship spurred the need to peer behind the hidden aspects of what was (with
a bow to Robert Southey on the Battle of Blenheim) "a famous victory."

While President Bush is generally praised by the authors of these books for
putting together a coalition of nations with diverse interests, several
criticize him for personalizing the war, giving a green (or at least a yellow)
light to Saddam Hussein and failing to pursue a consistent foreign policy.

Looking over a score of gulf war books by former Government officials, political
scientists and journalists, in fact, it's difficult to find unequivocal support
for the war. Here is a representative handful of the new books.

GEORGE BUSH VS. SADDAM HUSSEIN: Military Success! Political Failure?, by Roger
Hillsman. (273 pages, Lyford Books/Presidio Press, $21.95). After providing the
background of the war, Mr. Hillsman, emeritus professor of world politics at
Columbia University and Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs in
the Kennedy Administration, argues that President Bush turned the war into a
clash of personalities between himself and President Saddam Hussein instead of
between two countries. He says Mr. Bush lacked clear principles, failed to
listen to the advice of experts in his Administration and lost the opportunity
for a negotiated settlement.

Mr. Hillsman writes, "It may be that the situation came to war because of only
one personality trait that is common to both Hussein and Bush: a simplistic,
black-and-white view of international affairs that leads them to see it as a
personal struggle between rival leaders and that leads them to choose force
because it seems to offer a clear-cut solution rather than the muddied,
convoluted compromises offered by negotiation."

THE FIRE THIS TIME: U.S. War Crimes in the Gulf, by Ramsey Clark (Illustrated,
325 pages, Thunder's Mouth Press, $21.95). In a strong indictment of the conduct
of the war and especially of the needless deaths of civilians caused by bombing,
Mr. Clark, Assistant Attorney General in the Kennedy Administration and Attorney
General in the Johnson Administration, describes his visits to the battle zones.
He contends that while the United States made a great show of concern for the
Kurds and encouraged them to revolt, President Bush really did not want them to
succeed because it might have incited the Kurds in Turkey, a staunch American
military ally.

Mr. Clark started the Commission for an International War Crimes Tribunal to
gather evidence about the assault on Iraq. At a final judgment of the tribunal,
he notes, 22 judges from 18 nations found the United States and its principal
officers guilty on all 19 charges of "war crimes." These charges included
"destroying civilian life," "waging war on the environment" and systematically
manipulating and restricting the press. Unfortunately, he overlooks the crimes
committed by Saddam Hussein and his dictatorial regime against his own people,
his neighbors and the Kurds. In the most thoughtful section of "The Fire This
Time," Mr. Clark proposes a list of idealistic reforms to prevent and control
war.

STORM OVER IRAQ: Air Power and the Gulf War, by Richard P. Hallion (Illustrated,
383 pages,  Smithsonian Institution Press,  $24.95). In this cheerleading study
of the role of air power in the war, Mr. Hallion, a research associate at the
Smithsonian Institution and a former professor at the Army War College,
describes how the military services rebuilt American air superiority with
changes in training and technology after Vietnam. As a result, he says, "the
dominance of air power" made the difference in the war, obviating any need for a
land war and confounding experts who had predicted thousands of American
casualties on the ground. Tell it to the Marines; as in wars immemorial, the
grunts were there. Mr. Hallion concludes that in the future "aggressors who dare
to threaten the vital interests of the United States and its friends will risk
their own destruction amid a hurricane of air attack."

THE MEDIA AND THE GULF WAR, edited by Hedrick Smith (438 pages, Seven Locks
Press, Arlington, Va., $24.95). All sides, including the Pentagon's, are
represented in this thorough look at the vexing problems of censorship. Mr.
Smith, a former correspondent for The New York Times and now editor in residence
at the Johns Hopkins Foreign Policy Institute, has assembled articles and
statements on the ground rules and guidelines for covering the war, the
rationale for the Pentagon's policy, legal action against censorship and a view
of censorship from the other side by Peter Arnett, the CNN correspondent who
stayed on in Baghdad.

Mr. Smith writes: "At the annual dinner of the press's Gridiron Club in
Washington, where many figures are introduced to applause, President Bush
stopped clapping when Arnett was introduced. That captured the feeling of the
war's most ardent advocates in Washington."

THE IMPERIAL TEMPTATION: The New World Order and America's Purpose, by Robert W.
Tucker and David C. Hendrickson (228 pages, Council on Foreign Relations Press,
$22.50). In a condemnation of the motives behind the war, Mr. Tucker, professor
emeritus of American foreign policy at Johns Hopkins University, and Mr.
Hendrickson, associate professor of political science at Colorado College, argue
that the war was a break with American diplomacy and departed from international
law, thus poorly serving the new world order.

"That the United States undertook an imperial role without discharging the
classic duties of imperial rule reflected an extraordinary disjunction between
power and responsibility," the authors write. "This disjunction alone must cast
grave doubt on the proposition that the American nation is really well-suited
for its new calling as the primary military enforcer of the new world order."

LOAD-DATE: October 27, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              163 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 27, 1992, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Can We, on the Other Hand, Trust Bush?

SECTION: Section A; Page 22; Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 243 words


To the Editor:

I am amazed at how much ammunition a candidate's camp in this Presidential
campaign gives its opponents. For example, Mary Matalin, political director of
the Bush-Quayle campaign, complains in "Clinton Mugs Bush" (Op-Ed, Oct. 13) that
the Bush campaign was assaulted unfairly for questioning Gov. Bill Clinton's
actions during the Vietnam War. She justifies the attacks on Mr. Clinton's
character by asserting, "If you cannot trust a candidate's statements about his
past, you certainly cannot trust his promises for the future."

Be careful, Ms. Matalin. If that's the standard you set for Mr. Clinton, your
candidate must be prepared to be measured by the same standard. And we cannot
trust George Bush's statements about his past, specifically his involvement and
knowledge of the Iran-contra affair.

I don't believe that he, as Vice President and former Central Intelligence
Agency director, did not know that arms were being traded for hostages or that
the release of the Iranian hostages was engineered to insure Jimmy Carter's
defeat in 1980.

And because I don't believe President Bush, and I don't believe him because he's
lied to us repeatedly (and even dictated the terms of interviews so that this
issue cannot be raised), I do not trust Mr. Bush's promises for the future.
Thank you, Ms. Matalin, for explaining to us why we should vote for Governor
Clinton in November.

DEBRA BIRNBAUM
New York, Oct. 13, 1992

LOAD-DATE: October 27, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              164 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 28, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1012 words



International    A3-13

CANADIANS GROPE FOR SOLUTION

News analysis: The voters' rejection of a constitutional reform plan leaves
Canada still groping for a solution to its most longstanding problem:
reconciling French-speaking Quebec with the English-speaking rest of the
country.  A1

BEGGING TO LEAVE SARAJEVO

Huddles of desperate people gather each day at the United Nations building in
Sarajevo to plead for help in escaping the besieged city. But only a tiny
minority get seats on departing relief planes.  A1


The U.N. escorts Croatian refugees to the rubble of their village.  A9

SALVADOR RESISTS REBEL PARTY

A day after rebels endorsed a United Nations demobilization plan, El Salvador's
rightist ruling party moved to block the transformation of rebel armies into a
political party.  A13

MAKING IT UP TO THE QUEEN

After months of furor over the personal problems of her children, Queen
Elizabeth's friends and supporters treated her to a grand celebration of the
40th anniversary of her accession to the throne.  A10

ISRAELI TANKS MOVE NORTH

The Israeli Army massed tanks for a possible move across the border into Lebanon
as its planes and artillery pounded targets there.  A3

TENSE CONFRONTATION IN RUSSIA

President Yeltsin called for the disbanding of a newly founded opposition group
made up of ultra-nationalists and old-guard Communists. Some suspect the group
of plotting a constitutional coup.  A5

A pristine Russian peninsula opens warily to outsiders.  A4

U.N.'S SOMALIA ENVOY RESIGNS

The senior United Nations representative in Somalia submitted his resignation in
a dispute over his criticism of delays in famine relief.  A6

Citing a Slovak dam, Czechoslovakia Cabinet talks of resigning.  A11

National    A14-18, B9

THE ECONOMY SPURTS

The Government reported that the gross domestic product grew at a surprisingly
brisk pace of 2.7 percent in the July-September quarter. President Bush said the
development was proof that the economy was finally shaking off its lethargy, a
view disputed by the Democrats.  A1, A16

PRESIDENT CLINTON

The Democratic nominee sought to wrap the cloak of inevitability around his
campaign by describing in sweeping terms the tone and the priorities he would
bring to the White House.  A1

Clinton's powerful campaign weapon: his mother.  A16

Marilyn Quayle has continued to embrace her favored themes.  A18

On the Trail: Bush and the bad guys of the news media.  A16

THE TWO ROSS PEROTS

The question confronting his organization now is, Which media image of Ross
Perot will prevail? Will it be the Ross Perot of news accounts, who has been
badly damaged by his complaint of Republican dirty tricks, or the Ross Perot of
his own, enormously expensive television advertising campaign?  A1

New questions were raised on Perot's smear-tactic account.  A17

In Michigan, Perot has been gaining dramatically.  A18

A CAMPAIGN WITHOUT LIMELIGHT

This year there is a third-party candidate who is securely listed on the ballots
of all 50 states. No, not that one, the one who has actually gone out
campaigning among the people every day for a year without benefit of fortune,
fame or faux pas. It's Andre Marrou, nominee of the Libertarian Party.  A1

A MORE INCLUSIVE DEFINING OF AIDS

The Centers for Disease Control proposed a new AIDS definition that is expected
to almost double the number of cases reported next year by including many more
women and drug abusers.  B9

DIOXIN BURNING IS SET

After years of community strife and scientific dispute, Arkansas environmental
officials gave final approval to the largest project ever undertaken in the
United States to burn chemical wastes contaminated with dioxin. The incinerator
that will be used is expected to emit 150 to 800 grams of dioxin into the air
over the next two to three months.  A14

THE NEW ROAD HAZARD

Car thieves, robbers and even rapists and murderers are turning with increasing
frequency to suburban and rural highways to find their victims.  A14

NEW CHARGES ON IRAQI WEAPONS

The chairman of the House Banking Committee said the Commerce Department had
approved the exporting of American computers and missile-design software that
were ultimately used to develop the high-powered Iraqi "Supergun." A15

A bill on abortions at overseas military hospitals is before Bush.  B9

Education Page    B10

Thomas H. Kean, former Governor, now college president: what next?

The pros and cons of school choice provoke pre-election debate.

Campus Journal: Temple has a course on aliens and U.F.O.'s.

Metro Digest    B1

POLL SHOWS CLOSE SENATE RACE

A week before Election Day, the New York Senate race is a tossup between Alfonse
M. D'Amato and Robert Abrams, according to a new statewide New York Times poll.
Nearly one-quarter of voters said they were still undecided, an unusually high
percentage this late in a race, and an apparent sign of dissatisfaction with
both candidates.  A1

'CRASH AND CARRY GANG'

From the time they were teen-agers until their early 30's, the authorities said
they would crash into a fur salon or a jewelry store, an art gallery or a
warehouse. As glass rained down, they would snatch as many items as they could:
mink coats, paintings, compact disks. Now, 14 people have been indicted on
charges of being members of that gang.  A1

Business Digest    D1

Living Section    C1-10

Arts/Entertainment    C13-20

Sports    B11-16

Obituaries    D21

Editorials/Op-Ed    A20-21

Editorials

Federal Bureau of Temptation.
Canada, still divided.
Coming soon: the Vietnam peace.
For Congress from New York.

Letters

Anna Quindlen: Putting hatred to a vote.

George F. Kennan: The G.O.P. won the cold war? Ridiculous.

Robert Coover: A natural history of Presidents.

Earl Shorris: Latino, si. Hispanic, no.

LOAD-DATE: October 28, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              165 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 28, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Independent;
Perot Aides Try to End Story But President Keeps It Alive

BYLINE: By KEVIN SACK,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 17; Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 1134 words

DATELINE: DALLAS, Oct. 27


Ross Perot's top campaign aides tried diligently today to put an end to stories
about his unsubtantiated accusations of Republican dirty tricks, but President
Bush kept the story alive by calling Mr. Perot's charges "crazy" and "strange."

At a news briefing at Perot headquarters here, Sharon Holman, Mr. Perot's press
secretary, dismissed questions about his accusations as "yesterday's story" and
said the independent candidate for President wanted to get back to the issues.

But Mr. Bush, picking up where his spokesman, Marlin Fitzwater, left off on
Monday, expressed amazement in an interview on the NBC News program "Today"
about the accusations.

Asked whether he agreed with Mr. Fitzwater's characterization of Mr. Perot as "a
paranoid person who has delusions," Mr. Bush replied, "I agree that this recent
incident is crazy."

He added: "I mean, an allegation that we would wittingly or in any other way try
to break up a man's daughter's wedding, particularly not even in the
Presidential race at that time. What in the world would be the reason for that?"


Denver Rally Planned

Unlike Monday, when Mr. Perot repeated his accusations after showing up
unexpectedly at a morning news briefing conducted by his aides, he remained
secluded today. But the Dallas billionaire plans to appear at a rally in Denver
on Wednesday evening, Ron Ellsworth, his Colorado campaign chairman, said.
Recent polls have shown Colorado to be Mr. Perot's strongest state.

The trip will be only the second day of public campaigning for Mr. Perot since
he re-entered the Presidential race on Oct. 1. Ms. Holman said she expected him
to campaign this weekend but did not say where.

Mr. Perot also agreed today to be interviewed on Thursday by the ABC News
correspondent Sam Donaldson for "Prime Time Live." Mr. Bush and Gov. Bill
Clinton are taping separate interviews for the show. Mr. Perot will also appear
on CNN's "Larry King Live" on Thursday night and has purchased seven 30-minute
time slots on the networks between tonight and Monday night, the eve of the
election.

Since rejoining the race Mr. Perot has spent more than $1.4 million a day,
almost all of it on television advertising, according to Federal financial
disclosure reports made public on Monday. He spent $10.8 million from Oct. 15 to
Oct. 26, bringing his total to $37 million since he announced his candidacy 26
days earlier, and to $57 million for the year. Those numbers shatter previous
records for expenditures by an independent Presidential candidate.

In Mr. Perot's absence, his aides made it clear they wanted the story about his
accusations of Republican dirty tricks to go away. They say his improved
standing in public opinion polls is the reason for the continuing questioning of
his credibility.

Orson G. Swindle 3d, the director of United We Stand, America, Mr. Perot's
political organization, told reporters: "We're trying to stop talking about it.
If you'll cooperate, we'll quit talking about it."

Conventional News Reporting

But questions about Mr. Perot's accusations dominated today's news briefing at
the Perot campaign headquarters. And because even an unconventional campaign
cannot escape the conventional practices of news reporting, the issue of Mr.
Perot's credibility is not likely to die unless he provides backing for his
charges.

Mr. Perot said in interviews with The Boston Herald, the CBS News program "60
Minutes" and at rallies last Sunday that he dropped out of the Presidential race
in July because he had learned of a Republican plan to smear his daughter
Carolyn by making public a doctored photograph depicting her in a lewd manner.
He also charged that the Republicans planned to disrupt her wedding on Aug. 23
and that there was a plan to wiretap his phones.

He offered no evidence, although several Perot associates have said he spoke to
them of his fears before he dropped out on July 16. When reporters asked him on
Monday for help in substantiating his claims, he replied, "I'm sick and tired of
you all questioning my integrity without any basis for it."

It was too early to tell from public opinion polls whether Mr. Perot's
accusations were helping his campaign or hurting it. If voters believe Mr.
Perot, his explanation could soften one of his enduring liabilities -- his
decision to drop out of the race. But if they believe he has made reckless
charges it could feed the perception of some that he is ill-suited for the
Presidency.

Bush in Unlikely Position

While more restrained than Mr. Fitzwater, the President did his best today to
feed that perception. But it placed him in the unlikely position of having to
attack a candidate who only three days ago seemed to be helping him by taking
votes from Mr. Clinton.

"I will confess to you, strange, strange," Mr. Bush said in commenting on Mr.
Perot's charges. He noted that Mr. Perot had said he accepted White House
denials, but added, "I think I am glad that he has said there's nothing to it,
but that's after airing it to how many million viewers?"

Mr. Perot also was attacked on the issues today, this time by aides to Mr.
Clinton who characterized his proposals for hefty increases in gasoline taxes
and Medicare premiums as regressive.

Gene Sperling, Mr. Clinton's economic policy director, said the campaign had
conducted an analysis of Mr. Perot's economic plan showing that working-poor
families and elderly couples would pay more in taxes as a percentage of their
income than would middle-class families. Mr. Sperling also said the average
millionaire would get a tax break because Mr. Perot's proposal to raise income
tax rates for top earners would be more than offset by his proposed cut in the
capital gains tax.

Stockdale on Antiwar Protests

"What people should find most disappointing about this," Mr. Sperling said in a
telephone interview, "is that Mr. Perot's thesis has been that if it's fair,
people will share."

Meanwhile, Mr. Perot's running mate, James B. Stockdale, a retired Navy admiral
and former prisoner of war in Vietnam, took a swipe at Mr. Clinton. In an
interview published today in The Idaho Statesman in Boise, Mr. Stockdale
asserted that Mr. Clinton's participation in antiwar protests while he was a
student in England raised questions about his qualifications to be Commander in
Chief.

"Those comrades of mine that died, the extra 10, 15, 20 thousand, that blood is
on your hands, you war protesters," Mr. Stockdale told the newspaper. "Every
time in prison we would hear that they had one of these big galas of the sort
that Clinton was arranging here and there in the world, 'Huh,' we'd say.
'Another year in this place. We're not going to get out of here until we bomb
Hanoi.' And they couldn't do that until they beat that opposition down."


LOAD-DATE: October 28, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo:
At Paducah Community College yesterday in Kentucky, State Senator David Williams
announced the arrival of President Bush, who called Ross Perot's accusations of
Republican dirty tricks "crazy and "strange." An aide placed the Presidential
seal on the lectern during the rally.; (Jose R. Lopez/The New York Times);
"We're trying to stop talking about it," said Orson G. Swindle 3d, the director
of United We Stand, America, Mr. Perot's political organization. (Associated
Press)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              166 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 28, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Decision to Burn Dioxin Divides Arkansas Town

BYLINE: By KEITH SCHNEIDER,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 14; Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 1024 words

DATELINE: JACKSONVILLE, Ark., Oct. 27


After years of community strife and scientific dispute, environmental officials
in Arkansas today gave final approval to the largest project ever undertaken in
the United States to burn chemical wastes contaminated with dioxin.

An incinerator at the abandoned Vertac Chemical Company pesticide plant in the
heart of this city of 29,000 people will begin burning the wastes on Thursday,
the officials said. The old plant, once owned by a subsidiary of the Hercules
Chemical Company, made Agent Orange defoliants used in the Vietnam War.

If the project goes as planned, according to an analysis by Pat Costner, a
chemist with the environmental group Greenpeace, 150 to 800 grams of dioxin
would be released into the air here over the two to three months it will take to
burn the wastes. Officials with the E.P.A. said today that the agency was
familiar with that estimate and did not dispute it.

The release would be second only to an explosion in 1976 at a chemical plant in
Seveso, Italy, that dispersed roughly 2,000 grams of dioxin.

Disagreement on Risks

Once regarded as the most hazardous substance known to man, dioxin is now the
subject of intense scientific debate, with researchers disagreeing about its
effects.

In the case of the Italian explosion, studies thus far do not indicate that the
release of dioxin increased cancer in the region, but some researchers note that
the accident occurred too recently for its effects to be measured, since cancer
can take a long time to develop.  The Environmental Protection Agency began a
study in May 1991 to re-evaluate the risks of dioxin, a project that is to be
completed next year.

The incinerator here has stirred emotions on all sides, with some residents
warning of a public health calamity and others saying it is time to rid
Jacksonville of the chemical waste and end a controversy that has divided the
community since the late 1970's.

Local opponents to the incinerator have hired the influential Government
Accountability Project, a Washington public interest law group. Mick Harrison, a
lawyer from the group, said today that a lawsuit to block the project will be
filed here on Wednesday.

No other environmental issue in Arkansas has so dominated the public debate
during Gov. Bill Clinton's 12 years in the Governor's Mansion as the chemical
contamination in Jacksonville and what to do about it. The Bush-Quayle campaign
has not used the issue to make political points, principally because the Federal
Government has been as involved in making decisions here as the state. In
addition, President Bush supports incineration as a means for cleaning up the
thousands of toxic waste sites across the country.

Joining the Decision

Aides to Governor Clinton said that he took part in the decision to incinerate
some two million pounds of chemical wastes containing dioxin, a byproduct of
manufacturing the defoliants. The Governor, his aides say, believes that leaving
the wastes as they are is far more hazardous than destroying it through
incineration. The aides also said officials of the Clinton-Gore campaign were
not consulted about the decision because it involved a state issue.

Randall Mathis, the director of the state Department of Pollution Control and
Ecology, announced the final approval for the burning at a community meeting
here. The state and the Federal environmental agencies began planning the
cleanup of the hazardous wastes here five years ago.

The previous year, in 1986, Vertac had abandoned the plant, leaving behind
roughly 30,000 barrels of chemical wastes, along with acres of contaminated
soil, tanks filled with toxic materials, and miles of poisonous piping. The
E.P.A. lists the site among the country's worst hazardous waste sites, not only
because of extent of the contamination but also because the plant is only a few
blocks from a day care center, a hospital and hundreds of houses.

Surveys by the state and Federal agencies say dioxin from the plant has
contaminated Jacksonville's central city park, making its popular fishing and
swimming lake off limits to the ublic. And already, more than $24 million has
been spent here by the Federal and state governments, much of it to incinerate
chemical wastes considered less dangerous than those to be burned starting on
Thursday.

These 2,700 barrels of highly toxic wastes contain a defoliant known as 2,4,5-T,
which was an ingredient of Agent Orange and also popular in American agriculture
and forestry. The compound was banned by the E.P.A. in 1979 because it was
linked to birth defects.

The barrels containing the 2,4,5-T wastes here also hold 50 to 100 pounds of
dioxin, a byproduct of heating compounds containing chlorine.

Dioxin's notorious reputation and the Vertac plant's proximity to Little Rock,
the state's largest city, have made the state and Federal effort to dispose of
the waste a study in the management of a complex health issues.

Mr. Clinton's aides and several city leaders today said the Governor's work on
the issue has been exemplary.

"He's relied on scientific analysis, the best technical experts, and health
professionals to advise him," said Michael Wilson, a Democratic state
representative from Jacksonville. "Something had to to done and Clinton took the
steps that were needed to make sure it was done safely."

But opponents of incineration in Jacksonville said today they have come to
distrust the state and the Federal Government. They point to a review of test
results done by Ms. Costner that found that the incinerator can destroy only
99.96 percent of the dioxin, not the 99.9999 percent required by Federal law.
The discrepancy means that much more of the compound than originally expected
could be released. State and Federal officials confirmed Ms. Costner's results
but said the lower rate did not violate Federal law in this case.

Some residents also blame the plant for birth defects and what they perceive to
be higher rates of liver illnesses, kidney disease and cancer. They say state
officials have not made public the results of a health study that was finished
here last year.


LOAD-DATE: October 28, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Map of Arkansas highlighting Jacksonville area

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              167 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 28, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Coming Soon: The Vietnam Peace

SECTION: Section A; Page 20; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 292 words


Confronted with evidence that its secret archives could shed light on the fate
of Americans missing since the Vietnam War, Hanoi has finally opened those
records. The Bush Administration can best reciprocate with two overdue steps of
its own: Lift the U.S. veto on international bank lending to Vietnam, and
establish diplomatic ties.

America's punitive policies toward Vietnam have done little to advance U.S.
interests. Successive Administrations barred Americans from most commerce with
Hanoi and pressed allies for similar restrictions. This boycott isolated Vietnam
from the democratic ferment fostered by foreign trade and investment in Eastern
Europe and China.

Hanoi blames America for this isolation. But Hanoi's own perverse behavior is as
much to blame.  Vietnam might have achieved normalization in the Carter years.
Instead it demanded billions in reconstruction aid, not acknowledging its own
brazen violations of the Paris peace agreements. Although Hanoi can claim some
justification for invading Pol Pot's Cambodia in 1978, it can claim none for a
10-year occupation. And its long insistence that it was fully cooperating in the
search for missing Americans now stands exposed as a lie.

Still, if Hanoi opens its archives the case for ending the boycott is strong.
Vietnam now welcomes foreign investment and private entrepreneurship. It makes
no sense to undermine those reforms by blocking World Bank loans, or to handicap
U.S. businesses interested in this new market.

The case for diplomatic ties is also compelling. New political and economic
channels can increase opportunities for raising issues that concern Americans.
If both sides pursue this opening, the much-delayed Vietnam peace may finally be
at hand.

LOAD-DATE: October 28, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              168 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 29, 1992, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1021 words



International A3-17

AFRICAN DUST SPREADS WESTWARD
The hot October winds scoop the thin topsoil up from Africa, swirl the dust high
into the sky and drive it west for thousands of miles. Scientists tracking the
dust say it is a boon for the Atlantic food chain and for soil and vegetation in
the Americas.  A1

Somalian parents greet aid workers with rare show of friendliness.  A16

CONTRAST IN VENEZUELA
Nine months after a coup attempt nearly toppled democracy in Venezuela, a
contrast endures: Latin America's strongest economic growth is pitted against
political jitters. Economically, Venezuela, an oil producer, is still a star of
the Americas, growing 8.5 percent in the first half of this year.  A3

A fugitive Colombian drug lord's aide is killed.  A7

THE FRUSTRATIONS IN ISRAEL
News analysis: A few months ago, hard-liners governing Israel were blamed for
frustrating Arab aspirations, which, it was said, led to a surge of armed
attacks. Now the country has a left-leaning Government, and there is another
surge of attacks. The opposition blames those in charge for offering concessions
in the Mideast peace talks.  A8

YUGOSLAV BLOCKADE HITS HARD
The truncated Yugoslavia is reeling under the effects of a five-month economic
blockade that has sent prices soaring, brought industries to a halt and left a
dispirited population facing the hard Balkan winter with little heat or hope.
A8

YELTSIN DISBANDS RIVAL GUARD
President Yeltsin ordered the disbanding of a 5,000-member armed guard formed by
his rival, Ruslan I. Khasbulatov, chairman of the Russian Parliament, and moved
to outlaw the National Salvation Front, a new group formed by nationalists and
hard-liners.  A10

Disorder appears to be abating in Albania.  A11

Eastern German acknowledges his Communism and spy contacts.  A12

The last Russian combat troops withdraw from Poland.  A15

Rebels move within three miles of Liberian capital's center.  A5

Canada's no vote on constitutional changes heartens Quebec.  A9

Foreign films are killing off the Indonesian movie industry.  A17

Seoul Journal: A Korean businessman is seeking the presidency.  A4

National A18-25, B11-14

CAMPAIGN SPENDING SOARS
With far more incumbents than usual engaged in tough fights for re-election,
spending on Congressional races is at record levels.  A1

Carol Braun, hurt by ethics accusations, still leads in Illinois.  A25

Four other female Senate candidates in the Midwest trail badly.  A25

Once again, Gingrich is engaged in a tight and bitter race.  A25

BUSH STUMPS ON ONE THEME: TRUST
As two new polls suggested that the race for the White House had tightened
dramatically, the President crisscrossed Ohio, buoyed by a belief that the
attack on Governor Clinton's character was working.  A1

CLINTON COUNTERATTACKS
Governor Clinton accused the President of running a campaign characterized by
repeated lies.  A1

Clinton's chief strategist: master of political instinct.  A23

FICKLE FLIRTATIONS
Conversations with voters in Grand Rapids, Mich., suggest that they have been
switching from one Presidential candidate to another as quickly as they switch
TV channels. And that appears to mean a decline in support for Ross Perot.  A1

Perot went on the offensive in a visit to Colorado.  A22

News analysis: The limits of Perot the tactician.  A22

This year's ads use statistics and attribution to stretch the truth.  A24

The West Coast is again debating TV's election-night forecasts.  A24

On the Trail: Update on the primaries' also-rans.  A23

ARMY OPENS HARASSMENT INQUIRY
After complaints from scores of its female civilian employees, the Army has
undertaken an investigation into sexual harassment at two military centers in
St. Louis.  A1

HISS WAS NOT A SPY, RUSSIAN SAYS
Nearly half a century after Alger Hiss was convicted of espionage-related
perjury, a review of newly opened archives in Moscow has cleared him of the
accusation that he spied for the Soviet Union, a high-ranking Russian official
says.  B14

Randolph Journal: A Vermont town's drive toward renewal.  A18

Jorge Mas Canosa, the "man with a capital M." A18

A study found more damning evidence of lead's effects.  A20

Researchers found only a modest effect by an Alzheimer's drug.  A20

The Government will sponsor a clinical trial of an AIDS drug.  B12

The nation's governors reported financial turmoil.  A19

The C.I.A. chief acknowledged poor handling of the B.N.L. case.  B11

Metro Digest B1

THE GROWING SCOPE OF AIDS
Under the new definition, the number of new AIDS cases reported each year is
expected to nearly double, bringing with it a two-edged sword. States will be
eligible for more Federal funds than are now distributed on the basis of
reported cases. But agencies and clinics will face higher costs and heavier
workloads.  A1

DEAD ENDS FOR DRUG SALES
In a plan that city officials said had never been tried on such a wide scale
anywhere in the country, Bridgeport, Conn., announced that it would put concrete
barriers at more than 30 intersections, creating a maze of dead-end streets to
make it harder to hop off Interstate 95, buy drugs and return to the highway.
A1

Business Digest D1

Home Section C1-16

If you're done in by do-it-yourself decorating.  C1

At home with Mr. Fish: Who is that clown in the trailer?  C1

Giving elevators welcome mats.  C1

Arts/Entertainment C17-24

Director's return to Vietnam.  C19

Death and album sales.  C19

Fischer wins Game 25.  C22

Sports B17-23

Obituaries B16

Editorials/Op-Ed A26-27

Editorials

Medical madness on Capitol Hill.

The Oregon Trail of hate.

Gross national letdown.

For Congress from the suburbs.

Letters

William Safire: The voting trigger.

Leslie H. Gelb: Going bananas.

Daniel H. Pink: Year of the factoid.

Landon Parvin: Ask Mr. Blather.

LOAD-DATE: October 29, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              169 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 29, 1992, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

BYLINE: By BRUCE LAMBERT

SECTION: Section B; Page 16; Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 251 words


David K. Eckert, a decorated Air Force pilot who became a minister and an
advocate for gay and lesbian military veterans, died Sunday at the David Grant
Medical Center at Travis Air Force Base near Sacramento, Calif. He was 47 years
old and lived in Sacramento.

He died of non-Hodgkins lymphoma, said Beverly Eckert, his former wife.

In his 20-year Air Force career, Mr. Eckert won medals flying medical planes in
the Vietnam War. Later, he was the commander of a WC-135 jet, a version of the
Boeing 707, monitoring atmospheric radioactivity as part of enforcing a nuclear
weapons ban. At his death he was a retired lieutenant colonel.

After retiring with an honorable discharge in 1989, Mr. Eckert acknowledged his
homosexuality. He was a founder of the Twin Spirit Veterans Association for gay
and lesbian veterans and gave Congressional testimony on veterans with AIDS.

He then completed seminary school and became the interim pastor of the Delta
Harvest Metropolitan Community Church in Stockton, Calif., and was active in the
River City Metropolitan Community Church in Sacramento. Both are
nondenominational churches, many of whose members are homosexuals and lesbians.

Mr. Eckert was born in Texas City, Tex.

His marriage of 22 years to the former Beverly Bishop ended in divorce, but she
said they remained close during the changes in his life.

He is survived by his companion, Bill Weaver of Sacramento, and two daughters,
Elisa Anne and Angela Christine, both of Orangevale, Calif.


NAME: David K. Eckert

LOAD-DATE: October 29, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Biography; Obituary (Obit)
HEADLINE>David Eckert, 47, Minister and Ally Of Gay Veterans

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              170 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 29, 1992, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

A French Director Surprises Himself By Filming in Vietnam

BYLINE: By BERNARD WEINRAUB,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section C; Page 19; Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 940 words

DATELINE: HOLLYWOOD, Oct. 28


The setting is French colonial Vietnam in 1929. The central characters are a
young French girl, fatherless and barely able to make ends meet, and an older
Chinese man, cultivated and rich. The two have an affair.

What makes the lush, erotic drama "The Lover" unusual is not so much the
depiction of the affair, which transcends race and age, but the fact that the
movie is the first Western film in decades to be made in Vietnam. The movie,
based on the best-selling autobiographical novel by Marguerite Duras, opens
tomorrow.

Because the Duras book was set there, Vietnam was the obvious choice for
filming, but the director, Jean-Jacques Annaud, said that his first visit, in
July 1989, appalled him. .

"I decided I would never shoot in Vietnam, never," said Mr. Annaud, who speaks
English fluently, as he paced the floor of his room at the Bel Air Hotel. "No
roads, no telephones, nothing. If there were hotels, there were no bathrooms. If
there was a bathroom, there was no water. And if there was water it was brown.
Unbelievable! I felt oppressed, like lacking oxygen. I left."

But Mr. Annaud, whose films include the Academy Award-winning "Black and White
in Color" (1977), the adaptation of Umberto Eco's "Name of the Rose" (1986) and
"The Bear" (1989), returned to Vietnam.

"The other countries we looked at -- the Philippines, Thailand, Malaysia --
would have been so much easier to film in, but those countries were an Asia for
tourists," he said. "Some of those cities were bad replicas of Houston. Where
was the specificity of Asia? My head didn't like Vietnam, but I fell in love
with something secret I couldn't name: a flavor, a fragrance. Vietnam has been
so sealed off, it's like a museum of the colonial past."

"And those people touched me," he added. "Their need for dignity. They're
beggars and they hate being beggars."

The movie, which is in English, was written by Mr. Annaud and Gerard Brach, one
of France's most prolific screenwriters. It stars Jane March, a British actress
whom Mr. Annaud discovered in a fashion magazine and who bears a resemblance to
the young Marguerite Duras, and Tony Leung, who is a major star in Asia. The
film was originally rated NC-17 (no one under 17 admitted), but after an
extensive appeal by Mr. Annaud and his supporters it is now rated R.

Against the sensual backdrop of colonial Vietnam, the movie depicts the chance
meeting, aboard a ferry on the Mekong River, of the French girl and the Chinese
businessman entranced by her beauty.

Miss Duras -- a French icon who is now 78 years old, was born in Gia Dinh,
outside Saigon, and lived in relative poverty with her mother, a widowed
schoolteacher, and two brothers until she left for France when she was 17.

In real life, when the brief affair ended, she never saw the man again.  Mr.
Annaud said that Miss Duras, who has been married several times, never recovered
from the affair. "Most of her fiction is actually about this man," he said.

What gives the project an almost eerie resonance is that the widow of the
Chinese businessman (who died in 1977 in Los Angeles, where he had lived since
the fall of Saigon two years earlier) lives in the Beverly Hills area, not far
from Mr. Annaud's hotel. "I dare not call her; it's too close to reality," Mr.
Annaud said.

Yearlong Preparation

The making of the film, which is being distributed by M-G-M, was chaotic. In
February 1990, a full year before filming began, some crew and staff members
began settling into Ho Chi Minh City, formerly Saigon. The Vietnamese
leadership, eager for foreign exchange, read the script and proved highly
cooperative.

"Dictatorships are actually the best places for film makers," Mr. Annaud said
with a laugh. "You say, 'I want to put my camera here for two days; please stop
traffic,' and they say, 'Fine, sir.' I wanted to film on Saigon harbor. They
said, 'Yes; when?' "

Mr. Annaud said the Vietnamese leadership, like Asians in other countries,
seemed beguiled by the novel and the movie, which has already opened in Vietnam
and is a huge success.

"There was a dignity to this Asian man," Mr. Annaud said of his protagonist.
"The Marxist leadership in Vietnam is very prudish, and I was worried about
their reaction. But they were not shocked at all by the sensuality. They adored
the fact that this younger girl wanted this older man, the fact that the most
dignified character was Asian while the colonial family was poor."

A Reaching Out

Mr. Annaud said he had felt compelled to make the film, partly for personal
reasons. He is married and has three daughters, two of them in their late teens.
The movie was an effort to somehow understand and reach out to his daughters.

"All the films I've made have been from a male point of view," he said. "I was
upset with that. I have been transformed by women. Women have been very positive
in my life. My wife, my daughters, my teachers, my girlfriends." His new film,
Mr. Annaud said, sought to bridge the differences between instinct and
knowledge, carnality and love.

With a smile, Mr. Annaud reiterated the numerous difficulties of making a movie
in Vietnam: the lack of hotels, problems involving electricity, roads, water.
More than 20,000 bottles of mineral water were imported to insure the health of
the cast and crew. Filming took five months.

Since there are relatively few French remaining in Vietnam, Mr. Annaud used
Russian residents as the colonial French. Most of the Russians were offshore oil
workers and their families.

"They were perfect," he said. "Lovely people. But bad teeth, very bad teeth.
Just like the French in the 1930's."

NAME: Jean-Jacques Annaud

LOAD-DATE: October 29, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Jean-Jacques Annaud, director of the film "The Lover,"
discussing a scene with the stars, Tony Leung and Jane March, on the M-G-M set.
(Benoit Barbier)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              171 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 29, 1992, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Vietnam's Scars Reach a New Generation

BYLINE: By ANDREE BROOKS

SECTION: Section C; Page 8; Column 3; Home Desk

LENGTH: 1192 words


AS a small child she found her father cold and distant, consumed by paralyzing
memories of Vietnam combat. He would act as if she were not even in the room,
and spent hour after hour playing videotapes about the war.

Years later, the woman recalls the pain.

"You think it's your fault," she said. "You feel so bad."

The woman, in her early 20's, was one of six people 11 to 27 years old who met
in the basement playroom of a house in Mount Pleasant, N.Y., one recent evening,
to discuss their experiences as children of Vietnam veterans. The families
insisted that their names not be disclosed.

The children of those who served in Vietnam face problems that are only
beginning to be widely recognized by researchers and therapists. An increasing
body of research and clinical evidence indicates that such children, especially
those whose fathers or mothers have the psychic wound known as post-traumatic
stress disorder, are quite likely to develop emotional problems themselves. Few
formal groups exist specifically to address their needs.

The older children of these veterans seem to suffer more than the younger ones,
who were born after the balm of time had muted the memories, and after the
stigma attached to service in Vietnam had eased. Children of all ages expressed
compassion for the difficulties their fathers faced, and appreciation of their
efforts to be good fathers.

A growing number of psychologists say that the potential for emotional problems
among such young people is too great to be left to chance. Work needs to be done
"so that succeeding generations will be spared," writes Dr. Laurie Leydic
Harkness in the "International Handbook of Traumatic Stress Syndrome," which is
to be published by Plenum Press in 1993. Dr. Harkness is the chief of the
psychiatric rehabilitation program at the Veterans Administration Medical Center
in West Haven, Conn.

Experts say it has taken more than a decade to begin to understand the
difficulties of the children of Vietnam veterans. "They're now old enough so we
can start to see some of the consequences," said Dr. Yael Margolin, a
psychologist at the FDR Veterans Hospital in Montrose, N.Y., who also sees
Vietnam veterans in his private practice.

Another reason for the delay in recognizing the problem is that the field of
trauma studies itself is relatively new. And in the early years, "we tended to
concentrate on the vets themselves," said Dr. Terence M. Keane, director of the
behavioral science division of the National Center for Post-Traumatic Stress
Disorder in Boston.

The National Vietnam Veterans Readjustment Study, conducted nationwide by
psychologists working with the Veterans Administration from 1984 through 1988,
found that 15 percent of the 3.1 million Vietnam veterans suffered from
post-traumatic stress disorder, which is often called PTSD.

Those with the disorder may have a variety of symptoms. They may be easily
startled, violent, irritable, depressed, overly protective of their families or
distrustful of the outside world. A numbing of their emotions keeps them from
being close to others, even their own children. And they constantly relive the
horrors of the war in their thoughts and nightmares.

How does this behavior affect their children? And how does it differ, if at all,
from the difficulties faced by any child who grows up with a parent who has
profound problems?

One distinction is that some of the children behave as if they, too, had gone
through the trauma of war. Such a case was described in a paper published in the
Journal of Hospital and Community Psychiatry in 1985.

Written by Dr. Robert Rosenheck and Dr. Pramila Nathan, psychiatrists associated
with the West Haven hospital, it described a 10-year-old boy whom they called
Alan. His main fear, they wrote, was that he would one day be shot in combat,
along with his father. Alan had difficulty paying attention in school. He had
trouble falling asleep and constantly complained of headaches. He was obsessed
with war games.

The doctors found that Alan had become so emotionally submerged in his father's
identity that his own development was hindered. At times he even became as
anxious and aggressive as someone who had himself lived through a deeply
troubling experience.

For her doctoral dissertation, Elisheva Dan, a staff clinician in the mental
hygiene clinic at the West Haven center, is studying the possibility that
elements of the disorder could be transmitted biologically from one generation
to the next, rather than just from close personal contact. In her clinical work
with the children of veterans she observed that "some of them dream vividly
about the war in the same way their fathers do."

She admitted that her theories were highly speculative. But she said, "We
already have evidence that PTSD creates lasting changes in the nervous system."
So she is studying the possibility that, if someone had children after being
traumatized, those biological changes could "in some way be inherited."

But researchers say that some of the problems are clearly a response to the
erratic behavior of a traumatized father. In a study of 86 children of 40
Vietnam veterans from 1985 to 1988, Dr. Harkness found that many were having
more trouble at home than at school. She said that this could indicate that a
child's behavior deteriorates whenever the child is around the troubled parent.

In fact, everyone in the Mount Pleasant group talked of developing techniques to
stay out of the way of their fathers' eruptions. "For a few years, I wouldn't
even sit down at the table with him," said one, who is now a college student. "I
never knew what would happen next."

Dr. Harkness also found that the child of a physically abusive veteran is more
likely to have severe behavior problems, poor school performance and difficulty
in making friends than the child of a nonviolent veteran. In general, many of
the veterans' children also become easily depressed and have more difficulty
obeying rules than other children.

The researchers say that as these children grow older, they may find it
difficult to separate from their families and lead independent lives. Many have
learned from their fathers that they should not trust outsiders and that a
desire for separation is a betrayal. "One father I counseled would refer to his
family as 'my little squad,' " Dr. Margolin said.

A related issue has been highlighted by Dr. Yael Danieli, a psychologist in New
York City who is a founder and the director of the Group Project on Holocaust
Survivors and Their Children. She maintains that an additional burden facing the
children of Vietnam veterans may be the stigma attached to their fathers' deeds.

"These children have been told that people like their fathers were killers and
criminals," she said. "No wonder they grow up feeling alienated and isolated."

Indeed, the older ones in the Mount Pleasant group recalled a deep reluctance
about letting schoolmates know that their fathers served in Vietnam.

As one young man put it, "I was too embarrassed."

Experts say that the next step is to develop programs to help these young
people.

LOAD-DATE: October 29, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              172 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 30, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Republicans -- Candidate Aim at Crucial States, and Each
Other;
Bush, Buoyed by Polls, Scrambles to Rebuild Winning Coalition

BYLINE: By MICHAEL WINES,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1191 words

DATELINE: DETROIT, Oct. 29


With some new polls providing encouragement, President Bush and his strategists
have begun scrambling, hoping in the five days left them to rebuild the
shattered bloc of Republicans and disaffected Democrats that won the White House
in 1988. That is why they came to Michigan today.

Mr. Bush returned to an old wellspring of Democratic support, suburban Macomb
County, to sound alarms about high taxes and low character that he hopes will
drive voters away from Bill Clinton and into his camp.

Hoarse and shouting over the crowd of 10,000 people, Mr. Bush stripped his
message to its most pointed and strident essence.

'Crazy, Way Out, Far Out'

He accused Mr. Clinton of having "given up on reducing the deficit." Arms
flailing, he denounced Mr. Clinton's running mate, Senator Al Gore, as an
environmental extremist who is "crazy, way out, far out, man."

He underscored his "big difference" with people who would protest the Vietnam
war overseas, as Mr. Clinton did, "when your brother's in prison in Hanoi or
your kids are being drafted out of a ghetto somewhere."

Twice, he dismissed his two rivals with contemptuous remarks, declaring that "my
dog Millie knows more about foreign affairs than these two bozos."

And he turned one of Mr. Clinton's favorite anti-Bush buzzwords against him,
calling a band of sign-waving Clinton supporters at one Bush rally "a little
pathetic."

"They feel it slipping away from them," he exulted. "They know we're going to
win the election." The crowd at a cavernous junior-college fieldhouse roared its
approval.

Later, at an outdoor rally in Grand Rapids dominated by a huge, pink,
elephant-shaped balloon, Mr. Bush punched away at Mr. Clinton's credibility
again, saying, "What's catching up with him now -- what's catching up with him
just as we go down to the wire -- is this pattern of deception."

Mr. Bush's aides asserted today that their attacks had shifted the focus of the
political debate to the issue of character, where the White House wants it, and
to the best way to revive the economy, where they feel they are on at least
equal footing.

In fact, Mr. Bush has begun to leaven his assaults on Mr. Clinton with large
doses of can-do optimism about the future, something glaringly absent until this
month. He has seized on Tuesday's report of a healthy rise in economic output as
evidence of a looming American revival, even if voters have yet to notice it.

"There was very good news for this country two days ago, and they hate it," he
told 9,800 supporters in Grand Rapids today. "The only way they can win is to
convince America that we're in a recession. We had growth of 2.7 percent. We
have grown for six quarters. And now let's keep it going."

Later, he spoke of "a worldwide recovery," led by the United States, that will
"bring jobs to more Americans."

Mr. Bush's aides assert that the combination of slashing attacks and hopeful
messages is raising Mr. Bush's popularity and lowering Mr. Clinton's.

The President's campaign chairman, Robert M. Teeter, said today that he believed
Mr. Clinton's lead was shriveling in Michigan. In large part, he said, that is
because Mr. Bush had shone a spotlight on Mr. Clinton's pledge to raise taxes by
$150 billion.

Mr. Clinton says that new burden will fall mostly on the well-off and on foreign
companies. Bush strategists have responded by blanketing rallies with cardboard
devices, akin to simple slide rules, that supposedly enable voters to determine
how much Mr. Clinton's package of tax proposals "could" cost people in their
income brackets. Invariably, the totals are in the thousands of dollars.

Mr. Clinton's economic proposals, Mr. Teeter said, "are the antithesis of what
they want to hear."

How much ground Mr. Bush has gained in recent polls depends on which of the
wildly varying surveys one reads.

The "tracking poll" conducted for CNN and USA Today showed Mr. Clinton preferred
over President Bush by three percentage points today, 41 percent to 38 percent,
with 16 percent favoring Ross Perot and 5 percent undecided or supporting
another candidate. The margin of sampling error was three percentage points. In
a tracking poll, new samples are interviewed each day and reports are issued on
the combined results for two or more days at a time.

When the findings of the most recent major national polls are averaged, Mr.
Clinton leads Mr. Bush by 43 to 36 percent, with 16 percent for Mr. Perot.

Poll in Michigan

But the President was cheered this morning by a local television station survey
that showed him in a statistical tie with Mr. Clinton in Michigan.

Macomb County's blue-collar conservatives are the key to Mr. Bush's failure or
success here, and an indication of his national standing as well. They are the
archetype of the financially struggling, anti-tax Democrats who deserted Jimmy
Carter for Ronald Reagan in 1980, and stayed to vote for Mr. Bush in 1988.

With the economy lagging most of this year, conventional wisdom this year has
held that these Reagan Democrats were rejecting Mr. Bush and swinging back to
their party.

But Mr. Teeter, the Bush campaign chairman, said in a telephone interview today
that it was not happening. He said Mr. Bush had pulled even in Macomb County,
which he said "was strongly in favor of Bill Clinton" only two weeks ago.

Whether such trends are sufficiently strong or rapid to make a difference in
Tuesday's election remains unclear. But Mr. Teeter, who has every incentive to
appear optimistic, argued that the race was now close enough for Mr. Bush to
begin consolidating his hold on the normally Republican South and West. Those
are regions that Mr. Clinton has strongly contested all summer and fall.

"If we can get that base back of 190 to 210 electoral votes in the West and
South," he said, "then you can go fight him for those 60 or 70 other votes you
need to win an election."

Mr. Bush plans to pursue those votes next in Tennessee and Missouri, where he
campaigns on Friday, and on Saturday by train in Wisconsin.

In addition to a faster pace on the campaign trail, Mr. Bush has been jamming as
many television interviews as possible into his last week before the election,
appearing on all the network breakfast programs. Tonight he appeared on the ABC
News program "Prime Time Live" and he even consented to an interview on Saturday
with a reporter for MTV, which he had been avoiding for months. The interview is
to be broadcast on Sunday.

Tonight Mr. Bush seemed bent on driving home his argument that national news
organization were unfair to him, saying he had been "hammered, hammered,
hammered" on Iraq and other issues.

The ABC interview with Sam Donaldson grew testy at several points and Mr. Bush
may have been trying to use the combative reporter as a foil for his feud with
the press, much as he did with Dan Rather of CBS News in the 1988 New Hampshire
primary campaign.

When Mr. Donaldson suggested that the Administration knew that Iraq's President,
Saddam Hussein, was diverting agricultural loans to weapons programs, Mr. Bush
snapped: "Wrong, wrong and wrong. Wrong, wrong and wrong."

LOAD-DATE: October 30, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: President Bush went to Macomb Community College in Warren,
Mich., and continued to paint Gov. Bill Clinton in terms of high taxes and low
character. Mr. Clinton went on the attack against Mr. Bush in speech in Detroit
as he toured three states. (Jose R. Lopez; Lee Romero/The New York Times)
(pg.A1); President Bush was joined yesterday by former President Gerald R. Ford
after arriving at the airport in Grand Rapids, Mich. (Jose R. Lopez/The New York
Times) (pg. A17)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              173 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 30, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Pay Toilets a Success, but They're Still Closing

BYLINE: By STEVEN LEE MYERS

SECTION: Section B; Page 1; Column 2; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 883 words


The six tall elegant sidewalk pay toilets -- praised as a clean, inexpensive and
long overdue solution to one of New York City's most vexing and enduring
irritants -- are to be closed today, then dismantled and shipped back to France,
where they came from.

"Everybody needs it," said the owner of sports memorabilia shop in midtown, Azam
Khan, as he waited for his turn at one of the toilets on the bustling sidewalk
along West 34th Street in Manhattan. "I need it right now. They have to put
more, instead of taking them away."

Not to worry, though. City officials said the six coin-operated self-cleaning
toilets installed in Manhattan in a four-month experiment had worked so well
that the city would move ahead with plans to install more than 100 on busy
sidewalks in all five boroughs.

If all goes according to plan, the officials said, the toilets would be ready
by, say, the spring of 1994.

"I know it's frustrating to the people on the street," said Daniel P. Orlando,
special assistant to Deputy Mayor Barbara J. Fife, who coordinated the project.
"But that's the way we do business in the city. It's a process, not only for
this particular project but for other projects, as well. In the end it protects
the public."

The long effort to install the European-style booths to ease the shortage of
public toilets began early last year, when a coalition of civic groups and
foundations approached JCDecaux a company in a suburb of Paris. The company has
made and operated more than 4,000 such toilets in 700 European cities.

From the start, though, the effort became so mired in legal, political and
bureaucratic knots that at several points it appeared doomed. Advocates for the
disabled complained that the plans amounted to discrimination.

The city had to appeal to the State Legislature to waive a ban temporarily on
public pay toilets that was enacted in 1975 amid complaints that they
discriminated against women. Executives of JCDecaux worried whether people in
New York, the first American city to try the toilets, would accept them.

In June 1991, after much wrangling, Mayor David N. Dinkins approved the test of
the six kiosks, three of them accessible solely to people in wheelchairs. The
cost, nearly $1 million, was paid by JCDecaux and several foundations, including
the 34th Street Partnership and the J. M. Kaplan Fund.

A year later the experiment began. "In this city," the project coordinator for
JCDecaux, Suzanne Davis, said, "getting something done in a year is pretty
good."

By all accounts the toilets -- two each on Chambers Street near City Hall, 34th
Street near Macy's and 125th Street at Frederick Douglass Boulevard -- have been
an overwhelming success. More than 40,000 people have used the green or gray
kiosks, which cost a quarter and are free for disabled people with a special
card.

Despite the heavy use, fears about vandalism and lurid activity proved
unfounded, Ms. Davis said.

An attendant who minds the two toilets on 34th Street, Dragomir Livic, said he
had heard just positive comments. To prove that he displayed a stack of
customers' suggestion cards. "What a great relief," one card said. "Now I can
drink all the soda I want while I shop."

Despite their success the toilets have to be dismantled over the next two weeks
because the waiver of the law against public toilets expires soon. The
dismantling was first reported on Wednesday in New York Newsday.

Ms. Davis said her company wanted a 20-year contract to install more than 100
toilets around the city -- paid for by advertising on toilets and other kiosks
with maps and cultural information. She said that seven other cities had also
expressed interest, but that the company wanted New York, first in so many
things, to be the first in sidewalk pay toilets.

For now, though, the toilets face a long review by the City Transportation
Department, competitive bidding, a long procurement process and, finally, site
selection that would included consultation with as many as 20 city agencies, the
borough presidents and local community boards.

And along the way legal and political obstacles remain.

The city has to win approval of a bill permanently waiving the state law and
seek the approval of the Justice Department, because just some of the toilets
will be accessible to the handicapped. Advocates for the disabled say that
violates the Americans With Disabilities Act, which took effect in January.

Would Be Part of Cityscape

Ms. Fife said she was optimistic that the obstacles could be overcome and that
the toilets could become as much a part of the city as the subways and
skyscrapers. "We're going to 'fast-track' it," she said. "The public reception
has been quite qood. I would think we'll try to move quickly."

On 34th Street, where the two toilets have blended in along the sidewalk crowded
with vendors and shoppers opposite Macy's, customers were incredulous over the
Byzantine workings of government. Having come to rely on the toilets, the last
thing they wanted was to see them go.

"You mean, they put it in as an experiment and it works, so now they're going to
take it out?" asked Jeff Lichtenbaum, a 47-year-old disabled Vietnam veteran who
called the toilet he had just left a pleasure. "You know what that is? That's
politics."

LOAD-DATE: October 30, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: The test of pay toilets has worked well. Their French owner
plans more than 100, but after a wait to iron out approvals. "They put it in as
an experiment and it works, so now they're going to take it out?" asked Jeff
Lichtenbaum on West 34th Street. (pg. B1); Customers for the pay toilet on 34th
Street awaiting their turn. (pg. B7) (Chester Higgins Jr./The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              174 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 30, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Independent;
Campaign Stalled, Perot Team Tries to Fix It, Fast

BYLINE: By STEVEN A. HOLMES,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 19; Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1045 words

DATELINE: DALLAS, Oct. 29


Acknowledging that the Ross Perot's rise in the polls has stalled, his aides
tried today to defuse two issues that they fear have slowed his momentum: the
charge that he is trying to buy the election, and his unsubstantiated assertions
that the Bush campaign planned to disrupt his daughter's wedding and to wiretap
his business telephones.

The Perot campaign has developed different strategies for dealing with the two
issues. Aides are confronting the first with claims that President Bush and Gov.
Bill Clinton have actually outspent Mr. Perot. They are confronting the second
with silence.

"I think the realization was made yesterday or the day before that the attention
on the nonissues, the character assassination, was really playing into the hands
of the other two candidates," Clayton Mulford, the campaign's general counsel,
said today. "We need to get back to our message."

'The Recession is Here'

Mr. Perot hit hard on that message during an appearance on "Larry King Live"
tonight, asserting that, contrary to Mr. Bush's claims, the recession has not
ended.

"Oh, give me a break, Larry," Mr. Perot said when asked by his host if the
recession was over. "The recession's not over. The recession is here. The
recession is going to stay here because of deficit spending and competition for
money."

Mr. Perot went on to say that "everybody out there except the White House knows
the recession is here. And if you lived in that insulated bubble they've created
for the President, you wouldn't know it either."

According to the classic definition of a recession as two straight quarters of
no economic growth, the recession ended last year. The nation has had six
straight quarters of economic growth, but because the recovery has been so
sluggish, many people feel the nation is still mired in a recession.

In an interview taped with David Frost on Wednesday that is scheduled to air
Friday night, Mr. Perot asserted that he would "hate being a Cabinet member,"
refused to rule out a 1996 Presidential race, and seconded the assertion of his
running mate, Adm. James B. Stockdale, that anti-war protests had prolonged the
Vietnam War.

Mr. Perot also repeated his charges that he has been redefined by political
opponents. "I'm not paranoid," he said, rejecting the word used by Marlin
Fitzwater, the White House spokesman. "You will never find the word 'paranoid'
used once in all of the thousands, hundreds of thousands of words written about
me before this started."

John Florescu, the executive producer of the Frost show, said today that Mr.
Perot had become "testy" when Mr. Frost had asked him about his July withdrawal
from the race and about his allegations of Republican dirty tricks. At one
point, Mr. Florescu said, Mr. Perot asked that the cameras be turned off, and
they were. "I think he just wanted to collect his thoughts," Mr. Florescu said.
"He was annoyed."

Sliding in the Polls

At a press briefing Mr. Mulford agreed with a reporter's suggestion that public
opinion polls suggest that the air seems to be leaking out of Mr. Perot's
campaign, and he attributed that development to critical stories about the
independent that were "planted" by his opponents. Mr. Mulford produced no
evidence to support that assertion.

A tracking poll conducted by Gallup for USA Today and CNN that will be released
Friday indicates that 16 percent of those surveyed backed Mr. Perot. Last week a
similar poll gave Mr. Perot the support of 20 percent of those surveyed.
Similarly, a tracking poll by ABC News today showed Mr. Perot at 16 percent, a
five-point drop from a similar poll released on Monday that had the Texan at 21
percent.

A tracking poll is a survey in which fresh samples of voters are interviewed
daily and the combined results of two or three days of interviews are released.

Public opinion surveys are not the only indicators that the Perot boomlet may
have peaked. Figures compiled by Nielsen Media Research News indicate that the
number of people tuning into Mr. Perot's 30-minute and 60-minute "infomercial"
ads has dropped sharply. About 16.5 million viewers watched his first one on
Oct. 6. Since then none of the other half-hour programs have come close to
attracting that many viewers. On Monday, 12 million viewers -- a respectable
showing, but a 25 percent decrease -- watched at least part of his half-hour ad.

Obviously concerned about their candidate's stall, Mr. Mulford and Sharon
Holman, the campaign's press secretary, told reporters today that they would no
longer answer questions about Mr. Perot's assertions that Republican operatives
had planned to conduct a smear campaign against his daughter or about his
involvement in getting the F.B.I. to conduct an undercover sting operation on
the chairman of the Bush campaign in Texas.

Meanwhile, seven former Perot volunteers held a news conference in Washington
today to accuse Mr. Perot of ordering illegal credit checks on them and of
forcing them out of the campaign. They also told stories of high-handed tactics
like being pressured to sign "loyalty oaths."

Mr. Perot has admitted investigating some of his volunteers because he suspected
wrongdoing. The participants provided documents showing they had been
investigated but had no proof that Mr. Perot was directly involved.

All or Nothing

Mr. Perot also continued his running feud with the news media today. The Texan
was scheduled to be interviewed today on "Prime Time Live" and on Friday on
"20/20". Since both programs are broadcast on ABC, the network's executives
decided they might be giving Mr. Perot too much exposure. When they asked which
program he would prefer to appear on, Mr. Perot told them that if he could not
appear on both, he would appear on neither.

During his interview with Mr. King, Mr. Perot said ABC had appeared to be
pushing him to appear on only "Prime Time Live," where host Sam Donaldson would
interview him during one of the show's segments.

"I really object to being jerked around because I am neither a Democrat nor a
Republican," Mr. Perot told Mr. King. "I'm just a cur dog put on the ballot by
the people. I feel that if you invite somebody to do something, you should honor
your commitment or at least give them a voice."

LOAD-DATE: October 30, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Vandals used black plastic and white lettering yesterday to
turn the famous sign in the Hollywood Hills into a campaign advertisement.
(Reuters); Supporters of Ross Perot gathered outside a hotel room in Washington
where former Perot volunteers were holding a news conference to accuse the
campaign of ordering illegal checks of their credit records. (Stephen
Crowley/The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              175 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 30, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Judge to Oversee Burning in Arkansas

BYLINE: By KEITH SCHNEIDER,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 16; Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 569 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 29


A Federal district judge in Arkansas today assumed control of the largest
project ever undertaken in the United States to incinerate chemical wastes
contaminated with dioxin.

The judge's order, responding to a lawsuit brought by Arkansas community groups
and a Washington-based public interest law group, came as the incineration of
the chemical wastes began today at the abandoned Vertac Chemical Company
pesticide plant in Jacksonville, Ark., a city of 29,000 people 15 miles
northeast of Little Rock.

Closely Watched Project

The old plant, which manufactured insecticides and defoliants from 1948 until it
was closed in 1986, is one of the most contaminated toxic waste sites in the
country, according to the Federal Environmental Protection Agency. Since 1979,
when Federal and state investigators found dioxin in the soil and water in
Jacksonville, Vertac's toxic wastes and what to do about them have been a source
of considerable strife in the community and have dominated the attention of Gov.
Bill Clinton and his environmental advisers.

On Tuesday the state announced that it had given final approval to a plan to
burn nearly two million pounds of wastes from the manufacture of the Vietnam-era
defoliant Agent Orange, which was contaminated with traces of dioxin. Dioxin, a
byproduct of heating chlorine-based compounds, is regarded as dangerous, though
precisely how dangerous is a matter of dispute among scientists.

The incineration project in Jacksonville is being closely watched by
environmental groups, state officials and industry leaders across the country
because cleanups of dozens of other toxic waste sites contaminated with dioxin
could be accelerated or delayed, based on results from Vertac.

In his ruling today the judge, Stephen M. Reasoner, allowed the state to proceed
with its original plan that calls for continuing the incineration of the
dioxin-contaminated wastes through Saturday. Samples will then be collected from
air-monitoring stations around the plant and sent to a laboratory for analysis.

Burning of the dioxin wastes is to resume on Nov. 9-10 for more environmental
tests. The state plan called for evaluating all the results; f officials
determined that levels of dioxin in the atmosphere around the plant were below
safety limits set by the evironmental agency, the rest of the chemical wastes
would be burned over the next two or three months.

Temporary Halt Ordered

But Judge Reasoner, responding to a lawsuit brought by Gregory Ferguson, a
lawyer in Little Rock, and Mick Harrrison of the Washington-based Government
Accountability Project, issued an order directing the state to temporarily halt
the incineration after Nov. 10 to give opponents time to also evaluate the test
results.

The judge said he would hold a new hearing before deciding whether to allow the
project to resume. He did not set a date for the hearing today.

Kenneth L. Smith, Governor Clinton's chief environmental adviser, said the order
did not alter the state's plan."We're perfectly comfortable with the ruling," he
added.

Opponents said Judge Reasoner's order provided most of the protections they had
sought. Mick Harrison, a lawyer with the Government Accountability Project, said
state officials "are going to be allowed to do just enough testing to prove to
the judge that it's too dangerous and that the project should be permanently
shut down."

LOAD-DATE: October 30, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: A Federal district has issued an order directing the state of
ARkansas to halt incineration temporarily after Nov. 10 at the abandoned Vertac
Chemical Company pesticide plant, above, in Jacksonville, Ark. The plant is one
of the most contaminated toxic waste sites in the country. (Alan S. Wwiner for
The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              176 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 30, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Review/Film;
A French Girl, a Chinese Lover And Colonial Days in Old Vietnam

BYLINE: By VINCENT CANBY

SECTION: Section C; Page 5; Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1219 words


"The Lover" ("L'Amant"), Marguerite Duras's best-selling French novel, would not
seem to be the ideal subject for a film, especially not for an English-language
French film, directed by Jean-Jacques Annaud ("The Name of the Rose," "The
Bear") and shot on a very big budget on location in Vietnam.

"The Lover" isn't exactly "Apocalypse Now." It's Miss Duras's slim
self-searching memoir about a love affair she had when she was 15 1/2 years old,
a French schoolgirl in Saigon in 1929, with a rich Chinese man of 27. The novel
is an interior monologue so sparely written that the characters aren't even
named. The girl is the Girl, the man the Man, her mother the Mother and her two
brothers the Older Brother and the Younger Brother.

Even the love affair, a series of alternately diffident and passionate couplings
in a room in Saigon's Chinese quarter, is not quite what it seems. It is more an
expression of the girl's loathing for her doomed mother, her bullying older
brother and her bleak life than it is an expression of love for the man she has
sex with. The novel is also about colonialism turned upside down. Though young,
pretty and white, the girl is dependent on the man for his money, his consuming
love and his knowledge of the world of sexual politics she is about to enter.

The novel is almost without incident. It's both delicate and hard as nails. Not
the easiest sort of material to adapt. Yet the film that Mr. Annaud and his
producer, Claude Berri, have made is something of a triumph.  It's tough,
clear-eyed, utterly unsentimental, produced lavishly but with such discipline
that the exotic locale never gets in the way of the minutely detailed drama at
the center.

"The Lover," opening today at the Fine Arts, is the elegiac, barbed recollection
of one very particular young woman's growing up, of her initial timidity
expressed as incredible rudeness and of her increasing preoccupation with the
power she realizes she now possesses. The awareness that love had anything to do
with the relationship comes late.

The screenplay, written by Gerard Brach and Mr. Annaud, is a remarkably good
one. It sticks closely to the structure of the Duras novel and even to the
literary tone, which the film doesn't try to hide but, instead, exploits in the
soundtrack narration spoken by Jeanne Moreau. The rich husky Moreau voice
perfectly calls up the image of the aging Duras, sitting at her desk as she
writes, remembering her youthful prettiness and virtually the exact moment at
which that prettiness vanished, seemingly overnight, leaving, in her words, "a
destroyed face."

Jane March, a young English model, makes her acting debut in the central role of
the girl. It's still too soon to tell whether she's a great or even a good
actress, but she is wonderful here. Wearing a sleeveless sack of an old silk
dress and her adored hat (a man's fedora), her hair in pigtails and her lips
caked with the brilliant red lipstick she puts on when out of her mother's
sight, Ms. March looks remarkably like the photographs of the young Duras.
Possibly for reasons of taste, the film increases the girl's age from 15 1/2 to
18.

Whatever her years, Ms. March is still a nymphet beauty. The girl she plays with
such seeming effortlessness is pathetically inexperienced but also coldly
focused, approaching her first adult sexual relationship with a clinical
curiosity that both fascinates and baffles the man.

Equally good is Tony Leung, the handsome Hong Kong actor who plays the lover,
the son of a Chinese businessman from the north whose fortune comes from real
estate. Having recently returned from Paris, where he dropped out of school, the
Man has the manners of a Parisian playboy but with none of playboy's
self-assurance. He dresses impeccably, rides around Saigon in a shiny black,
chauffeur-driven limousine, but his hand shakes almost out of control when he
lights a cigarette the first time he meets her. She is standing by the rail on a
crowded ferry boat crossing the Mekong River.

That first afternoon he offers to give her a ride back to Saigon, so that she
can escape the bus she had been riding. She accepts. They scarcely speak in the
car during the drive, but their hands touch. She looks out the window, away from
him. He looks out the other window. The next day he waits in his limousine in
the street by her school. When she comes out, she walks directly to the car and
they go to the room in the Chinese quarter.  That is the beginning.

Though "The Lover" hasn't much time to characterize the girl's family, enough is
sketched in to give a sense of what her mother and brothers are like. They are
poverty-stricken, loveless colonials living frugally in a society in which
they're supposed to be dominant, at the top of the heap. On a rare day they seem
to enjoy each other. Mostly they are bitter and fearful. This is what the girl
means to escape.

In the room in the Chinese quarter she is tender to the man when they make love.
Afterward she might say without emotion that she doesn't much like Chinese. He
retaliates. He tells her that he couldn't even marry her now if he wanted to:
she's no longer a virgin.

He sometimes takes her out to expensive dinners with her mother and brothers,
who gorge themselves on food, get drunk and never speak to him. They accept the
relationship because the man gives the girl money.  The fact that she might be
in love with him never enters their minds.  He is, after all, Chinese.

From the beginning of the affair both the girl and the man have known it was not
to last. She is due to go back to Paris. He is betrothed to a proper Chinese
girl. The awareness of the limited duration of their relationship has seemed to
relieve them of any responsibilities, to have guaranteed them against awkward
commitments. Yet the end is not what either expected.

Mr. Annaud demonstrates real authority in his treatment of this material. The
film stays within its prescribed bounds. It is so beautifully controlled that
even the love scenes, though steamily photographed, have a kind of innocence
about them. Like the girl, the film has a way of standing just a little outside
everything it sees, considering, recording the details, reserving judgment. The
final effect is unexpectedly sad, but in a way that has nothing to do with pity.

Through the voice of Miss Moreau, the Duras presence is never forgotten. "The
Lover" is a very good mov ie.

"The Lover," which has been rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or
adult guardian), has a lot of nudity and scenes of simulated sexual intercourse.


The Lover

Directed by Jean-Jacques Annaud; screenplay by Mr. Annaud and Gerard Brach, from
the novel by Marguerite Duras; director of photography, Robert Fraisse; edited
by Noelle Boisson; music by Gabriel Yared; production designer, Thanh At Hoang;
produced by Claude Berri and Timothy Burrill; released by Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer
Inc. Fine Arts Theater, 4 West 58th Street, Manhattan. Running time: 103
minutes. This film is rated R.

Young Girl . . . Jane March
Chinese Man . . . Tony Leung
Mother . . . Frederique Meininger
Elder Brother . . . Arnaud Giovaninetti
Younger Brother . . . Melvil Poupaud
Helene Lagonelle . . . Lisa Faulkner
Chinese Man's Father . . . Xiem Mang
Narrated by Jeanne Moreau

LOAD-DATE: October 30, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Tony Leung. (Benoit Barbier)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              177 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 31, 1992, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Tom Cahill, 73, Football Coach At Army During the Vietnam War

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Page 11; Column 5; Sports Desk

LENGTH: 282 words

DATELINE: SCHENECTADY, N.Y., Oct. 30


Tom Cahill, the football coach at Army from 1966 to 1973, when the military
academy's sports fortunes were affected by opposition to the Vietnam War, died
Thursday after suffering a heart attack. He was 73 years old.

Mr. Cahill was stricken while bowling and died after he was taken to the
emergency room here at Ellis Hospital, hospital officials said.

He was hired at West Point in 1959 by Earl (Red) Blaik to coach freshman
football and baseball, and was elevated to head football coach in 1966, when
Paul Dietzel resigned to take over at South Carolina.

Mr. Cahill coached the Cadets to an 8-2 mark in his first season, and was voted
coach of the year by his fellow coaches and by football writers.

Army had an 8-2 record in 1967, and the Cadets went 7-3 in 1968, but they closed
out the 1960's with a 4-5-1 mark, as opposition to the Vietnam War continued to
mount, influencing athletic recruiting at West Point.

With such football powers as Nebraska, Tennessee, Penn State and Notre Dame
remaining on the Army schedule, the Cadets suffered on the field. Mr. Cahill's
1970 squad had a 1-9-1 mark. His last Army team went without a victory. After
Army lost to Navy in its 1973 season finale, by 51-0, the worst loss in the
history of that storied service-academy rivalry, Mr. Cahill was dismissed.

He later coached for five seasons at Union College in Schenectady.

In 1984, Mr. Cahill returned to West Point as an analyst on the Army radio
network. He was scheduled to broadcast the Cadets' game against Eastern Michigan
on Saturday. He was also a high school teacher in Clifton Park, N.Y., until he
retired two years ago.

He is survived by his wife and four children.

LOAD-DATE: October 31, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              178 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 November 1, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

When the Movement Knew Sin

BYLINE: By Michael Kazin;  Michael Kazin, who teaches history at American
University in Washington, is writing a book about populism in the 20th-century
United States.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 12; Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 924 words



RADS
The 1970 Bombing of the Army Math Research Center at the University of Wisconsin
and Its Aftermath.
By Tom Bates.
Illustrated. 465 pp. New York:
HarperCollins Publishers. $25.

THERE are events in the life of every political movement that appear to prove
its critics' worst charges. For the radical opponents of the war in Vietnam,
such an event was the bombing of Sterling Hall, a large brick building in the
middle of the sprawling campus of the University of Wisconsin in Madison. The
massive explosion early in the morning of Aug. 24, 1970, accidentally killed one
man (a theoretical physicist named Robert Fassnacht) who was doing research in
the basement, injured several others and caused over $6 million of property
damage.

It was not a deed typical of the New Left, despite that movement's romance at
the end of the 1960's with armed insurrection. Only a tiny number of militants
ever moved from rhetoric to terrorism. Still, it was a sobering moment for those
whose utter hatred of United States policy in Indochina inspired the chant
"Bring the war home!" As Todd Gitlin wrote in "The Sixties," his brilliant
history and memoir of the period, "In the illumination of that bomb the movement
knew sin."

Tom Bates's "Rads" tries to make sense of what in retrospect seems an act of
political idiocy and self-destruction. Mr. Bates -- a journalist, most recently
with The Los Angeles Times Magazine, who attended the University of Wisconsin in
the late 1960's -- embeds his conclusions in a lucid, dramatic narrative that
avoids taking sides. Although his "heart remains with those who tried to stop
the war in Vietnam," he dispenses empathy on both the amateurish bombers (who
called themselves the New Year's Gang) and the zealous police officers, F.B.I.
men and prosecutors who took several years to track them down. Mr. Bates, unlike
most who write nonfiction about the radicals of the 1960's, cares less about
coming to judgment than about mining the lode of extraordinary tales the decade
produced.

He focuses his history on Karl Armstrong, the white working-class leader of the
gang, whose actions he traces almost day by day. One learns how Mr. Armstrong
gathered each item in his volatile arsenal as well as when and with whom he
smoked marijuana and ate ice cream. But Mr. Bates reaches beyond the
biographical details, essential and otherwise, to portray a campus and
surrounding youth community that was, at the time of the bombing, in a state
resembling civil war. Part detective story, part Armstrong family history, part
saga of the local New Left, "Rads" works because its author clearly grew
attached to his characters and yet has a commanding view of the terrain on which
they fought.

Sterling Hall was considered a fitting target because it housed, among other
operations, the Army Math Research Center, an organization that symbolized the
many links the United States military had forged with academia since the onset
of the cold war. Madison radicals had waged a long campaign to expose the center
as a hotbed of counterinsurgency research and to drive it off the campus; they
had issued reports, circulated leaflets and petitions, held raucous
demonstrations.

But the litany of escalating protest only made the director of Army Math more
determined to stand his ground. Ironically, the bombing did less damage to the
center than to other parts of the building. And the victim, Robert Fassnacht,
had no connection to Army Math at all; a peace advocate, he had even favored
severing the research center from the university.

But the issue of military research was, as New Leftists were fond of saying at
the time, not really the Issue. Madison, by the late 1960's, had become a
Midwestern mecca for the hip and the radical, a "third coast" where the
university president, Fred Harvey Harrington, was antiwar, the official student
newspaper supported the Vietcong and drug laws were unenforceable. Karl
Armstrong had entered the university on an R.O.T.C. scholarship, but he soon
joined the huge cast of countercultural rebels in their Mifflin Street parties
and ritualized bouts with police. He badly wanted to help end the carnage in
Vietnam and to impress his fellow revolutionaries. Bombing allowed the quiet,
mechanically adept young man to be of use to the movement and become a big man
on campus at the same time.

Mr. Bates implies that Mr. Armstrong's motivation also stemmed from a more
intimate source of pain. Years before, his father had physically abused his
sisters and frequently beat Karl up; the boy did not fight back and could not
articulate his rage. So he may have compensated with dynamite and blasting caps.
An intriguing hunch, but Mr. Bates makes no attempt to explain how the personal
and political meshed in Mr. Armstrong's mind.

Fortunately, that blunt attempt at psychohistory is just a bump on an otherwise
smoothly plotted and humanely reflective narrative. The bombing of Sterling Hall
was not, as Mr. Bates writes, "the most violent act of a violent decade"; places
like Watts, Newark and Kent State have a better claim to that ill-defined,
uncertain title. But in the wake of Robert Fassnacht's death, most New Left
activists did abandon the fantasy of armed struggle and rediscover the anonymous
virtues of grass-roots organizing.

Aside from an excellent 1979 documentary film, "The War at Home," the Wisconsin
tragedy has largely been forgotten outside the precincts of Madison. Now justice
-- historical, personal, even literary -- has been done.

LOAD-DATE: November 1, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: A police officer inspecting a car that was damaged by a bomb
that ruined the Army Math Research Center, rear, at the University of Wisconsin
campus in Madison in 1970. (Associated Press)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              179 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 November 1, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

ABOUT-FACE

SECTION: Section 6; Page 14; Column 4; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 136 words


Michael Norman's article "About-Face" (About Men, Oct. 11) is right on. Vietnam
was a moral crisis for America -- and most of our young men failed it.

A few genuinely opposed the war and either served in noncombat positions or went
to jail -- an honorable course of action. But most of the little boys put their
fear, their interests and their ambitions ahead of their duty to their country.
Some ran away to Canada; many ran to the National Guard, as did Dan Quayle; some
pulled every string they could get their hands on, like Bill Clinton.

Because there were so many, it seems inevitable that some day we'll have a draft
dodger as President. But the moral rot of that generation is a poison in our
society. It will be a long time before Vietnam is forgotten!

JEAN L. ORBEN
Arlington, Va.

LOAD-DATE: November 1, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              180 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 November 1, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

ABOUT-FACE

SECTION: Section 6; Page 14; Column 5; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 279 words


Norman's article goes to the soul. I was an Air Force combat pilot in Vietnam,
also during its bloodiest years. I believe that I can understand how George
Bush's combat experience has had little impact on his "compassion level" or that
of his Presidency. He, too, was a pilot, and he had it even safer than I did.
Bush returned to a carrier after missions; I returned to "Rocket City," the
playfully accurate name for Pleiku in the Central Highlands. There was such
detachment from the war during a "routine mission" -- seeing it from above --
that I find myself, today, wishing I had listened to that Marine Corps
recruiting sergeant who tried selling me on the corps as I was leaving the Air
Force recruiter, back in 1967. Now, when it is all over, I see myself less a
veteran for not having had the honor of the daily mud and gore.

We pilots had our own kind of terror. But it is not the same as being on the
ground. So I do not believe George Bush's war experiences give him a measurable
edge over Bill Clinton. If anything, perhaps Bush, as well, has considered the
nature of battle and has mulled over the ground war. Maybe this is why he has
seemed eager to take up the sword and has committed our troops to engagements
that really are not ours.

Bill Clinton took a path that was open to me. I did not have to go, but I went;
Clinton did not have to go, so he did not. This does not make him less competent
to be in office than Bush, Norman or myself. Perhaps it makes him more
competent, for he functioned within the system to achieve his personal agenda. I
hope that if he is elected he can achieve a broader agenda.

STEVEN A. SOHN
Brooklyn

LOAD-DATE: November 1, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              181 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 November 1, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

ABOUT-FACE

SECTION: Section 6; Page 16; Column 3; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 83 words


While watching the first of the Presidential debates, my mind kept wandering to
the thoughts expressed by Norman. As I listened to Bill Clinton speak to "the
issues," I kept wishing that he had put himself at risk in his early life --
whether in uniform or jailhouse jeans. Like many others, I chose to serve in the
military, and I feel a special sense of pride when our flag goes by. In the end,
commitment to one's country and its ideals are paramount.

CLARK LAMBERT
Woodbury, L.I.

LOAD-DATE: November 1, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              182 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 November 1, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

ABOUT-FACE

SECTION: Section 6; Page 16; Column 3; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 105 words


I want Norman to do an about-face, look back into the horror of Vietnam and tell
us exactly why "a young Bill Clinton" might have become a wiser and better
President had he "put himself at risk."

Bill Clinton might have "learned a lot in uniform" -- something about equality,
teamwork, survival, his own inner strength. But I learned all of that long
before I went to Vietnam, long before I entered West Point -- and so can any
other young man or woman. We need not face "either the enemy or the F.B.I." to
forge our character. There are truer, less costly tests.

COL. PAT C. HOY 2D, RETIRED
Cambridge, Mass.

LOAD-DATE: November 1, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              183 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 November 1, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

ABOUT-FACE

SECTION: Section 6; Page 16; Column 3; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 162 words


Norman says he longs "for the day a pacifist . . . sits in the Oval Office."
However, he perpetuates the notion that battle shapes the man and makes him more
capable of bold leadership.

I suggest that in this time of extraordinary change, when new commitments to
friendship and cooperation are being made among cold-war enemies, that there are
new opportunities for heroism.

I hope for the day when a candidate for President will rise high in public favor
for doing other service to America: because she gave four years of her youth to
the Peace Corps; because she taught in an inner-city school for 15 years before
becoming a politician; because she gave half her time as a young lawyer to
provide free legal services for the poor before she ran for office.

We can expand the definition of patriotism and sacrifice. "Peace hero" may not
have the same ring as war hero. But we could get used to the idea.

CAROLYN JOHNSEN
Lincoln, Neb.
<ILS>Drawing

LOAD-DATE: November 1, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              184 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 November 1, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

EGOS & IDS;
Crazy for Birds, but No Birdy

BYLINE: By Degen Pener

SECTION: Section 9; Page 4; Column 1; Styles of The Times

LENGTH: 210 words


Jane March, the 19-year-old British model who stars in Jean-Jacques Annaud's
"The Lover," has birds on the brain.

"I kept two birds while we were filming in Vietnam," she said on Tuesday, while
visiting the Houston Street apartment of Hunt Slonem, a painter and collector of
exotic fowl. "The owl I found. One day, I saw some kids chasing it with a stone.
They weren't going to give up at this game, so I bought it off them for $1. I
nursed him back to health and let him go. I also had a banana bird. It ate
nothing but bananas and sang all day."

Ms. March is still exasperatedly denying the rumor that the film's love scenes,
which she shot with co-star Tony Leung, were something more than cinema.

"It's always going to be around," she said. "That stupid rumor. It's something
that happened because Jean-Jacques Annaud gave vague answers at the beginning.
He wants people to believe this story happened. They want to sell this film."

Based on the book by Marguerite Duras, "The Lover" is the story of a young
French girl's affair with a rich Chinese man in colonial Vietnam. The film
opened in the United States last week.

Is Ms. March harboring a secret desire to fly? "No, I'm not like Alan Parker's
Birdy," she said. "I just like them."

LOAD-DATE: November 1, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              185 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 November 1, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Benefits

SECTION: Section 9; Page 13; Column 3; Styles of The Times

LENGTH: 1670 words



Celebrity Cook-Out

MONDAY -- A score of notables including Paloma Picasso, Peter Boyle, Tatum
O'Neal, Joan Rivers and Tony Randall will match their culinary skills at a
benefit at the Plaza for the March of Dimes. Cocktails at 7 P.M. will be
followed by the celebrity smorgasbord of hors d'oeuvres, dinner and dancing.
Black tie. Tickets, $750, or $125 for people 35 years old and under for
reception from 7 to 8:30 P.M., from (212) 353-8353.

 For Hudson Valley Heritage

MONDAY -- Historic Hudson Valley, which operates five properties along the
Hudson River as part of its program to preserve the heritage of the Hudson River
Valley, will hold a black-tie dinner-dance benefit at the Rainbow Room.
Cocktails at 7 P.M. Tickets, $600, from (914) 631-8200.

 Senior Gay Benefit

MONDAY -- Senior Action in a Gay Environment, or SAGE, will hold a champagne
reception and a concert of the show music of the composer John Kander and the
lyricist Fred Ebb ("Cabaret," "Zorba," "Chicago"). Reception at 6:45 P.M.
followed by the concert at the Promenade Theater, Broadway at 76th Street.
Tickets, $100, or for the show alone, $75, from (212) 741-2247.

 Aid for Medical Students

MONDAY -- A black-tie dinner and dance at the Waldorf-Astoria will raise money
for scholarships to New York Medical College. Cocktails at 6:30 P.M. Tickets,
$350, from (914) 993-4550.

 Longtime New Yorkers

WEDNESDAY -- The Hundred Year Association of New York, made up of companies and
institutions that have been in the city for at least a century, will honor
William R. Chaney, chairman of Tiffany & Company. The annual black-tie Gold
Medal Award Dinner will be held at the Museum of the City of New York, starting
with cocktails at 6:30 P.M. Tickets, $500, from (914) 654-4520.

 Pan Asian Theater Benefit

WEDNESDAY -- The premiere of the Pan Asian Repertory Theater production of
"Cambodia Agonistes" will be a benefit performance for the theater company at
Playhouse 46 at St. Clement's Church, 423 West 46th Street. Cocktails at 7:30
P.M. Tickets, $100, from (212) 245-2660.

 A Season Preview

WEDNESDAY -- A cocktail party, auction and preview of the annual Christmas
boutique of the Auxiliary of St. Vincent's Hospital and Medical Center will be
held from 6 to 9 P.M. at the Westbury Hotel, Madison Avenue at 69th Street.
Tickets, $100, from (212) 790-8584.

 Pajama Party

WEDNESDAY -- Fashion Accessories Industry Together for Health -- Faith -- will
hold its first benefit to raise money for the American Foundation for AIDS
Research at City, a club at 124 West 43d Street. Dress is "creative pajamas."
Tickets, $250, for cocktails, a fashion show, buffet, dancing and entertainment
starting at 8 P.M., or $100 for entrance at 9 P.M., from (212) 355-5049.

 Renewal for Israeli Youth

THURSDAY -- The Youth Renewal Fund, which provides educational services for
young people in Israel, is holding a dinner-dance benefit at the Harmonie Club,
4 East 60th Street, at 7 P.M. Tickets, $100, from (212) 687-9022, or $125 at the
door.

 Greenery for the Bronx

THURSDAY -- The New York Botanical Garden in the Bronx will hold a dinner and
dance in its Conservatory to benefit Bronx community gardening programs. The
event starts with cocktails at 6 P.M. Tickets, $150, from (212) 220-8958.

 Amnesty International Event

THURSDAY -- Amnesty International, the worldwide organization that speaks out
against the persecution of people for their beliefs, will benefit from the 6:30
P.M. American premiere of the movie "Indochine" at the Gotham Theater, Third
Avenue at 58th Street. It will be followed by a 9:30 P.M. buffet at the French
Embassy Cultural Services, 972 Fifth Avenue, at 79th Street, with Catherine
Deneuve, the star of the movie about the French era in Vietnam. Tickets, $125 --
or for the movie alone, $30 -- from (212) 633-4212.

 19th Precinct Programs

THURSDAY -- To help local crime-prevention and athletic programs, the 19th
Precinct Community Council of the Upper East Side will hold a cocktail party
from 6 to 9 P.M. at the Americas Society, Park Avenue at 68th Street. The Ballet
Hispanico Student Company, the Police Department's Emerald Society Pipe and Drum
Band, and the jazz harpist Daphne Hellman will perform. Tickets, $35, at the
door. Information: (212) 348-4116.

 Gold Gloves for Charity

THURSDAY -- Eighteen Major League Baseball players will receive awards for
outstanding defense at the Rawlings Gold Glove Award Charity Dinner at the
Sheraton New York. The black-tie evening, starting with cocktails at 6 P.M.,
will provide money for scholarship funds and the American Cancer Society.
Tickets, $500, from (212) 874-3165.

 Night Out for Cerebral Palsy

THURSDAY -- A buffet dinner, drinks, dancing and raffles are on tap at a 7:30
P.M. party at the Broadway Grill, 1605 Broadway, near 48th Street, to benefit
United Cerebral Palsy of New York City. Black tie. Tickets, $50, from (212)
683-6700, ext. 217, and at the door.

 Subterranean Party

THURSDAY -- Dining in 18 restored subway and elevated rapid transit cars dating
to 1904 will be part of one of the city's more distinctive benefits at the New
York Transit Museum. The black-tie benefit is for the museum, which is in the
former Court Street station, at the corner of Boerum Place and Schermerhorn
Street in Brooklyn Heights, two blocks from Borough Hall, and which has some
80,000 visitors a years. Cocktails will be at 6:30 P.M., followed by dinner and
dancing on the mezzanine level. Tickets, $250, from (718) 330-3063.

 Berlin Opera Party

FRIDAY -- The baritone Sherrill Milnes will be honored at a black-tie
dinner-dance at the University Club, 1 West 54th Street, sponsored by the
American Berlin Opera Foundation, which raises funds for the Deutsche Oper
Berlin and for scholarships for Americans to study with the Berlin Opera.
Tickets, $500, from (203) 972-0854.

 Staten Island Institute Ball

FRIDAY -- The annual anniversary ball of the Staten Island Institute of Arts and
Sciences, one of the city's oldest and most diverse museums, will be at the
Monte Bianco, 2131 Hylan Boulevard, near Bedford Avenue in New Dorp. Cocktails
at 7:30 P.M. Black tie. Tickets, $125, from (718) 727-1135.

 Send In the Clowns

FRIDAY -- The Big Apple Circus will celebrate its 15th anniversary with a
fund-raising performance in Lincoln Center's Damrosch Park. The evening will
benefit circus programs including visits by 40 clowns three times a week to
eight local hospitals. Cocktails and a picnic supper, at 6 P.M., will be
followed by a full performance, after which the performers will join the
audience for dessert and dancing. Tickets start at $75 for adults and $50 for
children, 12 under, from (212) 268-2500.

 For Children With Cancer

SATURDAY -- The Tomorrows Children's Fund, an organization of parents aiding
children with cancer and serious blood disorders, will hold its annual awards
dinner at the Grand Hyatt New York Hotel. Don Imus, the radio personality, will
be honored. Cocktails, at 6:30 P.M., will be followed by dinner and
entertainment by the blues singer Delbert McClinton. Tickets, $250, from (201)
996-2900.

 Jazz in White Plains

SATURDAY -- The jazz musician Billy Taylor will entertain at the Performing Arts
Center at the State University at Purchase, N.Y. The evening, starting at 7 P.M.
with cocktails and followed by a buffet dinner, the performance and champagne
and dessert, will benefit a proposed cancer diagnostic and treatment center and
hospice program at the White Plains Hospital Center. Tickets, $200, or for
concert and post-concert reception alone, $100, from (914) 681-1120.

 Salute for an Activist

NOV. 8 -- Arthur B. Krim, the 83-year-old Hollywood producer of more than 1,000
films and a civil rights and political activist, will be honored by People for
the American Way, an organization founded in 1980 to protect Constitutional
liberties. A black-tie benefit for the group will be held at the Waldorf-Astoria
starting with cocktails, at 6 P.M., and followed by dinner, dancing and
entertainment, including a performance by Harry Belafonte. Tickets, $500, from
(212) 944-5820.

 Connecticut Afternoon

NOV. 8 -- The Housatonic Valley Association, an environmental group concerned
with one of Connecticut's most scenic river valleys, will hold a brunch and
auction. The events and items for bid include a private piano lesson with Peter
Duchin, lunch with Erica Jong, fly fishing with Tom Brokaw, original manuscripts
from Philip Roth's forthcoming book and exotic trips. Brunch is scheduled for 1
P.M at the Litchfield Inn on Route 202 in Litchfield, Conn., followed by a
champagne reception, viewing of the items and the auction at 3:30 P.M. Tickets,
$100, or for the reception and auction only starting at 2 P.M., $25, from (203)
672-6678.

 New Jersey Cruise

NOV. 8 -- The Paper Mill Playhouse will hold a four-hour cruise around New York
Harbor to mark its 10th anniversary in its playhouse in Millburn, N.J., which
was built after fire destroyed the original building. Boarding will be at 5 P.M.
at Harborside Dock in Jersey City for the cruise that will include cocktails,
dinner and entertainment. Parking is available at the dock or at the playhouse,
where there will be buses to the dock. Tickets, $250, from (201) 379-3636, ext.
2623.

 Family Benefit

NOV. 8 -- "Freaky Friday," a sort of children's comedic version of Kafka's
"Metamorphosis," is about Annabel who wakes one morning to find she has turned
into her mother. The musical's 12:30 P.M. performance at the Promenade Theater,
Broadway at 76th Street, will benefit Caring, a program at Columbia University's
College of Physicians and Surgeons that teaches child psychiatrists about the
emotional needs of poor children. A dim sum lunch at Shun Lee West, 65th Street
near Central Park West, follows the show. Tickets, $150 for adults, $50 for
children 12 years and under, from (212) 355-0356.

LOAD-DATE: November 1, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Schedule

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              186 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 November 1, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

CAMERA;
Not Just What We See, But How We See

BYLINE: By John Durniak;  John Durniak is a freelance writer, editor and
consultant on photography.

SECTION: Section 9; Page 15; Column 3; Styles of The Times

LENGTH: 661 words


JOE McNALLY took 36,000 pictures for a magazine assignment, which resulted in
the 40-page, 40-picture story, "The Sense of Sight," that dominates the November
issue of National Geographic.

Mr. McNally described the story's genesis to 100 young photographers at the
fifth annual Eddie Adams Workshop last month in Jeffersonville, N.Y. He said
that he got a phone call from Thomas R. Kennedy, the National Geographic senior
assistant editor who is in charge of photography at the magazine.

"What are you doing in 1991?" Mr. Kennedy asked him.

"I could not believe my ears," Mr. McNally recalled. "He was asking if I would
take an assignment on the human eye that would take one full year to complete.
What would I do with my other clients? Well, it didn't take me too long to say
yes."

Mr. McNally spent the first month of the assignment doing research, to learn as
much as possible about his subject. He read voraciously -- books, scientific
articles and research materials about sight and the problems that cause
blindness.

He decided that his challenge was to produce unexpected pictures that would give
new information. For example, most photos of blind people with their Seeing Eye
dogs don't look much different from pictures of people who can see strolling
with their dogs. So, Mr. McNally chose to shoot from the dog's level, a
low-to-the-ground angle. Using a flash and a slow shutter speed to get a
blurred-motion effect, Mr. McNally took a picture of a Seeing Eye dog and his
master crossing a street in New York. The dog's eyes were brightly lit by the
flash, while the master's face was cropped out, a vivid example of how a blind
person depends on the dog's eyes.

Because the magazine assignment required a lot of travel, Mr. McNally packed
lightly so that his equipment would not get in his way. "I traveledalone with
two Nikon F4 cameras, one Nikon 8008 backup camera, five lenses and two Nikon FB
24 electronic flash units," he said. His film: Kodachrome ISO 64 and ISO 200.

While on assignment, he discovered the Zeiss Model 40 SL/P Ophthalmic Slit Lamp
camera, which takes magnificent close-up pictures, and he used it to make a
jewel-like image of the pupil of an eye for the magazine's cover.

One of the most challenging shots was of surgeons who could not be disturbed
while working in darkened operating theaters. He used time exposure to show
tension and speed of movement during laser eye surgery at Johns Hopkins Hospital
in Baltimore. With the camera on a tripod, exposures were two to four seconds.
Small electronic flash units were set at one-sixteenth or one-eighth of normal
power and were covered with light-blue gel filters to match the normal lighting
of the room.

Over the course of the year, Mr. McNally and a National Geographic illustrations
editor, William Douthitt, boiled down 1,000 rolls of film to 80 pictures. Then
with other editors, they cut the number down to 50, then to 40 with the help of
layout artists.

Mr. McNally, who works through the Sygma agency, recently helped create an
unusual foldout picture of the Vietnam Veterans Memorial in Washington, featured
in the current Life. (Mr. McNally used an offbeat technique in making the
foldout. With a Fujica 617 Panoramic 120 camera on a tripod, he made a 20-minute
exposure during which he walked around the wall flashing in people with a hand
held electronic flash unit. He made 12 such exposures over a 10-hour period.)

Mr. McNally and Mr. Douthitt will present a talk, "Behind the Scenes at the
National Geographic," part of the Masters of Photography series, on Nov. 10 at
the National Geographic Building in Washington. Tickets by credit card are
available at (202) 857-7700; nonmembers, $8 to $10; members, $6 to $8.

College photography students and young professionals can receive information on
the Eddie Adams Workshop Competition by writing to P.O. Box 4182, Grand Central
Station, New York 10163, or by calling (212) 930-7604.

LOAD-DATE: November 1, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              187 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 November 1, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Vote on the Issues, and May the Best Man Win

SECTION: Section 4; Page 16; Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 535 words


To the Editor:

Having heard the charges against Bill Clinton regarding his alleged "draft
evasion," I would like to step forward as a witness to the truth.

As a classmate of Bill Clinton at Georgetown University, former Mayor of
Sarasota and local co-chairman for the Bush campaign in 1988, I offer the
following as objective testimony.

The charge is that Bill Clinton, like many young men of our generation, opposed
the Vietnam War and did not serve in the military. Let me take you back to the
spring of 1968.

The Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. and Robert F. Kennedy had been shot,
Washington was burning and Richard M. Nixon was running for President on a
platform to get us out of Vietnam. Protesters on college campuses were burning
draft cards, barricading themselves in administrative offices and suggesting
that students subject to the draft flee to Canada. It was a time of turmoil.

In the spring of 1968, Bill Clinton was not participating in draft-card burnings
or sit-ins. He was finishing his senior year of college, hoping he would be able
to use his Rhodes scholarship to study in Oxford, England, and not be called up
in the draft. He had been very involved on campus and had led fights to build
the largest float at the homecoming parade and for unification of Georgetown
schools. In addition to service work on campus, and work at Senator J. W.
Fulbright's office on Capitol Hill, he led many of us, including me, into
active, responsible, social issues.

During the last month of our senior year, Dr. Ralph J. Abernathy brought rural,
impoverished blacks from the South to Washington on the "Freedom Train" to
protest peacefully around the Reflecting Pool for civil rights and economic
development, and Bill Clinton spent his every extra minute helping. The protest,
poorly planned, underfunded and subjected to torrential rains, turned into a
quagmire of human misery. The people had no food, sanitary facilities, financial
resources, no way to get home.

Bill enlisted me to help transport people to bus stations, to bake bread and to
help out those in a desperate situation. I had just returned from a marathon
trip to Sebring, Fla., and back, trying to hook up with a National Guard unit --
unsuccessfully, I might add. I vividly remember discussing the draft with Bill,
particularly in light of his Rhodes scholarship, and his remarking that he was
going to take his chance in the lottery, or get into a Reserve Officers Training
Corps unit if he wasn't called up sooner. This was not a radical student, but
someone who, like most of us, wanted to get on with the productive advancement
of his life.

Having supported George Bush in 1988, and having known Bill Clinton since
college, I like and admire both. Like most people, I want to see this election
based on issues, not innuendo and false issues that won't lead us out of this
economic depression.

I hope people vote on the issues of today, based on the plans that have been
offered for tomorrow. Unless we pull together, and get back to solving problems,
our collective hopes for the 21st century will never be realized. For our
country, may the best man win.

KERRY G. KIRSCHNER
Sarasota, Fla., Oct. 9, 1992

LOAD-DATE: November 1, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              188 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 November 1, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THE WORLD;
Behind Vietnam's Candor: A Fear of Being Isolated

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE

SECTION: Section 4; Page 4; Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 946 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


A Vietnamese-speaking Russian named Irina Zisman is now touring the United
States to the applause of Vietnamese-Americans and the consternation of Hanoi.
Ms. Zisman recently began a prime-time evening broadcast on Radio Moscow that
beams pro-democracy messages to Vietnam through the same powerful Siberian
transmitters that once relayed programs on the glories of Communism.

Hanoi's stunned officials have branded the broadcasts subversive, but their
protests to Moscow have been unavailing. For them, the experience has been a
painful illustration of how the world has changed; it also offers a clue to
Hanoi's motives in pledging, after 20 years of obfuscation, to finally reveal
what it knows about Americans unaccounted for in Indochina since the war.

Without weakening in any way its absolute commitment to Communism,
Administration officials say, Vietnam is signaling that it realizes there may
never be a better chance to win American diplomatic recognition and unlock
international economic assistance that Washington has blocked. Withholding
information is no longer a workable policy for Vietnam, which remains
disastrously underdeveloped by Asian standards and is now running into trouble
with both Moscow and Beijing.

There is also some added reason to move fast. For years the Bush Administration
has told Vietnam it could obtain normal relations with the United States in
return for cooperation in ending the Cambodian civil war and better accounting
for American servicemen missing in Indochina. Now, tantalizingly close to the
end of that road, Hanoi cannot be sure that a new Congress or perhaps a
Democratic Administration will not revise the road map by raising additional
issues of political pluralism and human rights. Such a course is advocated by
Vietnamese-American organizations and some politicians in both major parties.
And if Bill Clinton wins the Presidency it is far from certain that recognizing
Vietnam would get high priority in any event.

Internationally, Vietnam has not only lost its political, economic and military
lifelines to the former Soviet bloc, but it has also been thrown into renewed
confrontation with China, with the latest friction points being conflicting
claims to offshore islands in the South China Sea and the activities of
smugglers. "Vietnam has become totally isolated strategically," said Robert S.
Ross, an assistant professor of political science at Boston College who has
recently returned from five months in China. "The Chinese are now trying to
extract Vietnamese humility in many ways."

"It was the Soviets who basically allowed the Vietnamese to defy China," said
Mr. Ross, referring to the period in the 1970's when Leonid I. Brezhnev
supported Vietnam even at the expense of Soviet-Chinese relations. Mikhail S.
Gorbachev reversed the policy, and after the Chinese-Soviet summit meeting in
1989 Vietnam was cut adrift. "It had little alternative but to accommodate
itself to Chinese authority," Mr. Ross said.

Pressure From U.S. Companies

Dependence on China did not contribute much to Vietnam's economic development
beyond some increased trade, however, and now Bush Administration officials are
being pressed by American oil companies and other industries eager to do
business with Vietnam. Administration analysts think Hanoi would be receptive,
and say they don't believe Hanoi wants to trade dependence on China for
dominance by Japan in its search for economic partners. Such a message was
apparently transmitted between the lines in recent talks between Vietnam's
leaders and an American delegation led by President Bush's special envoy, John
W. Vessey Jr.

"There is concern about both Japan and China throughout Southeast Asia," said
Evelyn Colbert, former Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for the region. But
she said some analysts overestimate how much the fear of China is a motive for
Vietnam's developing openness with the United States. She said the Vietnamese
"woke up and saw that their economic system wasn't functioning" and may simply
have come to realize that to improve their economy they would have to change
their relationship with the United States. And that, of course, would have to
start with a certain amount of candor about the missing servicemen.

"I like to think that Vietnam's cooperation has something to do with those of us
who in one form or another have been telling them over and over and over again,
you've got to do something about this issue if you want to get normalization,"
said Ms. Colbert. "They were told by many people, including their friends, that
this demand may be unreasonable, but you have this bad public image because of
it."

John McAuliff, executive director of the U.S.-Indochina Reconciliation Project,
an organization that has been forging private links to Vietnam, says the Bush
Administration has also shown a change of approach, "sending a signal to Vietnam
that they are serious about solving the problem without recrimination." In
addition, the Senate Select Committee on P.O.W.-M.I.A. Affairs and the Pentagon
played a part by narrowing the number of cases on which the Vietnamese could
reasonably be expected to provide information.

"This is something the Vietnamese can respond to," Mr. McAuliff said, but he
added that Washington must seize the moment too. "We would hope that once the
election is over," he said, "whoever is elected could use the interregnum period
for responding appropriately to the Vietnamese, to the legitimate pressures from
American business and to pressure from our allies to cease using trade and the
lending organizations as clubs to hit the Vietnamese for political reasons."

LOAD-DATE: November 1, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: American soldiers searching a week ago for remains of two
American pilots near the wreckage of an F-4 fighter that crashed in 1965 in
northern Vietnam. (Reuters)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              189 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 November 1, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Years After a War Death, Proof Brings a New Grief

BYLINE: By JANE GROSS,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1446 words

DATELINE: TUCSON, Ariz., Oct. 29


Day after day, long after Joseph C. Morrison's fighter plane was shot down over
Vietnam, long after the dreaded knock at the door with the news that her husband
was missing in action, Peggy Morrison continued to get his letters.

She would open the mailbox each morning, find the thin airmail envelope
addressed weeks earlier in his distinctive script, and she would tremble with
longing for her lost husband and with fear for herself and her children.

Those ghost letters were so painful that she remembers thinking, "Please, God,
let there not be another." Then one day the mailbox was empty. She found herself
seized with disappointment and quickly reconsidered her prayer.

"I'd go racing out thinking, Please, just let there be one more letter, just one
more," she said, the memory still sharp enough to sting 24 years later. "But the
last one had come. I knew that. There wouldn't be any more."

That was the day Mrs. Morrison began saying goodbye to her 38-year-old husband,
who had thick black eyelashes, a stubborn jaw, a deep Baptist faith and a
daredevil's love of flying.

But it was a long goodbye, not over until last month, when another knock at the
door and another group of military officials brought Mrs. Morrison and her
children photographs that proved that Colonel Morrison was dead and offered
clues about how it happened.

The Morrison photographs are expected to be the first of many distributed to
family members of the 2,265 United States servicemen who have been unaccounted
for in Indochina nearly two decades after American troops withdrew from Vietnam.

Earlier this month, the United States received a trove of 4,800 photographs and
a pledge by the Hanoi Government to turn over the remainder of its archives. But
such information has been slowly making its way to the families for several
years, with that trickle now about to become a flood.

The Morrisons, for instance, were notified in 1989 that an American team had
visited the site where Colonel Morrison's plane went down on Nov. 25, 1968. Some
time later, the family was given photographs, found by American researchers in
Vietnamese museums, of Colonel Morrison's pistol and holster. Last summer, the
family also received another picture, of the pilot's flight plan.

Then, late in September, Colonel Morrison's son, Jed, a 38-year-old banking
executive here, received a call asking if two gentlemen from the Pentagon could
come for a visit. Something big was about to happen, or so he thought.

The family gathered in Jed Morrison's living room: Jed; his sister, Cindy
McClanahan; their spouses, and Mrs. Morrison. Jed, who considered himself head
of the household at 13 when his father disappeared, arranged and rearranged the
furniture, irritating his jittery mother with his finicky preparations.

The Pentagon officials arrived with high-quality photos taken by the Vietnamese
that left no doubt that Colonel Morrison was dead. Mrs. Morrison's children
sprang from their chairs and said, virtually in unison, "I want to see them."

Mrs. Morrison, now 59 years old, said she was shocked by their bravery as they
hurried off to the bedroom with the photos. She knew she ought to be with them.
She was the mother, after all. But she sat like a stone.

"A steel trapdoor just slammed shut in my brain," Mrs. Morrison said. "I could
not look. I could not bear to see his face if there was agony I could detect."

While her children were in the bedroom, Mrs. Morrison asked some questions of
the Pentagon officials. Was his body mutilated? They told her no. How long was
he dead before the pictures were taken? She feared bloat or rigor mortis. The
photos were taken immediately, they said.

Then the children came out, eyes red and chins quivering. They assured her that
the pictures were vivid, but not gruesome. Mrs. Morrison signaled she was ready
and was escorted to the bedroom by her son-in-law. Gently, he passed her the
pictures: the wreckage of the plane, Colonel Morrison's helmet and watch and
finally pictures of his body.

In those photos, Colonel Morrison is sprawled face up in a clearing in the
jungle, his safety vest open to reveal his name stitched on his flight suit. His
right arm is slung back at an angle, as if there were a heavy pistol in his
hand.

Pact Not to Be Taken Alive

Jed Morrison believes, after conversations with the Pentagon investigators, that
his father died in a gun battle with a North Vietnamese trying to take him
prisoner. Mrs. Morrison concurs, since her husband had made a pact with his best
Air Force buddy that they would shoot it out rather than wind up P.O.W.'s.

The determined look on Colonel Morrison's face is one his wife remembers well.
"Like when he'd be lying on the couch, his eyes half closed, and ask me if I
thought we should buy that new car," she said. "I'd see that look, and I'd know
it didn't matter what I said, because he'd already decided."

Mrs. Morrison studied the photos, mesmerized by the familiar youthful face and
rangy body, so like Jed's, who is now the same age his father was when he died.
The man in the photo seemed so full of vitality, ready to walk back into her
life. "It hit me with such a sorrow," Mrs. Morrison said.

The resolve Mrs. Morrison had built over 24 years slipped away. She always
assumed that her husband was dead and better off spared the ordeal of prison.
But now, against her better judgment, she wished otherwise.

Wishes Change Over Time

"Why, oh why didn't you choose to be captured?" Mrs. Morrison mutely asked him.
"You might have lived to come home to us if you didn't choose to shoot it out."

Her children's thoughts as they confronted the photos were very different.

Jed felt protective of his father, wishing that "I'd been there to help you
fight." And he was proud to discover "that my dad was fighting right to the
moment of his death."

Cindy, who is 36 years old, wanted to reach out and hug her father. She also
rejoiced at the confirmation that he had died quickly and then enjoyed the peace
of heaven.

Later, she told her mother and brother that she had been dreaming about her
father, who disappeared when she was 11. In one recent dream she saw him in a
huge church but could not get near him. In another, they sat together on the
floor of a cargo plane and talked.

Colonel Morrison has always figured in the thoughts and conversations of his
wife, children and six grandchildren, who know all the stories about "heroic
Grandpa Jay." But these days they are also recalling and celebrating the way
they pulled together as a family of three.

Ordinary Childhoods

The children remember the ordinary rhythms of adolescence: Cheerleading for
Cindy, hunting and horseback riding for Jed with his maternal grandfather, comic
books and poached eggs whenever they were sick, the house noisy and full of
friends.

For Mrs. Morrison, there was a brief remarriage, but otherwise, with the
financial support of her military benefits and her husband's life insurance, she
was a full-time mom, seeing to it that her children did not grow up "walking
wrecks."

The children knew little of Mrs. Morrison's brief stint with a group of M.I.A.
wives who gathered signatures to send to Hanoi pleading for the men's release.
But when they were older, she told them about a signature-gathering expedition
at the University of Arizona, where one student refused to sign.

"Your husband got what he deserved," the young man said. Mrs. Morrison thanked
him for his time and cried all the way home.

Nor did the children know of Mrs. Morrison's sudden pangs of loneliness. When
her next-door neighbor came home from work each night, the sound of his car door
slamming left her bargaining with God. "Oh, if just one time, I could hear the
sound of Jay's pickup, I wouldn't even ask him to come in the house," she said.

Or the times in the grocery store when she would look up the aisle and see a
couple, hand-in-hand, deciding what kind of cereal to buy. "I would be
overwhelmed," Mrs. Morrison said, unable to finish her marketing. Item by item,
she would unload the cart, run to the car and fall weeping on the steering
wheel.

At home the children would be waiting. Late one night, long after he was
supposed to be asleep, Jed confronted his mother in the television room. "Mom, I
need to ask you a question," he said. "Are you and Cindy and me going to make
it?"

Mrs. Morrison gulped and stared deep into his eyes. "You better believe it, Jed;
you just watch us." she said.

"I said it with such a tone of voice that he must have believed me, because off
he went to bed. And that was the point I knew I had a reason to get up every
morning."

LOAD-DATE: November 1, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Peggy Morrison got photographs proving her husband's death.
(Jeff Topping for The New York Times) (pg. 1); Peggy Morrison held a photograph
of her late husband, Col. Joseph C. Morrison, as she stood with her son, Jed,
and daughter, Cindy McClanahan, yesterday at Jed's house in Tucson, Ariz. (Jeff
Topping for The New York Times); Colonel Morrison stands near his jet in Udorn,
Thailand, in 1968. (pg. 18)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              190 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 November 1, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Vietnamese Photos Resolve Fate of 4 Missing Americans

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 18; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 645 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 31


In months of analyzing hundreds of Vietnamese archival photographs, the Pentagon
has been able to resolve with any certainty only four new cases of Americans
unaccounted for since the war.

In all cases, the servicemen have been confirmed dead, officials said, and the
families have been told. Analysts are close to identifying at least another
three others, according to the Pentagon, but the photographs have yielded more
clues than conclusions.

Pentagon officials said that so far none of the material had indicated that any
Americans survived the war in captivity.

Working at the headquarters of the Defense Intelligence Agency in Arlington,
Va., a team is trying to identify some of the more than 2,260 Americans the
United States says are unaccounted for. More than half are known to have died,
but their bodies have not been recovered. There are varying degrees of
information, some of it contradictory, about the rest.

American Team to Vietnam

A team of American archivists and analysts went to Vietnam this weekend to take
Hanoi up on its offer of greater access to records concerning Americans captured
or killed during the war.  Accompanying the team, officials said, was Theodore
Schweitzer, the American researcher and Pentagon consultant through whom much of
the new archival material was funneled over the last year.

On Friday, in another demonstration of greater cooperation with the United
States, the Vietnamese allowed another group of Pentagon officials to visit the
secret headquarters in southwestern Vietnam from which Hanoi ran its war in what
was then South Vietnam.

The leading Communists at the headquarters, near the Cambodian border in Tay
Ninh Province, once included Nguyen Van Linh, later Secretary General of the
Communist Party, and Vo Van Kiet, who is now Prime Minister.

Breakdown of Photographs

At a recent briefing for reporters, Pentagon officials supplied a breakdown of
the new archival material. In studying the 4,800 photographs, officials said
they eliminated duplicates, leaving about 1,800 images. Of these, 600 were
identified as copies of photographs the Pentagon had already collected since
American troops were withdrawn from Vietnam in 1973.

Officials say that the 1,100 to 1,200 remaining photographs include copies of
identification cards and newspaper clippings. The Pentagon said these prove how
meticulously the Vietnamese kept records on Americans.

Of the photographs already analyzed, 178 were of people alive in captivity at
the time, 160 of whom have been identified as known prisoners. All but two came
home in prisoner exchanges. Two died in captivity, and their remains were
returned.

There are 63 photographs of bodies or body parts, containing 31 individuals.
Twenty-three of them have been tentatively identified. Five were on the missing
list, and six on the list of men known to have been killed but whose bodies have
not been recovered. Twelve were of servicemen whose remains have been returned.
Eight are still being studied.

The wealth of clues provokes questions about whether the "discrepancy list" of
cases judged to be the most easily resolvable in Hanoi should be maintained.

Mary Backley, director of operations for the National League of Families of
P.O.W.s-M.I.As, said the organization had always opposed the list.

"We don't want to narrow the universe to the extent that it would provide an out
for the Vietnamese," she said. "The archives have the potential to account for
many more Americans."

A Defense Department official said that there may be many more than the 135
discrepancy list cases that could be resolved, based on the new material. Other
officials in the Pentagon and State Department, believe that insufficient
attention is often given to cases that may be compelling, but do not appear on
the priority list presented to the Vietnamese.

LOAD-DATE: November 1, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              191 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 November 1, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Lowenstein Killer Moves Toward Freedom

BYLINE: By DAVID MARGOLICK

SECTION: Section 1; Page 49; Column 2; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1843 words


Last March, as the 12th anniversary of his most traumatic day ever neared,
Thomas Lowenstein heard some profoundly unsettling news. A New York judge had
just granted unescorted daily furloughs to Dennis Sweeney, the man who murdered
his father, Congressman Allard K. Lowenstein.

For Thomas Lowenstein, 23 years old, one of three children Allard Lowenstein
left behind, the news merely intensified the melancholy that March 14 always
brings. "I was already really sad anyway, and when I learned that Sweeney was
out 10 hours a day, I just hung up the phone, sat down, lit a cigarette, and
shook," he said.

Mr. Sweeney, the former Congressman's student and ally in the civil-rights
movement, was found not guilty by reason of insanity. Mr. Sweeney, whose disease
was diagnosed as paranoid schizophrenia, said he believed Mr. Lowenstein led an
international Jewish conspiracy that had tormented him for a decade.

The furloughs, which by court order must be used for "educational, vocational,
and/ or recreational purposes," are the latest stage in Mr. Sweeney's steady
progression through the state mental health system, where he has been held since
killing Mr. Lowenstein, a figure who helped topple a President during the
Vietnam era, served in the House of Representatives from 1968 to 1970, and
inspired a generation of impassioned followers.

At the time, the murder of the charismatic former Congressman by a deranged
former disciple epitomized for some the end of an era of political idealism.
Now, as Mr. Sweeney tastes freedom for the first time, the case has come to
illustrate two other factors that are often in conflict: the excruciating pain
and dissatisfaction of the families of crime victims over what they perceive as
leniency toward killers judged insane rather than guilty, and the fact that
those who kill the famous are often institutionalized or incarcerated longer
than those whose victims are lesser known. On average, people found not guilty
of crimes for reasons of insanity spend around four years in institutions.

"Perhaps it shouldn't in an egalitarian society, but whom you kill does matter,"
said one state official, who spoke on the condition of anonymity. "Mr.
Hinckley's choice of targets mattered a great deal," a reference to John W.
Hinckley Jr., who shot President Ronald Reagan in 1981.

Jenny Littlefield, who was married to Mr. Lowenstein from 1966 to 1976 and is
the mother of his three children, denied that the family wanted to see Mr.
Sweeney remain institutionalized indefinitely and that it had the political
clout to encourage that.

"John Hinckley or Sirhan Sirhan will never see the light of day, but Dennis
will, and that's something we have to live with," she said. "It's my job and the
job of Al's kids to say to the system, 'We want to make absolutely sure you do
your job and don't re-evaluate him in some slipshod way.' If a good doctor tells
us that he can be released, there's nothing more we can do."

The family's lawyer, Thomas Engel of New York, added: "By the time they got
involved, the horse was out of the stable and in the paddock. They just want the
supervision to continue, so that a guy who is seriously mentally ill doesn't get
lost."

From 1980 to 1989, Mr. Sweeney lived at the Mid Hudson Psychiatric Center, a
maximum-security facility in New Hampton, N.Y. In 1989, he moved to the
Middletown Psychiatric Center in Orange County, which is unsecured. The
furloughs were approved by Justice Brenda Soloff of State Supreme Court in
Manhattan, who accepted Mr. Sweeney's insanity plea and still presides over the
case.

Counseling, Not Drugs

Mental health officials maintain that his condition has steadily improved during
his institutionalization, through counseling rather than drugs, and that his
symptoms -- hearing voices, spitting continuously into a cup to exorcise the
devil within him, his belief in a Jewish conspiracy -- have largely abated.

For members of the Lowenstein family, Mr. Sweeney's newly found freedom prompts
a rash of emotions. There are the surges of sadness that come with fresh
reminders of the murder. There is anger over the course Mr. Sweeney's life has
taken, which some family members believe has been unduly easy -- in part because
it took the psychiatric rather than the punitive route. There is skepticism that
Mr. Sweeney has really changed, as state mental health officials insist, and the
conviction that the highly intelligent Mr. Sweeney has hoodwinked the
psychiatrists. And, at least to some, there is fear.

"We were absolutely shocked and very, very frightened," Dorothy DiCintio of
Westchester, Mr. Lowenstein's older sister, said about the furloughs.
"Surprisingly enough, even to myself, I don't hate Sweeney, and I don't think he
should get any harsher treatment because Al was an extraordinary person. But the
man is just a time bomb."

Seeking Conditional Release

Mr. Sweeney's status will soon be reviewed again, in a biannual procedure to
which anyone found not guilty for reasons of insanity is entitled under the law.
Officials at the Middletown center have asked Justice Soloff to maintain the
status quo for two more years. By opposing that motion, Mr. Sweeney is seeking,
for the first time, his conditional release from state custody.

Citing confidentiality requirements, neither state mental health officials nor
lawyers at Mental Hygiene Legal Services in Middletown, who are representing Mr.
Sweeney, will say how or where he is spending his time away from the center.
Others connected to the case, who insisted on anonymity, said he worked briefly
in a carpentry shop, then with disabled people until he was recognized as Mr.
Lowenstein's killer and a complaint was made to the Middletown center. Officials
then removed him from the job.

But they insist he poses no risk either to the Lowensteins, to others he stalked
a decade ago, or to anyone else. James Bopp, executive director of the
Middletown center, said Mr. Sweeney had made "great progress." Joel Dvoskin,
associate commissioner for forensic services of the New York State Office of
Mental Health, added: "Middletown has done a very, very thorough and competent
job of assessing Mr. Sweeney. By every report, he's doing fine."

Irving B. Hirsch, chief of the special projects bureau of the Manhattan District
Attorney's office, which monitors the status of people found not guilty by
reason of insanity, said his office would back attempts to keep Mr. Sweeney
institutionalized for the next two years. "Given his present condition, he is
still not ready to be living on his own," he said.

'I Feel Very Sad'

But the District Attorney's office did not object either in 1989, when Mr.
Sweeney was moved from a secure to a nonsecure center or, earlier this year when
the furloughs were first granted. In each instance, it concluded on the basis of
a psychiatric analysis of Mr. Sweeney that he was no longer a threat to himself
or to others, and that a relaxation of restrictions was appropriate.

Mr. Sweeney declined to be interviewed. His most recent available statement on
the case comes from a 1986 hearing. Asked what had led to his
institutionalization, he replied "a homicide on Mr. Allard Lowenstein." Asked
how he felt about killing the former Congressman, he said: "I feel very sad that
I did such a horrible thing to another human being, something that I will carry
around for the remainder of my life and continue to learn to live with."

Mr. Sweeney believed the former Congressman was part of a Jewish cabal that had
tormented him for a decade, in part by transmitting messages through his dental
work. That belief led him to remove his bridgework with a hacksaw. Later, it led
him to wander from Boston to Youngstown, Ohio, to Cambridge, Fall River, and
Lynn, Mass., to Mystic and New London, Conn., all in a vain attempt to elude his
tormentors.

And eventually, it led him, at the age of 37, to Mr. Lowenstein's law office,
where he removed a pistol from the pocket of his windbreaker, shot his former
mentor seven times, then laid down his weapon, lighted a cigarette, and waited
for the police to take him away.

More Evaluations

In the next few months, several psychiatrists, including one selected by Mr.
Sweeney's lawyers and one by the Manhattan District Attorney, will examine Mr.
Sweeney and submit their findings to Justice Soloff.

An assistant district attorney who questioned Mr. Sweeney in 1986, Kim Hogrefe,
recently expressed doubts that Mr. Sweeney's condition had changed. "The state's
doctors need to show that certain patients improve over time to justify their
existence and besides, if you kept people, there wouldn't be bed space for the
new folks coming in off the street," he said. "Unfortunately, Sweeney suffers
from the type of disease that is not thought to be curable."

Six years ago, at least one psychiatrist was convinced that his contrition was a
sham. "When I asked him if he was remorseful, he acknowledged, 'I feel bad,' but
there was no emotional input," Dr. James Christy testified at the time. "He
answered the same as if I had asked him, 'What's the day of the week?' or 'What
did you eat for lunch today?' "

Mr. Lowenstein was a dean and Mr. Sweeney a freshman when the two met at
Stanford University in 1961. Like dozens of idealistic young men, Mr. Sweeney
was electrified by the older man's energy and commitment to liberal causes. At
Mr. Lowenstein's urging, he traveled repeatedly to Mississippi for civil-rights
work, eventually dropping out of school to devote himself full time to such
work.

Casting Blame

As his mental state deteriorated, Mr. Sweeney blamed the C.I.A., the F.B.I. and
a group of New York Jews for a variety of calamities: his favorite uncle's fatal
heart attack; the plane crash that killed Thurman Munson, the former New York
Yankees catcher; the assassination of Mayor George Moscone of San Francisco, and
certain problems that befell him.

Before shooting Mr. Lowenstein, Mr. Sweeney stalked a film-maker named Edward
Pincus, whom he had met during his civil-rights work. Mr. Sweeney told Mr.
Pincus, who is Jewish, that his voice, along with his wife's and that of his
5-year old son, was among those tormenting him 24 hours a day. In a telephone
interview, Mr. Pincus said he was "very concerned" about the recent turn of
events in the case, but declined to comment further.

For Thomas Lowenstein, who was 10 when his father died, Mr. Sweeney's new status
brings a sense of menace. But there is also the resentment of a son who felt he
was coming to know his father only when he died.

"Most of us have the same name as the man he killed, so however minuscule the
odds, we certainly feel safer with him in than out," Mr. Lowenstein said. "But
since the only thing that's clear in all this is that he will never get what he
deserves, I could really care less what happens to him.

"I need to make peace with my father, and that whole aspect of my life. Every
minute I spend thinking of Sweeney is a minute I could spend on that."

LOAD-DATE: November 1, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: The family of Congressman Allard K. Lowenstein, who was killed
on March 14, 1980, struggles knowing that the killer, Dennis Sweeney, has
unescorted daily furloughs. Dorothy DiCintio, Mr. Lowenstein's sister, said, "We
were absolutely shocked and very, very frightened." (Susan Harris for The New
York Times); Dennis Sweeney, who was diagnosed as paranoid schizophrenic after
killing Allard K. Lowenstein. (Larry C. Morris/The New York Times) (pg. 54)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              192 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 November 1, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Foreign Affairs;
George, Bill and Millie

BYLINE: By LESLIE H. GELB

SECTION: Section 4; Page 17; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 718 words


Reaching new heights of eloquence in describing Bill Clinton and Al Gore,
President Bush declared that "my dog Millie knows more about foreign affairs
than these two bozos." Whether Millie's command of Mr. Bush's specialty
surpasses that of the two Democratic contenders remains to be seen. Their record
is yet too slender to render a final bozo balance sheet. Mr. Bush's record,
however, is ample.

Now, one does not lightly go about calling Presidents bozos. But by slapping the
bozo label onto a man who might be elected President in two days, Mr. Bush has
broken the bozo barrier -- and has invited measurement by that same exacting
standard.

Unquestionably, Mr. Bush skillfully supported Mikhail Gorbachev in the
dissolution of the Soviet empire and Helmut Kohl in forging German unification.
He beautifully corralled Arabs and Israelis into direct negotiations and pushed
for freer trade agreements. Above all, he brilliantly stitched together the
alliance against Saddam Hussein.

These represent considerable statecraft. Most of his other actions abroad
approach or cross the line into bozocraft.

Mr. Bush's denials notwithstanding, there is substantial evidence that he knew
-- and approved of -- President Reagan's efforts to trade arms to Iran for the
release of American hostages. In other words, Vice President Bush thought it
made sense to let Teheran know that it could acquire more U.S. weapons simply by
kidnapping more Americans in Lebanon. Was this a mere mistake or bozocraft?

President Bush provided billions of dollars in credits and technology with
military uses to Saddam until only months before the invasion of Kuwait. He did
so despite knowing that Saddam had employed poison gas against the Kurds, still
backed terrorists and was pushing ahead with secret programs to develop nuclear
weapons. Was this a reasonable policy to bring Saddam "into the family of
nations" or bozocraft?

In late August 1990, Saddam deployed more than 100,000 troops to the Kuwait
border. Never once in that time did Mr. Bush tell Saddam -- or even hint to him
-- that the U.S. would react to an Iraqi attack with U.S. force. Never once.
Indeed, on the day before the invasion, the White House opposed legislation to
stop further credits for Iraq. Was Mr. Bush understandably blinded by Arab
assessments of Saddam's peaceful intentions or was he caught in the web of his
own bozocraft?

In July 1989, only weeks after Chinese dictators had democratic dissidents shot
down in Tiananmen Square, Mr. Bush secretly dispatched Brent Scowcroft, his
national security adviser, to Beijing. The idea was to reassure Beijing's
leaders of the President's affections despite the harsh American words about
that unfortunate event. Was that trip a clever display of realpolitik or totally
insensitive bozocraft?

More than a year ago, Mr. Bush told leaders of an imploding Yugoslavia that the
U.S. wanted to keep that country whole. Serb leaders took this as license to use
force against breakaway republics. An excusable miscalculation or bozocraft?

Serbs and Croats have been massacring Bosnian Muslims for almost a year. Mr.
Bush and his Eurofriends have been feeding the dying victims, but reject even
the most limited military steps to defend them, like arming them. Prudent
restraint on Mr. Bush's part to avoid another Vietnam -- or phony excuses from
bozos who fail to understand the elemental need for humanitarian intervention in
any new world order?

After an inexplicably long delay, Mr. Bush offered a hastily drawn plan to
assist reform in the ex-Soviet republics. Then, as seems to be his pattern, he
ignored the situation -- as the Russian economy collapsed and dangerous
right-wingers gained the upper hand on Boris Yeltsin and the reformers,
imperiling the dismantling of thousands of nuclear weapons. The distractions of
campaigning or a bozo-like carelessness about the centrality of a peaceful
Russia in a new world order?

These and other policy flops raise profound doubts about Mr. Bush's reputation
for masterly statecraft. They suggest, rather, an arrogant disregard for
complexities, a blindness toward new world politics, a bozocraftiness. Now, Mr.
Bush says he wants to bring those same attributes to the solution of America's
problems at home. Watch your wallet, Millie.

LOAD-DATE: November 1, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              193 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 November 1, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

OCT. 25-31: In Clinton's Backyard;
After Dividing a State, Dioxin-Laced Waste Burns

BYLINE: By KEITH SCHNEIDER

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2; Column 2; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 228 words


Gov. Bill Clinton gave final approval last week to one of the most politically
sensitive environmental projects he has faced: the incineration of the largest
concentration of dioxin-contaminated wastes ever undertaken in the country.

The wastes lie in 2,700 steel drums at the abandoned Vertac Chemical Company
pesticide plant in Jacksonville, Ark., a city of 29,000 people near Little Rock.
In 1979, during Mr. Clinton's first term as governor, Federal and state
investigators swooped down on the old plant and found thousands of drums and
tanks, pipes and machinery contaminated by years of producing ingredients for
the Vietnam-era defoliant Agent Orange. Since then, the question of how to
dispose of the wastes has divided residents and dominated Mr. Clinton's state
environmental agenda.

Though its hazards are now a matter of dispute, many researchers still consider
dioxin very dangerous. Over the next few months, the incineration will release
150 to 800 grams of it -- somewhere between five ounces and two pounds -- into
the atmosphere, according to an estimate by the environmental group Greenpeace
that the Environmental Protection Agency did not dispute.

On Thursday, as the burning began, a Federal District Judge in Arkansas ordered
the project temporarily stopped on Nov. 10 to give experts time to evaluate the
results of safety tests.

LOAD-DATE: November 1, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              194 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 November 1, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Vote on the Issues, and May the Best Man Win;
He Led Us to Peace

SECTION: Section 4; Page 16; Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 300 words


To the Editor:

Within days we elect the next President of the United States. As I watched the
debates and read the commentaries in newspapers and news magazines, I reflected
on a precedent that might repeat itself.

I recall that Britain, in the election immediately following the defeat of
Germany in World War II, but before the surrender of Japan, voted Sir Winston
Churchill out as Prime Minister and Clement Attlee in. Within six years Britain
again summoned its greatest statesman and wartime leader, Winston Churchill,
back to serve as Prime Minister.

As the father of three draft-age sons and two daughters who are now able to plan
their lives without taking into consideration military service or the dangers
that haunted this nation during the cold war, I find it difficult to believe
that the American people have reduced the nation's highly successful foreign
policy of the last 12 years to an insignificant consideration in their selection
of leadership for the next four years.

I recently visited the three Scandinavian countries. Like the rest of the world,
they are experiencing economic recession. Many individuals with whom I spoke,
however, seemed amazed at the vitality of the United States in resisting the
worldwide slowdown. Our free enterprise system has experienced recessions, no
matter who occupied the White House. Anyone older than 30 can recall one or more
recessions from which the country bounced back.

We should think twice before we punish the architects of victory in the cold
war. The promises of short-term economic gains or of change for the sake of
change appear to come from those who are without the wisdom of experience.
Britain made that mistake -- let us learn from its experience.

GEORGE P. MC ANDREWS
Barrington, Ill., Oct. 23, 1992

LOAD-DATE: November 1, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              195 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 November 2, 1992, Monday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Republicans;
BUSH AND CLINTON GO NONSTOP IN BATTLING FOR CRUCIAL STATES

BYLINE: By MICHAEL WINES,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 1107 words

DATELINE: STRATFORD, Conn., Nov. 1


Raspy-voiced but outwardly ebullient, President Bush ended the weekend as he
began it, banging away at Bill Clinton during a last-shot sweep of states he
must win if he is to be re-elected.

In blustery Michigan, before cameras aboard Air Force One and on the airport
tarmac in Connecticut, the President leveled new accusations about Mr. Clinton's
position on taxes and his handling of questions about his efforts to avoid
military service.

Mr. Bush tried to rebut the clear impression that he is descending into a
catch-up strategy of deeply negative campaigning in the race's final hours.

"We didn't invite that term, 'Slick Willie. We didn't invite it," he said at a
rally of about 6,000 party workers at a professional basketball arena in the
Detroit suburb of Auburn Hills. "It's come in from Arkansas; it was all through
the Democratic primary. We are not going after his character; we're doing what
Harry Truman is: We tell the truth, and they think it's hell. So be it."

Tough and Getting Tougher

But Bush aides acknowledged that the final hours were only likely to get more
bitter and that Mr. Bush intended to place Mr. Clinton's character at the core
of every speech.

"There isn't any campaign that's this close and this tough that won't be even
tougher in the last couple days," Mr. Bush's campaign chairman, Robert M.
Teeter, said in an interview.

Mr. Bush's day started on a sour note in Wisconsin, where an unfavorable poll
and a tough television interview seemed to leave him in a dour mood. But
tonight, when Mr. Bush landed by helicoptor just outside Bridgeport, the
President was as cocky as he has been in this campaign.

Tireless on the Attack

"It's not the pollsters, it's not the pundits, it's not the talking heads on
television who tell you how to vote," he shouted to the Connecticut crowd of
about 8,000. "The American people make up their minds on Election Day.

"I love a good fight, and we're going to take it right to 'em," he concluded.
"Right around the American media."

Away from the campaign rallies, the President spent hours before local and
national television cameras, making twin attacks on what his aides view as Mr.
Clinton's weakest spots: his tax proposals, and his character.

In interviews in Detroit and aboard Air Force One, Mr. Bush raised new questions
about Mr. Clinton's stated intentions to revive the economy by making a $220
billion "investment" in new roads, advanced technology and other basic needs.

Today, the President asserted that Mr. Clinton was concealing a different
agenda. He cited a 1988 Newsweek magazine article in which Mr. Clinton was
quoted as saying that "investment" was a term that could be used to make a tax
increase more palatable.

'His Own Words'

"Let me read you his own words," Mr. Bush said tonight before some 8,000 people
at an airport rally in Stratford. "He said, 'There's a lot of evidence you can
sell people on tax increases if they think its an investment.' His own words
reveal this duplicity. We're talking about investment, and he means tax
increases."

Raising the Draft Issue

In the Detroit suburb of Auburn Hills, as campaign aides handed out copies of a
sworn statement to reporters, Mr. Bush said there was evidence that "friends"
tried to advance Mr. Clinton's political career in the 1970's by demanding
University of Arkansas records on his efforts to avoid military service during
the Vietnam war.

"Even today we have new evidence, an affidavit that when Governor Clinton first
ran for office, his friends used special connections to seize his R.O.T.C. file
and destroy all others," Mr. Bush said. "He's got to level with the American
people on this one."

In the affidavit, a retired Army colonel, Donald R. Cake, said that while he
worked at the university's R.O.T.C. unit in 1973 or 1974, he was told that
"representatives of Bill Clinton" had approached the unit's records clerk and
demanded all documents in Mr. Clinton's file.

Later, Mr. Cake swore, he and others in an R.O.T.C. staff meeting were told by
the unit's commander, Col. Guy Tutwiler, that the clerk's account was accurate
and that the R.O.T.C.'s regional headquarters had deferred a decision on whether
to comply with the request. University officials had advised him to release the
records, Mr. Cake swore.

Mr. Cake stated in the affidavit that he had decided to make his account public
because Clinton aides had called reports of the incident "hogwash."

For weeks, Mr. Bush has called on Mr. Clinton to make good on a promise made
last April to release all records relating to his military service. "He has
never done that to this day," Mr. Bush said. "He's waffling, and ducking."

Withdrew From Unit

At the time the R.O.T.C. events took place, Mr. Clinton was mounting his first
political campaign, for the House of Representatives. Four years earlier, in
1969, he had enrolled in the unit in an attempt to avoid the draft. He withdrew
from the unit several months later, when his risk of being drafted had declined.

As grist for his accusations, Mr. Bush was relying in part on an accusation in
Saturday's Washington Times, a conservative newspaper that has attacked Mr.
Clinton.

But in an interview before the Washington Times account appeared, James Davis, a
retired Army colonel who ran the R.O.T.C. program at Arkansas from mid-1974 to
1980, said neither Mr. Clinton nor anyone else approached him for records.

In Wisconsin early today for a television interview, Mr. Bush appeared subdued
and a bit nettled after being told that one new poll, by CNN, showed him falling
further behind Mr. Clinton. Mr. Teeter later challenged the poll, saying that
other surveys and the campaign's own data show otherwise.

By the time he arrived in rainy, windy Detroit to stump at a rally in the
Detroit Pistons' new arena, the Palace, Mr. Bush had regained his smile.

"There's been a little panic in Little Rock, because I think the goal that Bill
Clinton has seen ever since he was studying away in Oxford might be slipping
away from them," he said. "He's begun attacking my character, and I'd love to
fight this one out."

Responding to a shout from the crowd, Mr. Bush laughed then and said, "Yeah, he
is a character."

On Monday, his last day on the road, Mr. Bush will race through New Jersey,
Pennsylvania, Ohio, Kentucky and Louisiana on his way to an election eve
reception in Houston, where he will await the returns on Tuesday.

Those states, with Michigan and Connecticut, are seen as Mr. Bush's best
remaining shots in a struggle for the Midwest and East that holds the balance of
Mr. Bush's hopes.


LOAD-DATE: November 2, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: President Bush addressing a rally yesterday at the Palace of
Auburn Hills in suburban Detroit. (pg. A1); President Bush campaigning for his
shrink-the-government agenda and against Bill Clinton's record at the Palace of
Auburn Hills in Michigan. (Jose R. Lopez/The New York Times) (pg. a12)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              196 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 November 2, 1992, Monday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Perot Show;
Perot, Like 'Twin Peaks,' Started Strong and Went Downhill

BYLINE: By FRANK RICH

SECTION: Section A; Page 13; Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 1038 words


Ross Perot, who has conducted his campaign largely by television in the weeks
following his post-debate boom, may be a victim of a phenomenon more insidious
than real or imagined Republican dirty tricks: the "Twin Peaks" syndrome.

"Twin Peaks" was the ABC television series whose bizarre, at times paranoid,
all-American characters and tall, at times hallucinatory tales became a national
craze in 1990. Its lofty Nielsen numbers abruptly plummeted, and cancellation
soon followed, however, once subsequent episodes grew glacial in pace and
stubbornly refused to answer the pressing plot question, "Who killed Laura
Palmer?"

Mr. Perot's own television series, a costly procession of "infomercials" seen in
prime time, seems to have followed up its phenomenal debut by peaking
prematurely much as "Twin Peaks" did. And its final episodes, last night's
half-hour attack sitcom titled "Deep Voodoo, Chicken Feathers and the American
Dream" and tonight's Election Eve special, may be too late to reverse the trend
in either Mr. Perot's Nielsen or Gallup numbers even if he displays the
photograph allegedly doctored to brand his daughter as a lesbian.

A Stunning Opener

The series' opening episode, a half-hour of "Plain Talk about Jobs, Debt and the
Washington Mess" broadcast Oct. 6, stunned the public, the pundits and the
television industry with its strange esthetics and high ratings. Though the show
consisted of nothing other than Mr. Perot addressing a camera in close-up to
elucidate a series of pie graphs and bar charts, it drew a larger audience that
night than such other network offerings as "Quantum Leap," "Going to Extremes"
and a National League playoff game during which Ted Turner and Jane Fonda could
be seen doing the Atlanta Braves's tomahawk chop.

A close examination of the subsequent episodes reveals why they have not held on
to the pilot's audience. Ross Perot, the mini-series, is not likely to be easily
confused by viewers with such thematically related past hits as "Rich Man, Poor
Man," "Roots" and "The Civil War."

In "Ross Perot: Solutions," the immediate follow-up to "Plain Talk," Mr. Perot
repeated many of the points of the first program, sometimes in verbatim
language. The main variations in dramatic format from the first episode were the
use of a larger typeface in the charts and the substitution of a black,
metaphorically named "voodoo stick" for the original, chrome pointer.

Wing Chair Autobiography

Two later episodes, in which Mr. Perot recounted his biography, did not deliver
much more action. From a wing chair in what looked like an anonymous chain-hotel
suite in an edge city, Murphy Martin, a retired Dallas television anchor turned
Perot campaign media consultant, asked his boss such questions as, "Ross, where
did you grow up?"

Mr. Perot responded with rambling answers that included an impressively detailed
house-by-house tour of his boyhood newspaper route in Texarkana and a G-rated
narrative of his courtship of his "world class" wife, Margot. An account of the
legendary rescue of two Perot employees from Teheran contained four impotent
repetitions of the phrase "to make a long story short."

Heard at such uninterrupted length, the candidate's high-pitched drone was
unlikely to endear him to any but the most devoted fans of "Deputy Dawg." Mr.
Martin, the sonorous interviewer, looked and sounded somewhat like Johnny
Carson's former sidekick, Ed McMahon, but managed to outdo him in
obsequiousness. Mr. Martin's questions were so robotically recited that it was
hard to tell for sure if his and Mr. Perot's portions of their "conversation"
were filmed on the same set on the same day.

Getting to Know Ross

Perhaps sensing that his image was being damaged by overexposure, Mr. Perot
turned two of last week's episodes over to a gallery of supporting character
actors and restricted his own appearances to peppy cameos pushing the familiar
sound bites.

In "The Ross Perot Nobody Knows," the format echoed one of television's vintage
hits, "The Millionaire," in much the way that "Plain Talk" recalled the glory
days of "Sunrise Semester."

A parade of ordinary citizens, all beneficiaries of the candidate's private acts
of charity, sat in what looked like the same hotel suite as the series' previous
installment and, to the accompaniment of upbeat elevator music, testified to Mr.
Perot's humanitarian qualities. Like John Beresford Tipton, that fictional
television philanthropist of the 1950's, Mr. Perot made gifts of cash and clout
to those who suffered calamities ranging from wartime imprisonment in Vietnam to
a skiing accident in Colorado. But while the speakers were said to be among Mr.
Perot's "best friends" and those "who know him well," they usually referred to
him as Mr. Perot and sounded as if they were reading from a teleprompter.

Betting Your Hat

The next episode, "You Bet Your Hat He Can Win," alternated excerpts from a
Perot rally speech with encomiums from Perot supporters attending the rally. The
half-hour program was reduced to recycling some of the same ordinary,
baby-clutching citizens repeatedly. One fan compared the candidate to Mikhail
Gorbachev. Mr. Perot likened himself to Lech Walesa and Will Rogers.

Unfortunately for Mr. Perot, "You Bet Your Hat He Can Win," which was broadcast
on Oct. 28 and repeated last night, was overshadowed by his appearance on
another, far more highly rated television program: the Oct. 25 episode of "60
Minutes." The "60 Minutes" program whetted the television public's appetite not
for more testimonials or even flip charts but for answers to the questions Mr.
Perot raised about Republican conspiracies.

Mr. Perot has yet to oblige. Much as "Twin Peaks" never satisfied the public on
the question of who killed Laura Palmer, so he has allowed his own series to
trail off into tedium by refusing to provide the identities of all the villains
who are pursuing him and by failing to exploit the lurid melodramatic details of
all their plots.

No doubt Mr. Perot's television campaign would have fared better if its
prototype had been the geographically appropriate "Dallas," albeit with a
kinder, gentler -- and pint-sized -- J. R.


LOAD-DATE: November 2, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              197 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 3, 1992, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Campaign Trail;
After Months of Running, Advice for a Winner Named Clinton

BYLINE: By B. DRUMOND AYRES Jr.

SECTION: Section A; Page 14; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 733 words


Wrapping it up at the end of the trail.

It was 1 A.M. yesterday and his voice was down to a whisper, but Bill Clinton
was still pumped up. So he went to the Garden State Race Track in Cherry Hill to
address still another gathering of the faithful -- and to meet a 2-year-old
thoroughbred named Bubba Clinton.

This one was too good to miss. "Bubba" came through with a victory last week
when the odds were 37 to 1.

And did "Bubba" have any advice for "Bubba?"

"Just run hard," the Governor rasped.

Then someone handed Mr. Clinton a sax. And that one was too good to miss, too.

He lit into a piece called "Can't Sit Down."

Clinton Aide Shows Willingness to Try

And the winner of the 1992 spin award is Bruce Lindsey, the Clinton campaign
director.

Yesterday in Wilkes-Barre, Pa., Mr. Clinton, his throat still badly inflamed,
was standing in freezing temperatures shaking hand after hand after hand. Asked
why Mr. Clinton was doing that, Mr. Lindsey explained earnestly that the
Governor's doctor believed working a crowd was good for the candidate because --
ready? -- the act of raising the arms and shoulders to shake hands gently
loosens the muscles around the vocal cords.

What Did Election Cost in Hard Cash?

What did this journey down the trail cost the voters?

The hoopla that began back in the snows of New Hampshire has cost $173.7 million
in Federal matching funds and other campaign grants.

The Clinton campaign qualified for $78.8 million and the Bush campaign got $76.4
million. The rest went to also-rans. Ross Perot got nothing, having decided to
use his own money -- to the tune of more than $60 million.

Running for a Job With Low Ratings

Was it worth it?

Some might wonder, given a new ranking of jobs by The Jobs Rated Almanac, a
publication of World Almanac. "President, U.S." stood 241 out of 250, a little
better than roofer or meter reader but not as good as boilermaker or police
officer.

Why so low?

Punching in at 1600 Pennsylvania Avenue came in dead last in outlook, stress,
and job security.


Trail Mix: Centerfold On Today's Ballot

ELECTION QUIRKS In California, one legislative candidate on today's ballot is
the current centerfold display in Busty Beauty magazine, while another lists his
occupation as female impersonator. Also in that state, a 9-year-old Santa Cruz
County boy is running as a write-in candidate for a supervisor's seat, while in
Irvine there's a mayoral candidate offering to return contributors' money if he
is caught waffling on an issue.

MYSTERY CANDIDATE In Chicago, Nick Ferrara says he wants off the ballot as a
candidate for the Ilinois Legislature. He's a Democrat who insists he has not a
clue how his name somehow ended up on the Republican primary ballot in the
spring. That miscue propelled him into the general election contest since his
name was the only name on the ballot. In any event, he did not campaign in the
spring and has not since, which means his opponent, and fellow Democrat, is sure
to win -- and Republicans are sure to demand an investigation.

SENATOR'S CONFESSION And in Georgia, Senator Sam Nunn confirms that the tabloid
Weekly World News got it right. He says he and four other Senators -- a fellow
Democrat, John Glen of Ohio, and the Republicans Orrin G. Hatch of Utah, Nancy
Kassebaum of Kansas and Alan K. Simpson of Wyoming -- are, in fact, space
aliens.

"I confess," he told a Savannah rally. "It's amazing I've been able to keep it a
secret for 54 years."

Follow-ups

NONE OF THE ABOVE Sister Souljah. the black rapper, whom Bill Clinton criticized
early in the campaign for calling for racial violence, told an audience at
Syracuse University over the weekend, "I believe if Clinton becomes President
the same things will happen that will happen if Bush stays as President."

She says she's not going to vote.

BURNING A FLAG That widespread rumor that The New York Times was given a picture
of Bill Clinton burning a flag to protest the war in Vietnam?

Not true.

CHANCE TO ASK Jim Miller, the high school student who discovered the bomb that
forced Al Gore to cancel a rally in Fort Collins, Colo., last week, got to meet
the Senator on his his return appearance over the weekend.

Senator: "If there's ever anything I can do for you, please let me know."

Student: "Well, as a matter of fact, I do need a recommendation."

LOAD-DATE: November 3, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              198 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 3, 1992, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Political Week;
History Made and History Repeating

BYLINE: By R. W. APPLE Jr.,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 12; Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 980 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 2


In many ways, the tumultuous 1992 Presidential campaign has been unique.

Never before have so many major figures in the "out" party declined to seek the
White House, which is one reason that Bill Clinton, a small-state governor who
had never previously sought national office, stands where he does today. Had the
Democratic big boys run, he would have had precious little chance of victory.

Never before have an incumbent's approval ratings fluctuated as widely as George
Bush's in the last year. Acclaimed as a conquering hero after assembling and
leading the victorious coalition in the Persian Gulf war, he has been derided
since as a bumbler who did nothing about economic problems at home.

Never had anyone done the things that Ross Perot did. He actually led the
national polls for a brief time early last summer, a one-man band, a candidate
without a party and without a conventional campaign organization. He withdrew
from the race, then re-entered it. And he spent, by his own account, something
on the order of $60 million of his own money, largely on television ads.

But this campaign also bore more than a passing resemblance to others.

The most obvious parallels are to 1976, when the successor to a two-term
Republican President came from far behind and lost only narrowly, 50 percent to
48 percent, to a Southern governor. Like President Bush this year, President
Gerald R. Ford won the Republican nomination only after beating back a challenge
from the right; like Mr. Bush, Mr. Ford ran a campaign that was widely
criticized within his own party.

Like Mr. Clinton, Jimmy Carter ran a campaign emphasizing his moderate views,
trying with some success to win back Democrats who had come to consider their
party too liberal. Like Mr. Clinton, the self-proclaimed candidate of change,
Mr. Carter appealed to many people mainly because they wished to turn the
Republicans out of the White House after the Watergate scandal.

The Republicans, not surprisingly, dislike the analogy between 1976 and 1992.
Mary Matalin, the deputy manager of the Bush campaign, said the other day that
Mr. Ford had stalled after his gaffe in a television debate, when he denied
Soviet influence in Poland, while Mr. Bush, she said, was gaining.

That was last week, and this is this week. The final polls show a countersurge
by Mr. Clinton.

Still, the President has come from a long way back, only to find it
tantalizingly hard to make up the last few points. That is a familiar scenario.
Hubert H. Humphrey had seemed hoplessly engulfed in the Vietnam quagmire for
most of 1968, but even with George C. Wallace siphoning off the votes of
conservative Democrats, he came within 0.7 percent of Richard M. Nixon in a
breathless finish.

Mr. Perot's third-force candidacy prompted comparisons, when he was at his peak,
with the famous 1912 election. In that year, Theodore Roosevelt, seeking to
recapture the White House, ran as the Bull Moose candidate, shoving President
William Howard Taft into third place, splitting the Republican vote and
permitting Woodrow Wilson, a Democrat, to sneak into the White House.

More recently, however, Mr. Perot's late-starting campaign has more closely
resembled, in the size of his constituency, the insurgent 1968 campaign of
George Wallace.

If Mr. Bush is defeated, the election will resemble those of 1980, when Mr.
Carter was turned out of office by Ronald Reagan, and 1932, when Herbert Hoover
lost to Franklin D. Roosevelt. In both cases, the only losses by elected
incumbents in the last 60 years, economic crisis or painful economic reversals
played a major role.

One of the oldest maxims in Presidential politics holds that no matter how far
to the left or right a candidate finds he must go to put together a majority in
the primaries, when only his fellow party members and a few independents vote,
he should move back toward the center in the fall.

Mr. Bush, many of his Republican friends believe, failed to do that in time.
Indeed, at the Houston convention, he and his managers ceded valuable time on
national television to such speakers as Patrick J. Buchanan and Pat Robertson,
who delivered divisive, exclusionary speeches that offended many moderate
voters.

Jack F. Kemp, the Housing and Urban Development Secretary, denounced the
convention's emphasis on "family values" and tougher police measures against
urban rioters in a speech in Texas only last week, and said it had cost his
party badly needed votes.

The campaigns that are regularly cited to prove the dangers of extremism are the
Republicans' 1964 fiasco, when Barry Goldwater gained only 52 electoral votes,
and the Democrats' 1972 disaster, when George McGovern took only 17. Nothing on
that order seems in store this year, but an electoral-vote landslide against Mr.
Bush, if it materialized, would strengthen the voices of those warning that the
Republicans must move back into the middle next time.

Finally, a non-American model -- the comeback of John Major's Tories, who
trailed in the final polls in this year's British general elections but
nonetheless pulled off a victory. Bush backers have been talking about it for
months, but they overlooked one central point: Unlike Mr. Bush, Mr. Major had
not held high office for years; he himself embodied change, having replaced
Margaret Thatcher as Prime Minister in a party coup a little more than a year
before.

Whatever happens, the 1992 election marks a major turning point.

No matter who wins, it is highly likely that President Bush is the last nominee
to have served in World War II. That constitutes an important generational
change. World War II deeply marked those who took part in it, as Mr. Bush's
ringing appeals to 1940's patriotism and 1950's values demonstrate. For Bill
Clinton and candidates to come, the formative experience was the far more
ambiguous war in Vietnam.

LOAD-DATE: November 3, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              199 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 4, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 ELECTIONS: CELEBRATION
Man in the News: Albert Arnold Gore Jr.;
A Focused Leader on an Uneven Climb

BYLINE: By STEVEN A. HOLMES

SECTION: Section B; Page 4; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1818 words


When the subject of Al Gore Jr. is raised, inevitably the phrase "born to lead"
-- spoken with either admiration or sarcasm -- somehow seeps into the
conversation.

Still, if it was preordained for this child of a former Senator and native son
of Washington to reach the heights of power, his rise to the Vice Presidency has
been accomplished through fits and starts.

Indeed, after his disastrous 1988 run for the Democratic Presidential nomination
-- an effort that thrust him onto the national stage but also saw him alienate
large blocks of traditional Democratic voters -- he is as surprised as anyone
else to be in the position he's in now.

"I certainly had not given up the thought of running for President," Mr. Gore
said when asked about his feelings after his defeat four years ago. "I made no
bones about the fact that I wanted to be President and would run again when I
had the opportunity.

"But if somebody had told me in 1988 that come January '93 you'll be inaugurated
as Vice President of the United States, I would have said, 'You're nuts.' "

Once Disparaged Office

Mr. Gore's astonishment to be Vice President-elect stems both from having won an
office he had disparaged in the past and his feeling that he had removed himself
from consideration for national office when he said in August 1991 that he would
not run in 1992. At the time, he said he wanted to devote more time to his
family and young son, who was nearly killed when he was struck by a car two
years earlier.

But in what Mr. Gore feels is a sweet irony, the banking of the fire of his
ambition moved him closer to his goal of national power rather that farther away
from it.

"I think that sometimes in life -- and I'm neither old enough, nor wise enough
to put this in proper words -- when you care about something a lot and you give
it up for the right reasons, it will come back to you in a different form with a
deeper meaning," said Mr. Gore, who once attended divinity school.

"That's what this feels like," he said. "I gave up my ambition to be President
in the 1992 cycle for the right reasons, because of my family's healing process,
and stayed completely out of it and really enjoyed not running for President.
And then a place on the national ticket came back to me, unsolicited, unsought,
in a different form and with a deeper meaning because the element of personal
ambition had been in significant measure drained out of it."

Driven to Achieve

Albert Arnold Gore Jr. was born March 31, 1948, in Washington, the son of Albert
A. Gore Sr., a Democratic Representative, and later Senator from Tennessee, and
Pauline La Fon Gore, a graduate of the Vanderbilt law school.

From childhood throughout much of his adult life, Mr. Gore seemed to be driven
to achieve. He was the least rebellious of his parents' two children; an honors
student and captain of the football team at St. Albans School for Boys, an
exclusive preparatory school in the capital; a cum laude graduate from Harvard;
a diligent Congressman, and an expert on arms control and the environment.

In 1988 he wanted to be the youngest President in the country's history.

In all his successes, and even in his failures, friends say, Mr. Gore made his
mark more through doggedness than flash. "He was a very hard-working player,"
said James Bailey, a friend from Harvard who played alongside Mr. Gore on the
freshman basketball team. "There were other players who were more talented, but
nobody worked harder."

But his diligence and discipline can border on bland and boring. In 1988, after
a political consultant suggested that because few voters could identify him Mr.
Gore should not vary his wardrobe too much, Mr. Gore drove the patience of his
staff to the wall by refusing to appear in anything but a blue suit, light blue
shirt and red tie.

Opponent of Vietnam War

Like many of his classmates at Harvard, Mr. Gore opposed United States
involvement in the Vietnam War. But classmates say he was not an active
participant in the anit-war movement.

Vietnam was to confront Mr. Gore with his own moral quandary after his
graduation from Harvard in 1969. At the time, his father, an outspoken opponent
of war, was locked in a bitter and close re-election battle for his Senate seat
in which his opponent, Bill Brock, was making an issue over the Senator's
anti-war stand.

Mr. Gore considered leaving the country to avoid the draft -- a move his parents
say they would have supported -- but he knew that that would have doomed his
father's chances. In the end, he enlisted in the Army. He was motivated, he
says, by his desire to help his father and because if he had avoided the draft
someone else from his small town of Carthage, Tenn., would have had to go. His
decision, however, made little difference to his father's re-election bid. The
Senator lost by 46,000 votes.

His military career was undistinguished. In Vietnam, he served as a reporter for
the newspaper of the 20th Engineering Battalion, stationed outside Saigon, and
never saw combat.

But his father's loss, the war and the Watergate scandal a few years later
soured him on politics. "When I was a little kid, I remember thinking, maybe I
would like to do what my father did," Mr. Gore said. "But I completely abandoned
that notion, especially after coming back from Vietnam, going through the
Watergate years and becoming so disillusioned with government and politics."

Returning home in 1971, he went to work as a reporter for The Tennessean, a
newspaper in Nashville, attended the Vanderbilt Graduate School of Religion and
tried his hand as a home builder and a livestock and tobacco farmer. While
writing about politics and government for the newspaper he began to feel, he
said, as if he "could handle some of the decisions I was writing about more
creatively than some of the people I was covering."

In 1974, when the local Congressman abruptly announced he was retiring, Mr. Gore
said he made a "snap decision" to run for the office. After squeezing out a
victory in the Democratic primary, he won going away in the general election.

Recalling that his father's defeat in 1969 stemmed in part from accusations that
he had lost touch with his constituents, Mr. Gore made sure he kept in contact
with the people back home. In his eight years as a Congressman he attended more
than 1,300 town meetings in his district, spending an average of three weekends
a month away from his family in order to do so. Mr. Gore is married to the
former Mary Elizabeth (Tipper) Aitcheson, and they have four children: Karenna,
Kristin, Sarah and Albert 3d.

Attending a state convention of a civic club for high school girls in 1981, Mr.
Gore was stunned when told that a number of the participants felt that nuclear
war was inevitable in their lifetimes. The experience, Mr. Gore said, led him to
seize on arms control as a cause.

For a year, Mr. Gore buried himself in the study of arcane disarmament issues,
spending hours in weekly study sessions on the subject. He emerged with a novel
approach to the arms race that emphasized replacing multiwarhead missiles, which
he felt promoted fears of a catastrophic first strike, with single-warhead
missiles.

After Howard H. Baker Jr. of Tennessee, the Republican leader in the Senate,
announced in 1983 that he would not seek re-election, Mr. Gore sought his seat
the next year and won it easily.

But 1984 was a bittersweet year for Mr. Gore. His elation over his victory was
tempered by the death of his older sister, Nancy Gore Hunger, from lung cancer.

In 1988, when he sought the Presidency, Mr. Gore was responding to a request by
a group of centrist Democratic fund-raisers. But he entered the race late and
his main messages -- arms control, a need for a strong national defense and
protection of the environment -- never connected with voters. Although he won
five Southern and border states in the Super Tuesday primary, Mr. Gore's
campaign foundered above the Mason-Dixon line.

He ended the race with an embarrassing showing in the New York primary, where
his most prominent supporter, Mayor Edward I. Koch, so angered black voters with
repeated attacks on the Rev. Jesse Jackson that Mr. Gore was forced to march in
a New York City parade on a sunny Sunday wearing a bullet-proof trench coat
after receiving death threats.

Yet, if Mr. Gore's badly run 1988 effort in the primaries left him in need of
any political rehabilitation by his party's left wing, in many ways it was the
prototype for the successful campaign waged this year by Gov. Bill Clinton.

Many of Mr. Gore's themes -- focusing on the economic needs of "the average
working family," for example, or standing up to the icons of Democratic
liberalism like Mr. Jackson -- found their way into Mr. Clinton's oratory.

Senator's 'World Changed'

Disappointed after his loss and saddled with a $2.3 million campaign debt, Mr.
Gore set about refurbishing his image and preparing the ground to run again. He
paid off his debts in a remarkable 10 weeks, as much to rid himself of the
financial burden as to show his continued political viability. He once again
buried himself in weekly seminars, this time on economic issues, which he felt
would be central to the next election.

But in April 1989 "the world changed" for the Senator, said his longtime aide,
Peter Knight. That moment came when Mr. Gore's youngest child, Albert, was
struck down by an automobile after the family had attended a Baltimore Orioles
baseball game. The near-fatal accident and the child's monthslong rehabilitation
brought about a transformation in his father, the Senator's friends say.

"Basically, a lot of people can be pretty calculating," said Carter Eskew, a
political consultant and a longtime friend. "They're always looking at the next
move. The chess game never stops. Well, with Al, all of sudden the chess game
stopped."

As a kind of therapy, Mr. Gore threw himself into writing a book, "Earth in the
Balance," in which he compared his son's medical emergency with what he
considered the planet's tenuous condition and called for a radical program to
halt ecological degradation.

Before the accident, Mr. Gore says, he was convinced that he could win the
Democratic nomination in 1992 and that President Bush, despite his stratospheric
voter-approval ratings, could be beaten. But in August 1991 Mr. Gore announced
he would not run. Family considerations, he said, were paramount. As he put it:

"What I finally came to terms with was that the real cause of my conflict about
running was that so long as my son's healing process and my family's healing
process was still under way, I could not throw my whole heart and soul into a
race for President, because I would feel terrible not being able to devote the
time and attention and emotional energy that healing process still required of
me."

NAME: Al Gore Jr.

LOAD-DATE: November 4, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Senator Al Gore walking back to his plane yesterday afternoon
with his son, Al Gore 3d, after they played catch on the tarmac at a Nashville
airport before departing for Little Rock, Ark. (Jim Estrin/The New York Times)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              200 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 4, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Cambodians Ask U.N. to Abandon Its Peace Plan

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHENON,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 5; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 544 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Nov. 3


The Cambodian Government called on the United Nations today to abandon its
disarmament plan for Cambodia so Government troops can return to the battle
against Khmer Rouge guerrillas, who have refused to disarm.

The Government also said that the Khmer Rouge, the Maoist-inspired rebels who
are the most powerful of the three guerrilla groups who joined in the peace
settlement, should be expelled from Cambodia's Supreme National Council.

The council was established to assist the United Nations in bringing about a
lasting peace in Cambodia after a civil war that lasted nearly 13 years.

The Government wants the United Nations "to declare an official end" to the
disarmament phase of the peace process, Khieu Khanarith, a Government spokesman,
said at a news conference today in Phnom Penh.

"We want troops that have been cantoned to go back to their positions," he said,
referring to Government soldiers who are now living in United Nations-supervised
cantonment sites. "If the Khmer Rouge continue their attacks, it is necessary
that we counter that."

In telephone interviews from Cambodia, diplomats said that it appeared the
Government wanted to step up pressure on the Khmer Rouge before negotiations
this weekend in Beijing. The negotiations are being sponsored by France and
Indonesia in the hope of persuading the Khmer Rouge to begin to lay down their
arms, as their leaders promised when they signed the peace agreement last year.

If the Khmer Rouge do not begin to disarm by Nov. 15, the Security Council has
threatened to impose sanctions, which are likely to include an economic boycott
against the rebels.

United Nations officials in Phnom Penh and New York had no comment on the
Cambodian request, but diplomats said no steps were likely to be taken until
after the talks in Beijing.

The Khmer Rouge, led by the same commanders who were responsible for the deaths
of more than one million Cambodians in the 1970's, have refused to disarm until
they are given more power in Government decision-making in the period leading up
to general elections scheduled for May.

The Khmer Rouge controlled Cambodia from 1975 to 1979, when they were toppled in
an invasion by the Vietnamese Army. Hanoi then installed a Cambodian Government,
now led by Prime Minister Hun Sen, who defected from the Khmer Rouge.

Under the peace settlement, the Government and the three rebel factions are to
disarm 70 percent of their troops and place them in internationally supervised
cantonment sites.

The Government has so far allowed about 44,000 of its 120,000 soldiers to
disarm, although many have returned to their native provinces instead of
remaining in the camps.

Mr. Khieu accused the Khmer Rouge of numerous cease-fire violations in the
Cambodian countryside and said that the United Nations peacekeeping troops in
Cambodia should be allowed to train Government soldiers and other rebel
guerrillas for a renewed fight against the Khmer Rouge.

Apart from the demand for a greater say in the running of Cambodia before
elections, the Khmer Rouge have also insisted that the United Nations prove that
no Vietnamese troops remain in Cambodia. The United Nations says it has
investigated and found no evidence of any Vietnamese military presence.

LOAD-DATE: November 4, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              201 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 4, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 ELECTIONS: PRESIDENT -- THE OVERVIEW;
CLINTON CAPTURES PRESIDENCY WITH HUGE ELECTORAL MARGIN; WINS A DEMOCRATIC
CONGRESS

BYLINE: By ROBIN TONER

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 2436 words


Gov. Bill Clinton of Arkansas was elected the 42d President of the United States
yesterday, breaking a 12-year Republican hold on the White House.

Mr. Clinton shattered the Republicans' political base with a promise of change
to an electorate clearly discontented with President Bush.

Ross Perot, the Texas billionaire who roiled this race throughout, finished
third, drawing roughly equally from both major party candidates, according to
Voter Research & Surveys, the television polling consortium. His share of the
popular vote had the potential to exceed any third-party candidate's in more
than half a century.

Faithful Are Won Back

The President-elect, capping an astonishing political comeback for the Democrats
over the last 18 months, ran strongly in all regions of the country and among
many groups that were key to the Republicans' dominance of the 1980's:
Catholics, suburbanites, independents, moderates and the Democrats who crossed
party lines in the 1980's to vote for Ronald Reagan and Mr. Bush.

The Governor from Arkansas won such big, closely contested states as Michigan,
Missouri, Pennsylvania, New Jersey and Illinois. As polls closed across the
nation, networks announced projected winners based on voter surveys. It was Ohio
that put him over the top shortly before 11 P.M., followed closely by
California. Based on those projections, Mr. Bush prevailed in his adopted state
of Texas and other pockets of Republican states around the country.

With 83 percent of the nation's precincts reporting by 3 A.M. today, Mr. Clinton
had 43 percent to 38 percent for Mr. Bush and 18 percent for Mr. Perot.

A state-by-state breakdown of those returns gave the President-elect more than
345 electoral votes, a commanding victory in the Electoral College, which
requires 270 for election. His victory also provided coattails for Democrats
running for Congress in the face of tough Republican challenges: Democrats, who
control both chambers, appeared likely to gain in the Senate and suffer
manageable losses in the House.

'With High Hopes'

In a victory speech to a joyous crowd in Little Rock, Mr. Clinton declared, "On
this day, with high hopes and brave hearts, in massive numbers, the American
people have voted to make a new beginning."

He described the election as a "clarion call" to deal with a host of domestic
problems too long ignored and to "bring our nation together." He paid tribute to
the voters he had met along the campaign trail, saying they had simply demanded
that "we want our future back." The President-elect, who looked euphoric and
seemed to savor every cheer, added, "I intend to give it to you."

He also hailed his longtime rival, Mr. Bush, for "his lifetime of public
service" and the "grace with which he conceded this election."

"Not very long ago I received a telephone call from President Bush," the
President-elect said. "It was a generous and forthcoming telephone call, of real
congratulations and an offer to work with me in keeping our democracy running in
an effective and important transition."

The crowd hailed the victor repeatedly with cries of "We love you, Bill,"
especially when he paid tribute to his home state, the object of Republican
ridicule throughout the campaign.

Mr. Clinton credited much of his success to his wife, Hillary, who was also a
target of Republican attacks.  The Clintons and their daughter, Chelsea, were
joined by Vice President-elect Al Gore and his family, creating once again the
tableau of youth and generational change that they projected throughout the
campaign. Mr. Gore and Mr. Clinton embraced in jubilant bear hug.

Bush Gives Concession

Mr. Bush, looking weary but composed, made his concession speech shortly after
11 P.M. in Houston. "The people have spoken and we respect the majesty of the
Democratic system," he said. Mr. Bush congratulated Mr. Clinton, but did not
mention Mr. Perot, and promised that his own Administration would "work closely
with his team to insure the smooth transition of power."

Vice President Dan Quayle made his concession speech in Indianapolis a few
minutes later and like Mr. Bush congratulated Mr. Clinton and hushed the boos.
"We must all pull together now. If he runs the country as well as he ran the
campaign, we'll be all right."

Congressional leaders said they welcomed the new era beyond divided government.
"We welcome the challenge and the responsibility," said Senator George Mitchell
of Maine, the majority leader.

There were other signs of change: California elected two women to the Senate, in
Representative Barbara Boxer and the former San Francisco Mayor Dianne
Feinstein. Illinois also elected a woman, Carol Moseley Braun, to the Senate, as
did Washington State, which chose Patty Murray..

Mr. Perot made his concession speech in remarkably good spirits and seemed
intent on signaling that he was not leaving the political stage. "This is not
the time to get discouraged," he said. "This is the time to redouble our
efforts, to make sure we live in alabaster cities undimmed by human tears."

Mr. Clinton's campaign represented the culmination of years of effort by
centrist Democrats to redefine their party and reconnect with the middle class.
It also represented an extraordinary turnaround for a party that for much of
1991 seemed destined to lose to a President soaring in the approval ratings in
the aftermath of the war in the Persian Gulf.

Brown Sees 'Watershed'

"It was a watershed election for America," said Ronald H. Brown, the chairman of
the Democratic National Committee. "The case for change was made, and it
resonated so much that it broke down traditional political lines. It's a new
day." In fact, the voter surveys showed that economic discontent and a hunger
for change were two of the engines of the Democratic victory.

Republicans sadly watched Mr. Bush become the third one-term President in 20
years. "He was a good man, he was a good President," said Representative Vin
Weber of Minnesota, a co-chairman fo the Bush campaign. "But he thought that if
he simply did the right thing, people would understand. Whereas I think Reagan
understood the need to communicate your vision."

Lynn Martin, the Secretary of Labor, said of the voters last night, "They
understand about world affairs, but they were worried about their own."

But there was also Republican anger; Mary Matalin, deputy manager of the Bush
campaign, accused the news media of bias last night in their coverage of the
1992 election. Ahead, many Republicans feared, was a round of soul-searching,
finger-pointing and a struggle to recast their party for an era beyond the cold
war, an era that seems relentlessly focused on domestic needs.

A Grueling Comeback

The voting capped a grueling campaign in which Mr. Clinton came back from
seeming disaster in the New Hampshire primary, where questions were raised about
how he avoided the draft in the Vietnam War, setting off a round of attacks from
his political opponents on his trustworthiness. Mr. Clinton survived with a
remarkably disciplined campaign that stayed focused on the economy and what he
often called "the forgotten middle class."

Mr. Bush, at the same time, fell from great heights as the economy continued to
falter. He spent much of the year trying to convince the voters that the country
was in better shape than they thought. Still, the voter surveys showed that
seven in 10 voters considerd the economy either poor or "not so good," and Mr.
Clinton ran strongly among them.

Mr. Clinton also ran strongly among young voters, working women and a variety of
other groups that showed the strains in the Republican coalition, which had been
held together for years by economic growth and a fierce anti-Communism. And his
Southern roots, like those of Jimmy Carter in 1976, made him a formidable
challenger to the Republicans in the heart of their political base in the South.
The big states of Florida and Texas stayed fiercely competitive until the end.

Mr. Clinton, who is 46 years old, becomes the first President born after World
War II -- a changing of the guard in American politics.

Mr. Clinton's careful strategy to appeal to suburban residents, independent
voters and moderates clearly paid off. Nearly half of the suburban voters backed
Mr. Clinton, compared with about a third who were supporting Mr. Bush. Mr.
Clinton also carried 4 in 10 of the independent voters, with Mr. Bush splitting
the rest with Mr. Perot.

Here, and in several other demographic categories, Mr. Clinton broke into groups
that for the past decade were clear parts of the Republican Presidential
majority -- the swing voters drawn to the Republicans by the promise of fiscal
responsibility and economic growth. In 1980 and 1988, for example, independents
went heavily for Mr. Reagan and Mr. Bush.

The President-elect also won more than half of the voters who consider
themselves moderates, suggesting that he had succeeded in his goal of recasting
the Democratic Party in a more centrist image. Only 3 in 10 of the moderates
backed Mr. Bush, who was widely thought to be hurt by the backlash to the
"family values" appeal at the Republican National Convention. Again, that was a
far poorer showing than Mr. Bush had in 1988.

Mr. Clinton also succeeded in bringing home many of the Democrats who
persistently crossed party lines in Presidential elections in the 1980's: More
than half of the Democrats who voted for Mr. Bush in 1988 voted for Mr. Clinton
this time around.

Mr. Bush essentially ran even with Mr. Clinton among white voters, but the
Democratic nominee, as is the case with most recent Democratic nominees, did far
better with black voters.

Mr. Bush ran better than Mr. Clinton among white Protestants, but the Democrat
carried about half of the Catholic votes and an even bigger majority among
Jewish voters.

'Way Beyond Abortion'

Mr. Bush and Mr. Clinton fared about the same among men, but Mr. Clinton had an
edge among women, particularly among working women. Only 3 in 10 of the working
women voted for Mr. Bush, according to the poll.

"It goes way beyond abortion," said Ann F. Lewis, a former Democratic strategist
and commentator.  "George Bush campaigned four years ago on the promise of a
kinder, gentler nation, and women are keenly aware that he provided neither."

There was also a distinct generational cast to this election. Mr. Clinton, who
carefully courted MTV viewers, carried half of the 18- to 29-year-olds, after a
decade in which Republicans worked hard to cement their political gains by
building on the loyalty of the young. Baby-boomers, those aged 30 to 44, broke
more like all voters, despite Mr. Clinton's status as a card-carrying boomer.

But Americans aged 60 and over showed a clear bias in favor of Mr. Clinton,
according to the poll. He also ran well among other demographic groups,
including half of the military veterans, (despite the furor over his draft
status during the Vietnam War), half of the first-time voters, and more than
half of union members.

From the beginning of this campaign, in the chilly towns of New Hampshire, the
economy was the issue that was front and center, and so it was when voters went
to the polls yesterday. Jobs and the economy were cited by nearly 4 in 10 voters
as the issue that mattered most in their decision. Health care and the deficit,
the latter's prominence probably a reflection of the Perot candidacy, were the
second-most important issues, each cited by about a quarter of the voters.

The hostility of the political terrain for Mr. Bush this year was underscored by
this fact: fewer than one in 10 voters cited foreign policy as the most
important issue to them. Abortion was cited as the determining issue by about
one in 10.

Not surprisingly, Mr. Bush carried the anti-abortion vote, after a year when he
and his party chose to reaffirm their strong opposition to legalized abortion,
as codified in their platform. Mr. Clinton, equally unsurprisingly, carried the
votes of those who support abortion's being legal in most or all circumstances.

There were also clear regional patterns at work: Mr. Clinton ran strongest in
the East and the West, and only slightly less strongly in the Midwest.  Mr.
Bush's strength was greatest in the South, which was long considered his
political "fire wall." But even there, the all-Southern Democratic ticket kept
it neck and neck. Mr. Perot's strongest performance was in the West.

The voting ended what had become an epic campaign.

The Clinton forces, who became increasingly convinced that victory was in their
grasp over the past week, flew home to Little Rock yesterday morning. There was
some weeping, much rejoicing and great weariness on the Clinton plane. James
Carville, the strategist who headed the campaign's "war room" in Little Rock,
said there was also some weeping Monday night as the group of strategists at the
heart of this campaign met for the last time.

"I'm a little overwhelmed," said Mr. Carville, the tightly wound Louisianian who
became emblematic of a new, more aggressive Democratic Party. "When you get to
the top of the mountain, your first inclination is not to jump for joy, but to
look around."

How the Polls Were Conducted

The Election Day exit poll was based on questionnaires completed by voters as
they left voting stations throughout the United States. The national poll
included 13,471 voters in 300 randomly selected precincts in all states and the
District of Columbia.

The polling was conducted by Voter Research & Surveys, an organization created
in 1990 by ABC News, CBS News, CNN and NBC News.

In addition, V.R.S. conducted further interviewing throughout the individual
states. The New York Times subscribed to 12 of the individual state exit polls.
These included from 700 to 1,900 voters per state in 30 to 50 randomly selected
precincts per state.

In theory, in 19 cases out of 20, the results from such polls should differ by
only a few percentage points in either direction from what would have been
obtained by seeking to interview all voters who turned out. The potential
sampling error was one percentage point for the nationwide survey and from three
to five percentage points in the individual state polls, depending on the number
of interviews.

Results based on smaller subgroups have a larger potential sampling error. In
addition to sampling error, the practical difficulties of conducting any survey
of voter opinion on Election Day, such as the reluctance of some voters to fill
out questionnaires, may introduce other sources of error.


NAME: Bill Clinton

LOAD-DATE: November 4, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Graph: "Congress at a Glance" shows the following statistics as of 2:45
A.M. Eastern time:

Senate

Current balance
      Democrats    57
      Republicans    43

At stake
      Democrats    19
      Republicans    15

Winners
      Democrats    19
      Republicans    11
      Undecided    4

New balance
      Democrats    57
      Republicans    39
      Undecided    4

House

Current balance
      Democrats    268
      Republicans    166
      Independent    1

At stake
      All 435 seats

Winners
      Democrats    222
      Republicans    151
      Independent    1

New balance
      Democrats    222
      Republicans    151
      Undecided    61
      Independent    1 (pg. A1)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              202 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 4, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Samuel W. Kalb; Obstetrician, 94

SECTION: Section D; Page 24; Column 6; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 146 words


Dr. Samuel W. Kalb, an obstetrician who practiced in Newark for 35 years, died
on Sunday in Muhlenberg Hospital in Plainfield, N.J. He was 94 years old and
lived in East Orange.

Dr. Kalb graduated from Valparaiso (Ind.) University and, in 1926, the
University of Cincinnati School of Medicine. He spent his residency in
obstetrics in Dublin before opening his practice in Newark in 1930. He retired
in 1965.

He was an attending physician at Newark Beth Israel Medical Center and past
chief of nutrition at the Clara Maass Medical Center in Belleville, N.J.

Dr. Kalb was a Marine Corps veteran of World War I and served as a civilian
volunteer in South Vietnam during the Vietnam War.

Dr. Kalb is survived by two daughters, Patricia K. Einhorn of Palm Beach, Fla.,
and Barbara Rachilin of Plainfield, N.J.; five grandchildren, and four
great-grandchildren.



LOAD-DATE: November 4, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              203 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 4, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Public & Private;
A Place Called Hope

BYLINE: By ANNA QUINDLEN

SECTION: Section A; Page 31; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 738 words


For the last 15 years Barbara Walters has been haunted by the comment she made
to Jimmy Carter in a pre-inaugural interview. "Be wise with us," she said. "Be
good to us." The truth is that we all know what she meant, because most of us,
on one Tuesday in November or another, have felt at least a whiff of the same
thing. It's called hope.

I flipped the little blackjack next to Bill Clinton's name with hope, the first
time I recall feeling that emotion since I cast my first vote for George
McGovern in 1972. If ever a man has been tested for the Presidency, it is this
one, not in Vietnam or even in the trenches of long life, but in the court of
public opinion.

My polling place was choked with voters; even children wanted to stay up and
hear the news. Everyone is eager to say that this is because the American people
seized the day. And they did, fashioning a real contest from common sense, Larry
King, the debates, the McNeil/Lehrer News hour, the pages of their newspapers,
the "Today" show, endless dinner table discussions and concern for their
children and their checkbooks.

In time there will be many post-mortems of this election, but one thing they
should all have in common is the admission that Bill Clinton ran the best
Democratic campaign in recent memory, and George Bush the worst Republican one.
The man who was inexorable vs. the man who didn't turn up, then turned nasty.
History will record that the President turned in two lackluster debate
performances and that when he got his campaign back on course with questions
about higher taxes and misplaced trust, he derailed it himself by the sophomoric
gaffe of calling his opponents "bozos" and comparing their expertise to that of
his spaniel. They say it's not over till the fat lady sings; I say when the dogs
rear their heads, it's time to bow-wow out.

But ultimately the President's greatest burden was his own first term. On the
morning after Franklin Delano Roosevelt was elected President in 1932, the
editorial page of this paper thundered: "The Republicans got what they richly
deserved. During the past 12 years they have displayed that insensate pride
which goeth before destruction. . . . Four years ago Republicans promised, under
their benign guidance, an ever-ascending scale of prosperity, just before the
worst and longest financial and industrial and agricultural disaster fell upon
the land." And the editorial added, "There can be no mistaking the determination
of the American electorate to order a change in their government and in its
policies."

I am a working mother, a feminist and a reporter whose enduring interest has
been in the small moments of the lives of unsung people, the kind of people who
only ride in limos when someone in the family dies. I thought George Bush was
not interested in, not even aware of, most of those disparate parts of my life,
whether vetoing family leave, nominating Clarence Thomas or talking endlessly
about a capital gains tax.

One night I saw Bill Clinton on the news say, "The hits that I took in this
election are nothing compared to the hits the people of this state and this
country have been taking for a long time." And I began to believe that he saw
us. I began to believe that growing up struggling to make ends meet, learning to
live with an alcoholic parent, losing the governor's office because of the
hubris of the young and cocky, and taking the hits about infidelity, patriotism
and moral spine that he had taken during this campaign might have taught him
something about hard times.

Every once in a while I want a little hope, the way some people want a martini
or a new pair of shoes. That's what Barbara Walters was trying to get at when
she talked to Jimmy Carter. People said she didn't act like a journalist, and
maybe there's some truth in that. But maybe there are simply some occasions when
we reporters, despite our best intentions, can't help but act like human beings.

Yesterday was one of them. I could be cynical about the possibility of real
change and the manifest dangers of expectations. I could talk about the enormous
challenges to come. But not right now. This is Mr. Clinton's moment; he deserves
it and I am glad he prevailed. You walk into the voting booth and each time you
pull the little lever there is implicit in the gesture a tiny leap of faith. And
this time some hope as well. For at least a moment, I'll make it last.

LOAD-DATE: November 4, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              204 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 4, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

THE 1992 ELECTION: THE NATION'S VOTERS;
Clinton Carves a Wide Path Deep Into Reagan Country

BYLINE: By JEFFREY SCHMALZ

SECTION: Section B; Page 1; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1193 words


Gov. Bill Clinton of Arkansas recaptured for his party yesterday the Democrats
who had fled to Ronald Reagan, and he made strong inroads into what had been
Republican strongholds in the suburbs and among voters who label themselves
moderates and independents.

In general, according to interviews with voters as they left the polls,
President Bush lost the groups that Mr. Reagan had won over and that had
remained with Mr. Bush in 1988. More than half the Democrats who said they voted
for Mr. Bush last time voted for Mr. Clinton this time.

The President also lost ground with women. While they split evenly in 1988
between Mr. Bush and his Democratic opponent, Michael S. Dukakis, their vote
this year went solidly to Mr. Clinton, with about half of women giving him their
vote, compared with a third for Mr. Bush and the rest for Ross Perot.

At the same time, the Arkansas Governor held on to traditional Democratic
groups, carrying more than three-quarters of the black vote. And, reversing a
trend over the last two Presidential elections, the Democrat won more than half
of first-time voters, including students and the young.

Impact of the Economy

In the interviews, voters painted a bleak picture of the American economy, with
more than two-thirds describing it as "not so good" or "poor" and giving their
votes to Mr. Clinton.

Overwhelmingly, the economy and jobs were cited by voters as issues that
mattered the most in deciding their votes. The next biggest concerns, health
care and the Federal deficit, were cited only half as often.

Although Mr. Bush appealed to upper-income voters, a natural Republican
constituency, he did not fare especially well among voters with family incomes
of $75,000 or more. He split that vote evenly with Mr. Clinton.

As expected, Mr. Bush did win the support of more than half of the people who
felt that their financial situation was better today than four years ago, while
two-thirds of those who thought it was worse voted for Mr. Clinton.

Despite fears in both camps that Mr. Perot would swing the election in
individual states, early surveys of voters indicated that a two-way race would
not have turned out much differently. Mr. Perot had an especially poor showing
among blacks and voters at least 60 years old. The survey was conducted by Voter
Research and Surveys, a consortium of the four television networks.

Desire for Change

In a year in which Republicans tried to make experience, character and trust the
central issues, voters indicated that the theme of change sounded by the
Democrats was more important. Change was cited as one of the qualities that
mattered the most in deciding their vote by well over a third of those
interviewed. Honesty and trustworthiness were cited by fewer than 2 in 10, but
those who did cite it went overwhelming for Mr. Bush.

Nearly half of the voters said Mr. Clinton was lying about his draft record and
his activities during the Vietnam War. In the end, however, nearly half of the
those who said they were military veterans voted for him anyway.

But Mr. Bush was not unscathed by the question of honesty. Seven in 10 voters
said he was lying about his role in the Iran-contra affair.

About one in four voters said Mr. Bush's reversal of his 1988 "no new taxes"
pledge was very important in making their choice for President this year. Of
those, roughly two-thirds voted for Mr. Clinton.

Three in 10 voters said the candidates for Vice President were very important in
making their choice for President. That did not bode well for Mr. Bush and Dan
Quayle, as most of those voters backed Mr. Clinton.

Republicans made much of the theme "family values" throughout the year, but a
mere sixth of the voters said the issue was important in deciding their vote. In
fact, there were indications that Republican denunciations of non-traditional
families may have alienated more voters than they attracted.

Half of single people, half of single parents and more than half of working
women voted for Mr. Clinton, while a third of each group voted for Mr. Bush.
Seven in 10 homosexual and bisexual voters backed Mr. Clinton.

In a year in which Mr. Clinton's wife, Hillary, drew much criticism for remarks
that some women took as offensive to homemakers, Mr. Clinton won just over a
third of homemaker vote, with close to a half going to Mr. Bush. About 1 in 10
voters identified themselves as homemakers.

Abortion was cited as an important factor in their decision by only 1 in 10
voters. More than half of people who said abortion should be always illegal or
mostly illegal cast their votes for the President, while more than half who
support legalized abortion voted for Mr. Clinton.

Mr. Bush won the support of those who attend religious services at least once a
week, getting nearly half their vote. But he failed to win over a majority of
Roman Catholics, a group he had aggressively courted. Their vote split along the
lines of general public's, with roughly half going to Mr. Clinton and just over
a third to Mr. Bush.

Jewish support went overwhelmingly to Mr. Clinton, who took 8 in 10 of Jewish
votes, a better performance than the 6 in 10 won by Mr. Dukakis in 1988.

With the controversy over Clarence Thomas's nomination to the Supreme Court
still echoing in some races, especially for Senate, a third of voters in the
Presidential race said future appointments to the Court were very important in
making their selection for President. More than half of them voted for Mr.
Clinton, while only a third went for Mr. Bush.

In Illinois, voters were evenly divided over the wisdom of the Thomas
nomination. Two-thirds of those who said the nomination was a mistake voted for
Mr. Clinton, while more than half who favored the nomination supported Mr. Bush.

Mr. Clinton and his running mate, Senator Al Gore of Tennessee, made much of
their representing the baby-boomer generation, while Mr. Bush emphasized his
maturity and experience. But only 1 in 10 voters said age mattered in their
choice, with most of them voting for Mr. Clinton.

The Persian Gulf war, which brought Mr. Bush to historic heights in his approval
rating and which scared away many top Democrats from seeking the White House, in
the end mattered to only a quarter of the voters. Most of those did indeed
support Mr. Bush.

Another Bush selling point, foreign policy, was cited by fewer than 1 in 10
voters as an issue that mattered most in casting their ballot. The environment,
an issue that Mr. Clinton was counting on to help him, was cited by even fewer
voters, 1 in 20.

The exception was California. Half of the voters there said they were
environmentalists, and more than 6 in 10 of them voted for Mr. Clinton.

The televised debatges seem to have helped Mr. Clinton, who won the vote of half
of those who said the debates were important. The remainder was split between
Mr. Bush and Mr. Perot, who benefited from a lift in the polls after the third
debate.

 A Man in the News article in late editions about Vice President-elect Al Gore
Jr. misstated the year his father was defeated for re-election to the Senate. It
was 1970, not 1969.

LOAD-DATE: November 4, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: November 5, 1992, Thursday

CORRECTION:

A Man in the News article in late editions yesterday about President-elect Bill
Clinton misstated his age when he was defeated for re-election after his first
term as Governor of Arkansas. He was 34 years old, not 32.

GRAPHIC: Photo: David Ervin, left, and Richard Cook carrying signs for State
Denator Diane Watson outside the ruins of a building in South-Central Los
Angeles. (Liliana Nieto del Rio for The New York Times) (pg. B4)

Chart: "KEY GROUPS: How They Say They Voted'

In percent.

Independents

Perot: 29%
Bush: 31%
Clinton: 41%

Moderates

Perot: 21%
Bush: 30%
Clinton: 50%

Suburbanites

Perot: 20%
Bush: 36%
Clinton: 44%

(Source: Voter Research & Surveys exit poll of 13,471 voters) (pg. B1)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              205 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 5, 1992, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 ELECTIONS: THE WORLD -- FOREIGN POLICY;
Clinton Warns U.S. Foes And Reassures Its Friends

BYLINE: By THOMAS L. FRIEDMAN,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 10; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1151 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 5


President-elect Bill Clinton's declaration today that no foreign nation should
"doubt America's resolve" during this transition period was intended to signal
adversaries, particularly President Saddam Hussein of Iraq, that they should not
try to test the young new American leader, Clinton aides said.

Mr. Clinton's statement also appeared, in part, to be an effort to address any
lingering public doubts that his lack of experience in foreign affairs and his
efforts to avoid military service during the Vietnam War would in some way
diminish his abilities to be an effective Commander in Chief.

Mr. Clinton and his foreign policy aides concluded in the weeks leading up to
the election that if he won, the leaders of Iraq, Iran or China -- whose elderly
statesmen have grandchildren Mr. Clinton's age -- might be tempted to test him
when he takes office in January.

Clinton aides were specifically concerned that a foreign leader might try to
take advantage of the Arkansas Governor's foreign policy inexperience, recalling
that Nikita S. Khrushchev thought he could take advantage of President John F.
Kennedy after the botched effort to topple Fidel Castro of Cuba in 1961.

Facing Hussein's Glee

When Mr. Clinton was receiving foreign policy briefings during the campaign, he
often asked experts: "Where will I be tested first? What should I say to prevent
that?" one adviser recalled.

Clinton aides said today's statement was carefully written with such questions
in mind, and it got an extra jolt after the news that President Hussein fired
his gun into the air in defiant celebration of President Bush's electoral
defeat. As one Clinton adviser put it: "The only world leader who was
unreservedly for Bill Clinton is Saddam Hussein, and we have to make sure he
regrets that."

It may have seemed odd that Mr. Clinton, who ran a campaign focused on domestic
economic concerns, would use his first statement the morning after his election
to send a foreign policy message. But the choice reflected the sense among many
Clinton foreign policy advisers, as well as senior Bush Administration
officials, that while the nation has been focused inward on the campaign and
domestic affairs, serious problems have begun brewing abroad and will be
inherited by Mr. Clinton.

Hyperinflation and challenges from right-wing extremists are threatening to
topple the democratically elected government of President Boris N. Yeltsin in
Russia, which has already put on hold the withdrawal of troops from the Baltic
republics and is backtracking on some of its agreements with the Bush
Administration to destroy nuclear arms. Meanwhile, a series of ethnic wars are
flaring up around its borders.

Iran's increasingly aggressive behavior and arms buildup has prompted the United
States to augment its naval presence in the Persian Gulf as a counterweight.
Other problems, like the prospect of further widespread starvation this winter
in Bosnia and Somalia or a potential breakdown of the Arab-Israeli peace talks,
could be enough to derail Mr. Clinton's plans to be first and foremost a
domestic President.

As Defense Secretary Dick Cheney remarked on the eve of the election, "I would
put forward the proposition that the next set of American policy makers will
face tougher challenges, more difficult problems than anything we have had to
deal with over the course of the last four or five years."

Mr. Clinton's statement today was also intended to be a note of reassurance to
longtime allies. When Mr. Clinton said he wanted to "reaffirm the essential
continuity of American foreign policy," he did so with the knowledge that
certain important American allies, like Saudi Arabia, Japan and some European
nations, are extremely uneasy about the passing of the Republican Bush
Administration, with which they had worked closely.

King Fahd of Saudi Arabia had a strong personal relationship with Mr. Bush, with
whom he planned the gulf war, and the Saudis were quietly rooting for his
re-election. The Japanese are very wary of the protectionist instincts within
the Democratic Party, as opposed to Mr. Bush's unabashed free-trade instincts,
and the Europeans have always been more comfortable with Mr. Bush's
unsentimental realpolitik view of the world than traditional liberal democratic
instincts.

Mr. Clinton, aides said, wanted to get off on the right foot with all of them by
signaling from the outset that there will be much more continuity in American
foreign policy than might have been suggested by the heated campaign debates.

With an eye to the problems that he might inherit, and with an effort to put the
best face possible on them, Mr. Clinton declared that he looked forward to
"working closely with President Bush to insure continuity in global affairs of
interest to all Americans, from continued progress in the Mideast peace talks,
to completing negotiations on the details of the Start II arms control
agreement, to making progress toward a good agreement on our world trade talks,
to bolstering Russia's fledgling democracy, to working toward peaceful
resolution of the conflict in the republics of the former Yugoslavia, to
assisting the victims of famine in Somalia."

Mr. Clinton, aides said, specifically mentioned the Arab-Israeli peace talks
because all the various parties are returning to Washington on Monday to resume
negotiations, which have been stalled on all fronts save for Israel and Jordan.

The message Mr. Clinton wanted to send to both Arabs and Israelis, say aides, is
that progress in their peace talks will be a foreign policy priority. The
negotiators, they said, should therefore remain seriously engaged and not
withhold concessions just to see what will happen after he takes office. With
everything else he will have to worry about, Mr. Clinton does not want to have
to worry about reviving these negotiations as well.

While Mr. Clinton indicated his intention to maintain the continuity of American
foreign policy in the Persian Gulf, he may not have the resources in the region
to do it. At the end of December Turkey is scheduled to decide whether it will
continue to let its air bases be used as part of the gulf war military
coalition, and in specific for maintaining the no-fly zone over northern Iraq
and the relief effort for Iraqi Kurds.

At the moment, political sentiment in Turkey is running strongly against
remaining in the coalition. The American military operations in the gulf have
from the start been built on three pillars: Saudi Arabian bases, Turkish bases,
and American naval power. If Turkey pulls out, it would seriously diminish that
triad and the operational effectiveness of American forces in that part of the
world.

"If you want to keep Saddam in a box, you need to be able to keep the lid on,
and that is not going to be easy without Turkey," said one foreign policy
adviser to President-elect Clinton.

LOAD-DATE: November 5, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              206 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 5, 1992, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 ELECTIONS: REACTION -- VOICES;
The Subject Is Politics, and the Voices Are as Diverse as the Country

BYLINE: By DIRK JOHNSON

SECTION: Section B; Page 7; Column 6; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 396 words


Wherever Americans gathered yesterday, the subject was politics in general and
Bill Clinton in particular. The young and the old, suburbanites and ghetto
residents, political junkies and even the avowedly apathetic paused to
contemplate the election results and what a Clinton Administration might be
like.

Following are snapshots of an assortment of voters who shared their thoughts one
day after the election.

Colorado
Coming Home, To the Suburbs

ARVADA, Colo., Nov. 4 (Special to The New York Times) -- A huge number of
suburban voters came back to the Democratic Party on Tuesday. Voters here say
that is because the Democratic Party came back to the suburbs.

Here in the conservative Denver suburbs of Jefferson County, where minivans fill
the parking lots of shopping malls, Bill Clinton ran neck-and-neck with
President Bush. For a Democrat, that is success.

Voters here said they did not necessarily believe everything Mr. Clinton had to
say. But they believed one important thing.

"He's not a liberal," said Geraldine Asay, a 52-year-old housewife, who voted
for Ronald Reagan twice, then Mr. Bush, and now Mr. Clinton. "For a long time,
the Democrats have been all for welfare. But Clinton's not like that. He wants
to put people to work."

Like almost every other Clinton supporter interviewed here this morning, she
cited one other motivation for her vote: "We need change."

Ray Williamson, a 47-year-old trucker, came back to the Democratic fold, too. As
the economy faltered, he said he simply lost faith in President Bush. "All he
could do was complain about Clinton," Mr. Williamson said.

Not everyone was celebrating on the streets of Arvada this morning. Republicans
like Pat McMullin, a 49-year-old cosmetologist, said she expects higher taxes
from the President-elect. "How else is he going to pay for his programs?" she
asked.

Her husband, Perry, a former Marine who works as a photographer, said he could
not vote for Mr. Clinton, a man who opposed the Vietnam war.  "What if we have
another situation like Kuwait?" he asked.

But Larry Teeple, a retired owner of a baking company, said the new Presidency
offers hope. "I wasn't thrilled with any of the three," said Mr. Teeple, 70, who
finally chose Mr. Clinton. "More than anything else, we needed a change. And
Clinton's the only one with a chance of giving it to us."

LOAD-DATE: November 5, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Larry Teeple, A retired owner of a baking company in Arvada,
Colo. -- "We needed a change. And Clinton's the only one with a chance of giving
it to us." (Brian Brainerd for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              207 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 5, 1992, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 ELECTIONS: REACTION
Off the Trail: Visits With Americans;
New Hampshire Voter Recalls Clinton's Stern Test

SECTION: Section B; Page 7; Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1102 words

DATELINE: NASHUA, N.H., Nov. 4


Bill Clinton arrived at Phil and Ann Ackerman's house on a snowy night nine
months ago, plummetting through a double-digit fall in his poll standings. His
Presidential campaign was failing and a pack of news reporters was staked out on
Mr. Ackerman's icy driveway.

The Arkansas governor was visiting within, at number 9 Sunshine Court, to talk
of banking reform and the threat of foreclosure stalking the Ackermans. But the
Clinton character issue was flurrying outside furiously as the snow.

"He was taking a beating that whole week and we kept thinking of old Ed Muskie
breaking down and crying and his Presidential campaign ending in the New
Hampshire snow," recalls Mr. Ackerman, a 52-year-old print shop owner here who
was an innocent bystander in what, in retrospect, was Mr. Clinton's closest
brush with defeat and a defining moment in his 13-month campaign to win the
Presidency.

The nation now knows that Mr. Clinton was hardly the sort to cry in the snow
that night last Feb. 10 as revelations of his youthful attempt to avoid service
in the Vietnam war came full blown into the campaign, hard on the heels of
tabloid accusations about marital infidelity.

'Granite' in an Inferno

Far from tears in the snow, that week brought fresh fire to the forge of Clinton
competiveness.

But his Nashua campaign coordinator, Kris Durmer, recalls reeling through the
harrowing final week of the Democratic primary with a Biblical sense of
mortality. "Talk about walking through the valley of the shadow of death," Mr.
Durmer relates, in awe in retrospect at seeing Mr. Clinton establish his
signature resilience as a national politician in that week.

"This was far beyond taking the heat in the kitchen. He was in an inferno," Mr.
Durmer remembers. "And he absorbed it, stood in the middle of it like frozen
granite."

It is a measure of the evolution of American politics that New Hampshire voters
now remember Mr. Clinton in those terms, desperately clawing his way back to
credibility, the way Iowa Democrats recall a gentler bit of campaign legend,
Jimmy Carter's carrying his own garment bag into their back-road precincts in
his opening days as a dark horse heading for the White House 17 years ago.

The Ultimate Impedimenta

Candidates have since come to lug their character around as the ultimate
impedimenta, and Mr. Clinton has written the campaigner's guidebook on how best
to do it.

"I was with him and saw him transfer himself into a person possessed," George
Bruno, Mr. Clinton's state primary chairman, recalls. "Any lesser candidate
would have folded under the pressure."

Mr. Ackerman remembers Mr. Clinton finishing up his now forgotten bank reform
agenda, smiling at the family and heading out to a news conference on the snowy
front lawn. "Ready to kick butt?" he asked mainly himself, smiling, on the way
back to the fray.

The endangered homeowner watched the endangered candidate suddenly wax
combative, denouncing the "Republican attack machine" --- a shrewd touch
because, although there was no G.O.P. evidence of having orginated the character
charges, Mr. Clinton was able to relate them to the now unpopular attack
advertisements of the 1988 Bush campaign and blur any specific merits.
Revealingly, he said he said he understood he had to counter-attack attempts to
"define and destroy" his candidacy as the early front-runner.

His antidote was a definition campaign of his own, preemptively upping the
personal-life ante by appearing in a 60 Minutes TV interview to have his wife
dramatically testify to how she believed in him. At the same time, he released
further bits of detail on his Vietnam dilemma when, even as a young man, the
record showed he had somehow anticipated being a politician with a potentially
embattled record. Most of all, he turned to public rallies, fielding questions
from voters on the issue in a public innoculation in the New Hampshire hustings
that avoided the more penetrating and righteous queries of critics.

Politicians here think Mr. Clinton established a new sort of campaign maxim on
counterpoising public character against private character --- that a candidate's
adrenal turning to fight explosively for his political life can be redefining
and more impressive to the voters than the actual details or merits of the
charges under challenge.

"I have one thing to say about the next eight days," Mr. Clinton vowed on Mr.
Ackerman's lawn. "I'm going to fight like hell."

The character issues never really disappeared from the long campaign, but Mr.
Clinton displayed his power to contain them, and the voters came to safe enough
terms with them. A week after stopping by the Ackermans' home he had stabilized
his New Hampshire campaign and finished a strong second to former Senator Paul
E. Tsongas of Massachusetts.

Crucial Turning Point

Nashua residents remember Mr. Clinton in a stop that week here at the Arel Manor
retirement home where a resident, Mary Davis, suddenly broke down crying as she
tried to explain how her budget-pinched life often comes down to a choice
between buying food or paying her extensive medicine bills.

"Imagine -- that Clinton came right over and knelt down and hugged me," Mrs.
Davis recalls. "Isn't he A-1? Another F.D.R.?"

Mr. Durmer feels that was the critical turning voters sensed. "Here's a man with
his own big troubles right then, but kneeling to comfort Mrs. Davis. It was the
most telling moment in my 20 years of campaigns here."

In that hug, Mrs. Davis offered the candidate advice. "I told him to fight back,
stand up to the slander," she recalls, smiling as she realizes she was
comforting a future President.

"'Stick it out,' I said and Clinton said, 'I promise you I'll fight back,"'
recounts Mrs. Davis, who received a $35 bag of groceries that week from the
Clinton entourage, and a fond reference from Mr. Clinton in one of the TV
debates last month.

But Mr. Ackerman is less romantic if no less appreciative toward that fiery week
in the 1992 campaign. "It may be a sad commentary, in a way, but Clinton was
still the only viable guy in the race," he said.

"There was no other strong Democrat to take over," Mr. Ackerman continues,
finding, however, that, in the perverse and circumstantial ways of political
history, this proved to be the best possible boon for the Democrats. "He was
left out there, showing his ability to take a punch, showing a certain strength
of character."

Mr. Clinton left number 9 Sunshine Court vowing not to be undone. "I don't know
how it comes out," he said of his run for the Presidency, "but I came to play."

LOAD-DATE: November 5, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: In February, Gov. Bill Clinton stood outside the home of Phil
and Ann Ackerman in Nashua, N.H. It was a time when his Presidential prospects
were as cold as the weather and when the character issue had frozen his campaign
almost before it had started. (Associated Press)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              208 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 5, 1992, Thursday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

THE 1992 ELECTIONS: PRESIDENT-ELECT -- ROAD TO VICTORY
Sifting Strategies: What Went Wrong, and Right;
Clinton: Forging Discipline, Vision and Luck Into Victory

BYLINE: By GWEN IFILL,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1978 words

DATELINE: LITTLE ROCK, Ark., Nov. 4


The Hollywood stars were streaming into the Biltmore Hotel in downtown Los
Angeles on the warm night of June 2 to see and be seen with Bill Clinton, who
had just wrapped up the Democratic nomination for President. The Clinton
California primary victory party was the hottest ticket in town.

But upstairs in the Governor's suite, Mr. Clinton was frustrated, his advisers
depressed. The Wednesday morning headlines would proclaim him the winner, but a
fatally wounded one. In a politically debilitating turn of events, polls showed
Mr. Clinton running a distant third behind the shiny, new independent candidacy
of Ross Perot. It looked as if the party might be over before it had properly
begun.

"We had hit the worst of all possible junctures," recalled Paul Begala, a
Clinton strategist who went out for a rare stiff drink that night with his
partner, James Carville. "Voters knew all the bad and none of the good."

The campaign's success in changing the course of this year's tumultuous campaign
resulted from stern discipline, a measure of dumb luck and a nearly naive sense
of purpose that fueled Mr. Clinton's pursuit of the Presidency.

Mr. Clinton overcame extraordinary political adversity by plotting his
objectives far in advance and presenting the electorate with a threatening
vision of the consequences of re-electing President Bush -- for the economy, for
domestic tranquillity and for Washington gridlock.

"The very future of the American dream is at stake," he warned last spring. He
was determined not to repeat the mistakes Senator Al Gore, another Southerner,
had made when seeking the Presidency in 1988 by failing to plan beyond a sweep
of Southern states in the Super Tuesday primaries. Mr. Clinton assembled a
circle of victory-hungry strategists and advisers who were determined to
establish the Arkansas Governor as a viable candidate nationwide.

The Clinton forces also set themselves the task of overcoming the stigma of the
Democratic Party as the home of losers and liberals. What some viewed as a
repudiation of traditional party principles were defined instead as an effort to
broaden the party.

And when the campaign began to flounder, as on that night in California, Clinton
strategists, including his media adviser, Mandy Grunwald, pushed forward on
another front: linking Mr. Clinton to pop culture through appearances on the
Arsenio Hall show, MTV and the Nashville Network.

In the end, the candidate and his staff hammered out a strategy that looked
stubbornly ahead, even during their bleakest moments.

Two Miscalculations: Vietnam and Hillary

In retrospect, Clinton campaign aides now say, it became clear shortly after the
Republican Convention that the prize was in their grasp. It was the spectacle in
Houston that, in their view, flattened Mr. Bush. Long on conservative rhetoric,
the convention was also short on the sort of specifics the Democrats had decided
voters wanted to hear.

The mistakes are easy to chronicle.

One of the biggest was Mr. Clinton's failure to appreciate the danger posed by
his incomplete explanations of how he had avoided military service during the
Vietnam War. Campaign staff members said they gravely miscalculated the damage
the draft issue could do to Mr. Clinton's credibility.

During a campaign strategy session in December 1991, Mr. Clinton and his aide,
Betsey Wright, asserted that questions about the candidate's draft status had
been resolved previously in state campaigns and would be no problem in 1992. Mr.
Clinton was adamant that no further research be conducted on the matter, the
staff members said.

But for all the problems that the draft issue caused Mr. Clinton, it never
became the weapon the Republicans hoped it would be.

Still, there were other perilous miscalculations. For example, Hillary Clinton,
who had originally been considered an unqualified benefit to the ticket,
faltered when she defended her career with a disparaging aside about women who
stay home to "bake cookies and have teas."

"That was a self-inflicted wound," Mrs. Clinton said in an interview this week.
"It just was something I had to learn about. That was a learning process for
me."

Yet is instructive to note that when Mr. Clinton's closest advisers are asked to
name the lowest moments of the Democrat's campaign this year, they do not
immediately mention the embarrassments and notoriety over rumors of marital
infidelity, the Vietnam-era draft or Mr. Clinton's marijuana, each of which at
times threatened to engulf the campaign.

Instead, they talk about the success and failures of their message and how they
chose to deliver it. In the end, when they stuck to their message, they overcame
their mistakes.

Long-Term Strategy: Fix What Is Broken

One of the most frustrating moments for Mr. Clinton during this year's campaign
had nothing to do with the character questions that President Bush would later
use against him. It occurred when he found himself battling his competitors for
the hearts of the middle class.

Paul Tsongas, Jerry Brown and Ross Perot all proved to be threats. And as each
of these slightly offbeat candidates took his turn as prime challenger, the
campaign's internal polling showed that Mr. Clinton's negative ratings among
voters began to rise correspondingly.

In rapid succession, Mr. Clinton appropriated their messages, railing against
Washington and making his prescription for change more somber. But to hear Mr.
Clinton talk about it at the time, it would have been easy to believe that each
small calibration was his own idea.

"One of the things I've learned in this business is make your own strategy, try
to stick to it, hope for the best, assume the worst, and go on," Mr. Clinton
said in an interview in March.

He had barely finished elbowing his way to a second-place finish in the New
Hampshire primary in February before he started taking aim at Georgia and South
Carolina. And by the time the letdown of the California primary victory had
passed, the campaign's top advisers had already retreated to Little Rock to
begin planning the general election.

"There had been a lot of discussions in May about what we would do in June,"
Hillary Clinton said. "We assumed we would win the nomination. And we remembered
what Bush did to Dukakis in June."

By anticipating the worst of the attacks, the Clinton campaign's vaunted
quick-response team deflected nearly everything the Republicans threw at them.
"We killed their attacks before they went national, and by the time they went
into their convention, their biggest attack was Hillary," George Stephanopoulos,
the campaign's communications director, said. "Bingo."

The Democrats also quickly realized they had to repair their candidate's image.

Hillary Clinton said she was "stunned' when internal polls showed that most
people thought she and her husband were childless. Instantly, 12-year-old
Chelsea appeared with her parents on the cover of People magazine.

The same polls showed no one knew much of anything about Mr. Clinton except for
the soap operas of the primaries, which had become fodder for late-night
comedians. On Arsenio Hall, they learned he played the saxophone. On MTV, they
learned he could sometimes laugh about himself. On morning talk shows and in
televised town meetings in targeted states, they heard about health care,
educational opportunity and life after the cold war.

Some of Mr. Clinton's advisers thought the whole thing not very Presidential,
but using the pop-culture approach was also a purposeful -- and ultimately
successful -- attempt to circumvent mainstream press coverage, which the
Clintons and their advisers were convinced would endlessly rehash debilitating
controversies.

Not all the surprises were bad. Even Mr. Clinton's most forward-thinking
strategists had not predicted the galvanizing effect Mr. Gore and his
picture-perfect family would have on the ticket.

Although Mr. Gore was limited as a Presidential candidate in 1988 and sometimes
long-winded as a Vice-Presidential candidate this year, his presence on the
ticket was an unalloyed benefit.

The pictures that emerged from their joint bus trips were effective television
images, and Tipper Gore's friendliness on the stump blunted Hillary Clinton's
sharp edges as the two giggled together like old cheerleader buddies.

Al From, the executive director of the centrist Democratic Leadership Council,
said that in choosing another Southerner as his running mate rather than
reaching for geographical balance, Mr. Clinton signaled that he meant it when he
said he was an unconventional Democrat.

Waiting for Attacks Or Signs of Strategy

Clinton advisers seemed in a state of perpetual surprise over the Republican
Party's failure to mount an effective and consistent counterattack.

"They did not a thing, to our great delight," said Ms. Grunwald.

David Wilhelm, the architect of Mr. Clinton's state-by-state strategy, said the
campaign targeted 32 states with 376 electoral votes, calculating each state's
historical performance in Presidential elections -- something they called the
"Southernness factor" -- to gauge Mr. Clinton's regional appeal, to plan where
to travel, and more important, to decide where to spend advertising money.

The top tier of states the Democrats aimed for and won were Delaware. Maryland,
Missouri, Pennsylvania, Colorado, Georgia, Iowa, Kentucky, Louisiana, Maine,
Michigan, Montana, North Carolina, New Jersey, New Mexico, Ohio, Tennessee and
Wisconsin.

Shunning network television advertising in favor of state purchases, gave them
"gubernatorial level" campaigns at each crucial state, Ms. Grunwald said.

A discordant Republican convention and a listless performance by the President
during the debates, particularly his groping response to a question about how
the recession had affected him personally, infused the Clinton strategists with
confidence.

"When Bush couldn't answer that question, the whole campaign exhaled," said Mr.
Stephanopoulos.

Assembling Victory From Puzzle Pieces

Mr. Clinton's victory is a paradox, a hard-won political victory that
contradicted the year's conventional wisdom: Voters despised politics but
elected a man who had been steeped in political ambition ever since he shook
President Kennedy's hand.

This was supposed to be the year that questions of character were to determine
the campaign's outcome. But voters elected a man who was forced to answer
questions about marital infidelity on national television, who avoided the
military draft and who shaded the truth about whether he used had drugs as a
student.

All of this turned out to be largely beside the point on Election Day because,
as it turned out, Mr. Clinton's timing was impeccable.

Like Ronald Reagan, he sought the Presidency in a year when the country was
struggling with a weakened economy and when the incumbent President was
perceived as ineffectual on the matters that counted most.

Also like Mr. Reagan, he ran as a can-do governor who promised to move his own
party in a different direction. For a Democrat who had worked for George
McGovern in 1972, Mr. Clinton did a remarkable job of transforming himself into
a moderate who rejected the overtly liberal orthodoxy that had cost his party
every Presidential election, save one, since 1964.

"I remind you again tonight, my fellow Americans, that this victory was more
than a victory of party," Mr. Clinton told his jubilant supporters late Tuesday
night as they shivered in the cold outside the pristine Old State House here.
"It was a victory for the people who work hard and play by the rules, a victory
for the people who feel left out and left behind and want to do better, a
victory for the people who are ready to compete and win in the global economy
but who need a government that offers a hand, not a hand-out."

NAME: Bill Clinton

LOAD-DATE: November 5, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: November 6, 1992, Friday

CORRECTION:

Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about the impact of Ross Perot
on the Presidential race misstated Mr. Perot's vote totals in some copies. He
finished second in one state, Utah; in the 49 other states he finished third.


GRAPHIC: Photos: President-elect Bill Clinton greeting a crowd of supporters
after giving his acceptance speech on Tuesday night outside the Old Statehouse
in Little Rock, Ark. (Agence France-Presse); Rahm Emanuel, left,j Paul Begala,
center, and James Carville, the team of campaign strategists for President-elect
Bill Clinton, sitting together yesterday at a news conference in Little Rock,
Ark. (Jim Estrin/The New York Times) (pg. B3)

Chart: "New York, County by County: The Race for the Presidency and Senate"
                 %
             Rptg.   Clinton      Bush     Perot    Abrams    DAmato
Albany          83    66,898    43,102    18,991    63,409    54,364
Allegany       100     4,507     8,392     4,486     5,619     9,541
Bronx          100   218,218    62,156    14,535   178,305    83,602
Brooklyn       100   393,152   131,620    33,889   301,443   204,952
Broome         100    40,370    32,275    19,491    36,176    47,436
Cattaraugus    100     9,489    13,148    10,156    11,885    15,767
Cayuga         100    12,136    11,292     9,808     9,688    14,556
Chautauqua     100    21,534    19,873    17,400    23,906    26,603
Chemung        100    14,930    15,966     7,210    11,920    23,027
Chenango       100     7,439     7,339     5,043     6,805    10,580
Clinton        100    12,628    13,349     5,135    11,578    16,209
Columbia       100    10,958    11,265     5,695    10,552    14,349
Cortland       100     7,324     7,212     4,717     6,624    10,226
Delaware       100     6,951     8,555     4,200     7,361    10,303
Dutchess       100    40,413    45,877    25,258    42,075    60,327
Erie            96   187,067   123,746   116,136   190,124   177,749
Essex          100     6,599     8,311     3,760     6,688     9,049
Franklin       100     7,018     6,254     3,668     6,743     8,217
Fulton         100     7,892     8,635     4,894     7,606    11,733
Genesee        100     7,703    11,342     5,982     8,570    13,372
Greene         100     6,851     9,337     4,278     6,265    12,114
Hamilton       100       945     2,021       777     1,152     2,232
Herkimer       100    10,081    11,202     6,572     9,212    14,816
Jefferson      100    12,449    13,453     8,708    11,183    18,705
Lewis          100     3,421     3,787     3,211     3,133     5,292
Livingston     100     8,503    12,152     5,713     8,945    14,052
Madison        100    10,168    11,034     7,293     9,724    14,358
Manhattan      100   387,537    80,889    25,816   355,921   103,302
Monroe         100   133,261   127,919    60,169   130,346   151,400
Montgomery     100     9,274     8,686     4,953     9,191    11,568
Nassau          95   258,505   232,206    70,676   217,821   315,648
Niagara        100    35,195    29,919    29,060    39,844    41,531
Oneida          95    35,783    38,123    19,670    32,776    50,576
Onondaga       100    88,887    76,700    44,058    78,418   105,281
Ontario        100    14,983    17,892     9,147    15,138    21,571
Orange          99    42,671    49,534    20,676    39,022    63,285
Orleans        100     5,089     7,437     4,137     5,255     8,657
Oswego         100    16,476    17,989    14,539    15,716    25,220
Otsego         100    10,737     9,571     5,566     9,988    11,769
Putnam         100     8,676    14,516     5,976     9,101    17,984
Queens         100   330,817   150,134    43,589   260,032   229,227
Rensselaer     100    29,209    28,658    15,629    29,537    36,819
Rockland       100    52,658    47,174    14,180    43,099    64,787
St.Lawrence    100    17,931    13,510     9,519    16,232    18,490
Saratoga        99    32,634    36,791    18,409    33,372    44,932
Schenectady    100    31,611    25,964    14,453    31,452    34,622
Schoharie      100     4,678     5,325     3,131     4,897     7,150
Schuyler       100     2,721     3,199     2,030     2,557     4,382
Seneca         100     5,375     4,983     3,484     4,380     7,501
StatenIsland   100    54,353    67,615    18,711    41,480    90,527
Steuben        100    11,949    19,521     9,164    11,365    24,255
Suffolk         98   215,058   256,501   103,729   202,485   299,580
Sullivan       100    13,393    11,171     6,214    12,617    15,476
Tioga          100     7,722     9,192     5,794     7,720    12,370
Tompkins       100    21,609    10,991     6,351    20,560    13,693
Ulster          99    31,759    28,489    17,297    30,768    38,848
Warren         100     8,721    11,061     6,334     9,513    12,969
Washington     100     7,795     9,389     5,792     8,136    12,103
Wayne          100    11,495    17,803     8,969    11,983    20,695
Westchester     96   160,047   135,491    34,398   145,364   165,410
Wyoming        100     4,792     7,362     5,544     4,929     8,808
Yates          100     3,338     4,329     2,240     3,250     5,189
Totals          99 3,242,383 2,268,729 1,026,410 2,890,956 2,999,156
(pg. B14)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              209 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 November 6, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

For Children

BYLINE: By Dulcie Leimbach

SECTION: Section C; Page 22; Column 5; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 863 words



New Library Branch
 Riverside Branch
 of the New York Public Library
 127 Amsterdam Avenue (at 65th Street)
 (212) 870-1810
 Recommended for all ages

This new addition to Lincoln Center combines the Riverside Branch Library and
the children's performing-arts collection from the New York Public Library for
the Performing Arts across the street. The new branch has a children's library
on the second floor.

The children's library is accessible by marble stairs or an elevator; the
mint-green walls and picture windows look out to Martin Luther King Jr. High
School and a slice of New Jersey. There is a small stage for storytellers. The
Heckscher Room, a private room with rose-colored children's chairs and a huge
rocking chair for readings and other programs, has three stations where children
may listen to the library's collection of 500 records, CD's and cassette tapes.
The reference and lending sections offer a general selection as well as one
focused on performing arts.

The library, designed by Davis Brody & Associates, was financed by New York City
and Lincoln Center for the Performing Arts. The Children's Room is open Mondays
through Thursdays from 2:30 to 5:30 P.M., and Saturdays from 1 to 5 P.M.

'Eyes on Oppression'
 Downtown Community Television Center
 87 Lafayette Street
 TriBeCa
 (212) 966-4510
 Recommended ages: 10 and up
 Through Sunday

Just what is on the minds of young video makers? Sensitive subjects like
homophobia, racism, Puerto Rican nationalism, teen-age drug dealing, sex and
homelessness. The Downtown Community Television Center, a media center in a
landmark former firehouse, is holding its first children's video festival.

The 11 videos are diverse. "Our Documentary on Drugs," for example, was taped by
youngsters in conjunction with the Children's Museum of Manhattan. The children
visited a drug-rehabilitation clinic, interviewed the residents and talked about
their own misconceptions. (One girl said she had thought the place would be
"slimy.") In Los Angeles, 16-year-old Kimiko Roberts's autobiographical video,
"Cultural Identity Crisis of an All-American Girl," is an unself-pitying account
of her life as the daughter of a black man and a Japanese-American mother.

"No Way Out," made by 18-year-old Darryl T. Cohen, is a highly charged depiction
of a young man's struggle to avoid the materialistic trap of drug dealing.
"Accidents Can Happen," made by students involved in Spark, a New York City
high-school video program, is a look at a couple who forgot to use birth control
once and are now facing the consequences.  In one of the best videos, "Beyond
the Color of Authority," 16-year-old Rachael Fielding interviewed her father, a
Los Angeles County Sheriff, before, during and after the city's riots last
spring. Mr. Fielding likens the sense of hopelessness in the ghetto streets to
the disillusionment he felt in Saigon during the Vietnam War.

The 90-minute festival, at 3 P.M. tomorrow and on Sunday, will include a panel
discussion of New York City teen-agers. Admission is $3; refreshments will be
available.

Junior Museum
Science Club
 Staten Island Institute of Arts and Sciences
 75 Stuyvesant Place
 St. George
 (718) 727-1135
 Recommended ages: 8 to 13
 Saturdays

Once a month, Clay Wollney leads older children through a two-hour scientific
journey that touches on biology, chemistry and physics. Mr. Discovery, as he is
known, is the chairman of the science department at Staten Island Academy, a
private school. Tomorrow, children can learn about their cardiovascular and
respiratory systems.

Take lung capacity: children will blow into a spirometer and then into an
inverted bottle of water to determine how much air their lungs hold. Each child
can measure his cardiovascular strength by taking his pulse at rest and after
running in place. If there is time, Mr. Discovery will have children examine the
circulatory, digestive and skeletal systems of a starfish.

The sessions run from 10 A.M. to noon and from 1 to 3 P.M. Admission is $7 for
institute members and $9 for nonmembers. Free parking is available; the
institute is a five-minute walk from the Staten Island Ferry terminal: turn
right on Richmond Terrace, walk two blocks to Wall Street and climb the hill,
one block, to Stuyvesant Place, where the institute is on the corner. The next
Mr. Discovery session, on Dec. 19, will explore acid rain and wildlife in
wintertime.

'Dragonwings'
 Triplex Theater
 199 Chambers Street
 TriBeCa
 (212) 346-8510
 Recommended ages: 5 and up
 Tomorrow

"Dragonwings" is a play based on a children's book by Laurence Yep, a
playwright. It portrays the story of an immigrant Chinese family in San
Francisco, and the graces and horrors of Western life as seen by Moon Shadow, a
newly arrived Chinese boy.

Tickets to tomorrow's 11 A.M. and 1 P.M. shows are $7. The play is produced by
the Lincoln Center Institute, which provides arts-education programs to schools.
"Dragonwings" will also be performed on Dec. 5 at La Guardia Community College's
Performing Arts Center, 31-10 Thomson Avenue, Long Island City, Queens, (718)
482-5151.

LOAD-DATE: November 6, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              210 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 November 6, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

On Trade Ties to Hanoi, Japanese Jump the Gun

BYLINE: By DAVID E. SANGER,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 6; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1111 words

DATELINE: TOKYO, Friday, Nov. 6


Jumping ahead of American policy in Asia, the Japanese Government announced
today that it was resuming broad economic ties with Vietnam, including the offer
of a major loan package, senior Japanese officials said.

The move comes in response to heavy pressure from Japanese business groups,
which have urged the governing Liberal Democratic Party to pave the way for a
variety of long-planned investments in Vietnam by Japanese companies. Tokyo is
expected to announce a $375 million package on Friday, and that may be followed
by loans from its Export-Import Bank.

Some government officials and business executives familiar with the internal
debate over the issue said the Government of Prime Minister Kiichi Miyazawa had
postponed its announcement until after the American elections. It feared that
acting earlier would open Japan to criticism during the Presidential campaign
that it was catering to the Japanese business interests while questions remain
unresolved about the fate of American soldiers missing since the Vietnam War.

With the recent announcement by Hanoi that it would open its records on American
P.O.W.'s and M.I.A.'s, Washington is expected to move fairly quickly to lift the
American embargo on trade with Vietnam and to begin to normalize relations.

Japanese officials said they had informed the United States of their actions,
but they declined to characterize the American response. They also said Japan
had urged the Vietnamese to provide more information about the missing
Americans.

Unlike the United States, Japan never broke relations with Hanoi after the
American pullout from Vietnam. But in 1979, after Vietnamese troops invaded
Cambodia, it halted virtually all aid to the Communist Government. Vietnam, in
return, refused to pay back Japanese loans amounting to nearly $200 million, and
since then economic relations have been stalled.

A senior Japanese official involved in the decision over Vietnam said recently
that "we are looking at this as a symbol," and that Japan has told the United
States that "we want U.S. relations with Vietnam normalized."

American officials have said little publicly about Japan's impending action,
though the Bush Administration was apparently informed of it several months ago.
Last week Lawrence S. Eagleburger, the acting Secretary of State, said during a
visit to Tokyo that "whatever the Japanese Government decides to do, we have our
own view of how to proceed."

"We will not be affected by what the Japanese Government decides," he added.

For Japan, the decision appears to edge away from foreign policy positions that
were largely defined by the United States. In recent months Japan has been
stepping up its warming of relations with China, capped by a tour of the country
last month by Emperor Akihito. Tokyo has also kept up a dialogue with the
repressive Government of Myanmar, formerly Burma, where Japanese diplomats
insist that quiet persuasion -- and continued relief aid -- has begun to soften
the regime.

For the Vietnamese, courting Japan has been a major priority. Not only is Tokyo
the largest contributor of aid, it is also the likeliest source of capital to
rebuild the country's decrepit infrastructure. Some here say the expanded
relationship with Japan may place subtle pressure on the United States to
restore diplomatic relations and end its trade embargo, though Japanese
officials deny that this is their goal.

Among Japanese companies, Vietnam is considered one of Asia's last frontiers: a
cheap and well-educated work force, in a country with enough population density
to become a prime market, over time, for the lowest-tech Japanese goods.

Already Ho Chi Minh City's hotels are brimming over with Japanese businessmen,
looking for everything from oil contracts to good sites for low-technology
factories. Japanese-made products, especially electronics, are already widely
sold. Executives say they want to lay the groundwork for the day when Thailand
and Malaysia, two other countries that have received enormous Japanese capital
investment in recent years, become too expensive for further expansion.

Business Dealings Grow

Over the last two years, several of Japan's giant trading houses have opened
small offices for representatives in Vietnam. Recently five Japanese companies
joined to open a shipping and distribution company that could send manufacturing
plants and equipment to Vietnam. Mitsubishi Oil Company recently signed a
contract for rights to conduct test borings for oil off Vietnam's southern
coast.

Before they expanded further, however, the Japanese companies wanted to see
Japanese aid pouring into the country, partly as insurance that their bills
would be paid. "We knew that we had to get past the burden of the unpaid old
loans," said an official of Mitsui, one of the trading houses with a growing
presence in Vietnam. "But they have oil and cheap labor, and because the
infrastructure is so limited, we can expect some business to build it."

Japanese officials, in announcing the package this morning, said that they had
received "support" from the United States for the resumption of aid. Under the
package announced today, the $375 million loan must be repaid within 30 years,
but Japan will charge no interest for the first 10 years and only 1 percent
interest thereafter.

Vietnam will pay off its outstanding loans with cash received under the new
program. That is expected to leave more than $200 million for projects to
rebuild the country's shattered roads, and to build new factories and housing.

                             --------------------


U.S. Re-examining Policy

WASHINGTON, Nov. 5 (Special to The New York Times) -- Buoyed by a Vietnamese
decision to turn over archival material on missing Americans, the Bush
Administration is re-examining its policy on recognition of Vietnam and the
lifting of a trade and aid embargo, officials say.

American companies have been pressing President Bush to allow trade and
investment in Vietnam, where, in addition to the Japanese, businesses from
Taiwan, South Korea, Singapore, Hong Kong and Thailand have been very active.

Under a road map to recognition given to the Vietnamese a year ago,
"substantial" progress on explaining the fate of missing Americans could lead to
the lifting of the embargo and the opening of an American liaison office in
Hanoi and a Vietnamese office in Washington.

Full diplomatic recognition, according to the Bush Administration's plan, would
await a democratic election in Cambodia, tentatively scheduled for next spring.
President-elect Bill Clinton has given no indication that this timetable would
change.

LOAD-DATE: November 6, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              211 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 November 6, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 969 words



International A3-10

RAISING TAXES ON EUROPEAN WINES
The U.S. fired the first shot in what may become a trade war, announcing that in
30 days it will begin collecting a 200 percent import tax on all white wine from
members of the European Community.  A1

TOUGH TIMES IN UKRAINE
Ukrainians find that the romance of nationhood is hard to sustain when the
economy is in shambles. And virtually no new economic policies have been put
into effect after 14 months of independence.  A1



EXODUS FROM HAITI RESUMES
After a four-month lull, the number of Haitians trying to reach the U.S. aboard
small boats has again begun rising rapidly. The increase is attributed to a
seasonal calming of the seas and refugees' expectations that a Clinton
Administration may treat them more generously.  A3

U.S. RECALLS ENVOY IN AFRICA
The U.S. recalled its Ambassador from Burkina Faso, saying it is supplying
weapons to the Liberian rebel leader Charles Taylor.  A3

THE HEALTH OF JORDAN'S KING
A fatalistic-sounding King Hussein told Jordanians his cancerous left ureter and
kidney were removed but more U.S. treatment awaits.  A5

TOKYO TO OPEN HANOI TIES
The Japanese Government announced that it is resuming broad economic ties with
Vietnam, including the offer of a major loan package, Japanese officials said.
A6

JAPAN'S MONEY POLITICS
Japanese prosecutors said officials of the governing party had offered $25
million to persuade a rightist group to halt verbal attacks that were preventing
their man from becoming Prime Minister. The prosecutors said it was rejected.
A7

NO SERB-CROAT LINKUP IS SEEN
Muslim leaders in Bosnia and Herzegovina say the prospect of long-term violence
and terrorism will prevent Croats and Serbs from forming an alliance to carve up
the country.  A8

Serbian forces in Bosnia were accused of violating a flight ban.  A8

IRELAND'S GOVERNMENT COLLAPSES
The coalition that has governed Ireland since 1989 collapsed after the Prime
Minister lost a vote of confidence in Parliament. He then had Parliament
dissolved and set elections for Nov. 25.  A9

IRAN DENIES ACCESS TO AMERICAN
The U.S. said Iran was continuing to deny consular access to an American
arrested in September on charges of bribery and espionage.  A10

Jaipur Journal: Ex-maharajahs are seeking their birthrights.  A4

National A12-20

AN AMBITIOUS BEGINNING
His aides predict that Bill Clinton will try to convey an impression of boldness
during his first days in the Oval Office by issuing a whirlwind of executive
orders on matters like abortion rights, White House perquisites and government
ethics. But the success of those plans rests a great deal on unanswered
questions about his character.  A1

A dispute over the transition broke out within Clinton's camp.  A19

Many who dream of jobs under Clinton will be disappointed.  A18

Democratic fund-raisers set a record this year.  A20

Why Kansas, and a lot of other places, embraced Perot.  A20

THE CAPITAL UNDER CLINTON
Faster than you can riffle through a Rolodex, the world of Washington is
realigning itself. But to what?  A1

In the Senate, a sign of Republican squabbling.  A19

SETBACK FOR HOLLYWOOD STUDIOS
A Federal appeals court struck down an F.C.C. rule that restricted the major
television networks from owning and selling the re-run rights to the prime-time
shows they broadcast.A1

MALAYSIAN TOURISTS ARE FREED
The Government dropped all charges against a Malaysian tour guide accused of
smuggling illegal aliens into the United States. The move ended a painful and
puzzling ordeal for members of the guide's tour group, who had been detained in
Boston for more than two weeks as witnesses.  A14

REPORT ON VITAMIN SUPPLEMENTS
A study concluded that elderly people who take modest daily amounts of a broad
array of vitamins, minerals and other supplements have markedly fewer infections
and stronger immune defenses than those who do not.  A16

A STORM'S EFFECTS LINGER
Two and a half months after Hurricane Andrew swept through South Florida, the
daily lives of virtually all Dade County's two million residents have been
altered in fundamental ways, perhaps for years to come.  A12

HIGHWAY OF TERROR
The American Automobile Association and the Florida visitors' bureau have issued
rare advisories warning motorists that because of sniper and stone-throwing
attacks, they should avoid an Interstate highway usually traveled by winter
vacationers from the North.  A12

Dallas Journal: Three days of hell for would-be pathologists.  A12

Dartmouth received $30 million, the largest gift in its history.  A15

San Francisco's Mayor chose a new Police Chief.  A13

Law Page A30

Questions of law and psychology in a rape case involving a 3-year-old.

At the Bar

Metro Digest B1

ON THE TRAIL OF ILLEGAL STUDENTS
Faced with a surge of students fleeing New York City schools, the Sewanhaka
Central High School District in Elmont, L.I., is one of many financially
strapped suburban school systems that have embraced spying to discover children
who are not residents.  A1

Weekend C1-29

The snippets that sell big films.  C1
Fischer beats Spassky and wins match.  C27

Music: Music Notes C1

Art: The Art Market C1

Fashion Page B7

Business Digest D1

Sports B9-15

Obituaries B8

Editorials/Op-Ed A28-29

Editorials

The winds of war, 90's-style.

Terms, already limited.

Serbia: blowing up the Balkans.

Topics: Senator Defendant.

Letters

A. M. Rosenthal: Clinton meets the sage.

Anthony Lewis: The new landscape.

Steve Erickson: End of cynicism.

LOAD-DATE: November 6, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              212 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 November 6, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Art in Review

BYLINE: By CHARLES HAGEN

SECTION: Section C; Page 25; Column 2; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 251 words



Mitch Epstein
Tenri Cultural Institute
575 Broadway (at Prince Street)
SoHo
Through Nov. 11

Will Vietnam ever be just another country to Americans? In his new color
photographs, Mitch Epstein presents Vietnam in a surprisingly gentle light,
depicting a verdant countryside with jagged rows of blue mountains on the
horizon and flame trees covered with bright orange blossoms. Virtually the only
reminders of the long war are scrap-metal scavengers in the former demilitarized
zone.

What obviously interests Mr. Epstein most are the Vietnamese themselves. He is
especially skilled at recording gestures, whether of a sleeping boy who grasps
the ear of the puppy asleep beside him, or of a vendor, squatting on the
sidewalk, who holds a tray of watermelon chunks in her lap. Elsewhere, a boy
lolls sensuously on top of an old boat in the Saigon River.

Other pictures have a striking narrative richness and suggest film stills. In
one particularly resonant image a woman waits for a train in the Hanoi railway
yards, holding a bicycle with a profusion of lilies spilling from its basket.

Despite the bucolic innocence that suffuses these pictures, it is hard to see
them through dispassionate eyes. A sweet photograph of a gaggle of laughing
children takes on ominous overtones from its title, which notes that it was
taken near My Lai. Emotional contradictions of this sort are unavoidable in
viewing these lyrical images of a place that for many Americans still evokes a
terrible time.

LOAD-DATE: November 6, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              213 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 November 6, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Abroad at Home;
The New Landscape

BYLINE: By ANTHONY LEWIS

SECTION: Section A; Page 29; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 719 words


"In victory, magnanimity." So Winston Churchill advised. But for Bill Clinton it
will have to be watchful magnanimity.

Anyone who thinks the gracious concession speeches on Election Night presaged an
Era of Good Feeling for the Clinton Presidency -- a suspension of partisanship
-- has a short memory. To win, Mr. Clinton had to survive an exceptionally
vicious campaign against him. Republicans, embittered and divided, are not going
to be kind and gentle to the Clinton Administration.

To be effective in the White House, Mr. Clinton will have to win the confidence
of not just the 43 percent who voted for him but of many of the other 57
percent. The Republican tactic will surely be to destroy that confidence by
personal attack. That is the game Newt Gingrich knows, and it is the one George
Bush played in the campaign.

(Was there, incidentally, an inadvertent note of guilt about the nature of his
campaign in President Bush's concession speech? I thought so. He said, "We have
fought the good fight . . . and I believe we have upheld the honor of the
Presidency." It was as if he were trying to reassure himself.)

The hard part of Mr. Clinton's confidence-building will be the central promise
he made to the voters: to rebuild the economy. It will take years, even with the
wisest policy, to correct the distortions of the Reagan-Bush years and cope with
the grim international trends.

What he can do on the economic front, in his first days as President, is
demonstrate the caring and the commitment to action that the people felt were
missing in George Bush. But his task is complicated by the Perot factor: the
fact that Ross Perot won a remarkable 19 percent of the vote on one main
argument, that we must eliminate the budget deficit.

If Mr. Clinton actually made the brutal spending cuts that the Perot vision
requires, the economic effects would be devastating. The recession would worsen
sharply. The Clinton idea, rather, is to stimulate the economy first and then,
as it picks up, move toward deficit reduction.

Mr. Clinton can adopt one Perot theme, the reform of campaign financing. The
only thing is that real reform will also have to reach the Perot phenomenon
itself. It is wrong that one person can spend $60 million in the last month of a
Presidential race to flood the voters with propaganda. Careful legislation could
persuade the Supreme Court to think again about its 1976 decision that limits on
political spending violate constitutional guarantees of free speech.

The area ripe for early action by Congress and Mr. Clinton is social. Within
months legislation should end the Federal ban on fetal tissue research and the
abortion gag rule. A family leave law will be enacted.

Those so-called social issues touch the most sensitive area of division in the
Republican Party. The great struggle shaping up pits the Rev. Pat Robertson and
the religious right against conservatives who want Government to stay out of
such matters, leaving them to private decision.

Mr. Robertson has achieved great power in the party. His Christian Coalition
mailed out 40 million voter guides. (Why is the Christian Coalition tax-exempt?
There is a question overripe for inquiry.)

On the other hand, the Robertson forces' domination of the Republican Convention
this year offended many voters. Gov. William Weld of Massachusetts warned on
Election Night against the Republican Party's following the Democratic example
of 20 years ago and moving toward the extreme.

The campaign, on reflection, offers one clear guideline to Bill Clinton as
President: Play it straight.

Some of us thought Americans had become so cynical that they did not care what
politicians said. But it turned out that dissembling hurt.

Nearly half the voters, asked after they voted, said they thought Mr. Clinton
was lying about his draft record in the Vietnam War. But 70 percent thought
President Bush was lying about his role in the Iran-contra affair, and that
really hurt him on Election Day.

Craig Fuller, Mr. Bush's chief of staff as Vice President, said on ABC's
"Nightline" a month ago that the evidence of Mr. Bush's falsity in saying he was
"out of the loop" on Iran-contra was irrelevant. "It didn't matter in 1988," Mr.
Fuller said, "and it won't matter in 1992." But it did.

LOAD-DATE: November 6, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              214 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 7, 1992, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

U.S. and Philippines Agree to Continued Military Cooperation

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHENON,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 2; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 711 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Nov. 6


The United States and the Philippines agreed today that United States fighting
ships, aircraft and troops will continue to have access to military
installations in the Philippines even after the United States pulls out of its
last military base there this month.

The agreement, announced after a meeting of United States and Philippine
military commanders in Manila, means that the American military presence in the
Philippines will not end despite last year's vote by the Philippine Senate
barring the renewal of the United States' leases on its sprawling naval base at
Subic Bay and other installations in the Philippines.

The last American sailors stationed at Subic are due to leave on Nov. 24.

No U.S. 'Permanent' Troops

In remarks apparently intended to appease Philippine legislators who want the
American military out of the Philippines once and for all, Adm. Charles R.
Larson, commander of United States forces in the Pacific, and Philippine
officers who jointly made today's announcement were careful to say that American
troops would no longer be stationed in the Philippines.

"I know some have charged that the U.S. still wants a permanent force stationed
in the Philippines," Admiral Larson said. "This is not the case. We simply hope
to continue the exercises, the exchanges of information, training, logistical
cooperation and coordination."

The Philippine Chief of Staff, Gen. Lisandro Abadia, suggested that American
military access to the Philippines would be similar to that already offered to
other nations.

"I don't think there's a difference between U.S. ships coming here, or
Australian ships coming here, or Bruneian ships coming here," he said. "It would
be the same."

After an extended debate over nationalism and the need of the Philippines to
assert full independence from its former colonizer, the United States, the
Philippine Senate voted last September to reject a new 10-year lease for the
American naval base at Subic Bay. The vote meant the end to a permanent American
military presence in the Philippines that began in 1898, when the United States
took the Philippines from Spain.

The other large American military installation in the Philippines, Clark Air
Base, was abandoned by the United States Air Force in 1991 after it was buried
in ash from an erupting volcano, Mount Pinatubo.

The Philippine Constitution forbids the presence of foreign military bases and
troops in the Philippines after Subic Bay and other United States military posts
are closed. The Constitution is not specific about whether foreign troops can
visit the Philippines.

President Fidel V. Ramos said last month that despite the Philippine
constitutional restrictions, he was willing to search for a way to keep some
American troops in the Philippines under an agreement similar to that worked out
last year between the United States and Singapore.

While the United States does not have a base in Singapore, it does maintain
permanent military offices there, and American warships and military planes
routinely visit Singapore for maintenance and refueling.

American officials say they may eventually try to work out a broader military
arrangement with the Philippines, but that they were satisfied with the more
limited agreement announced today.

"For now, we don't need anything more than this agreement," said an American
official. "We can continue to use Philippine facilities in a fairly liberal
manner, without going through another crisis with the Philippine legislature."

Admiral Larson said that with the conclusion of the cold war, the United States
military sees its challenge in Southeast Asia as one of helping to guarantee
regional stability.

Defense Department analysts say there is reason to fear an eventual military
confrontation over the Spratly Islands, a group of tiny atolls and coral reefs
in the South China Sea that are claimed by six nations in the region, including
the Philippines, Vietnam and China. The islands are thought to be potentially
rich in oil.

Admiral Larson said today that other Southeast Asian nations had come to welcome
the presence of the United States military as a stabilizing force in the region.
"I am confident the Philippines will reach this conclusion as well," he said.

LOAD-DATE: November 7, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Map of the Philippines showing locations of Clark Air Base and Subic
Bay Naval Base.

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              215 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 7, 1992, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Religion Notes

BYLINE: By Ari L. Goldman

SECTION: Section 1; Page 10; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 823 words



Silent He Was Not

Thursday night, two days after the Presidential election, three clergymen sat
down before an audience of 300 at the Jewish Theological Seminary in Manhattan
to discuss the legacy of the late Rabbi Abraham Joshua Heschel.

Behind them on a blue and white banner was the motto of the seminary, taken from
Exodus, "And the bush was not consumed." One of the panelists, the Rev. William
Sloane Coffin, said wryly, "That was the only Bush that was not consumed."

No one claimed to know how Rabbi Heschel would have voted, but there was no
doubt that his legacy was political as well as intellectual. Rabbi Heschel, who
died in 1972 at the age of 65, was an early supporter of the civil rights
movement and of the effort to stop the Vietnam War. He was also a pioneer in
Christian-Jewish dialogue and helped shape Vatican documents that said that Jews
cannot be held accountable for the killing of Jesus.

The power and scope of Rabbi Heschel's work, even today, has been evident from
the crowds -- black and white, Jewish and Christian -- that have been coming to
an exploration of his teaching at the seminary, the educational center of
Conservative Judaism, at 3080 Broadway at 122d Street. This week's session was
the third in a series of six Thursday night lectures that will run through Dec.
3.

While most of the programs have centered on what lecturers have called Rabbi
Heschel's prophetic, existential and theological works, the last meeting was
given over to personal reminiscences by three people who consider themselves his
disciples. They were Dr. Coffin, a United Church of Christ minister; Dr. Hillel
Levine, the director of the Center for Judaic Studies at Boston University, and
Rabbi Marshall Meyer, the rabbi of Congregation B'Nai Jeshurun in Manhattan.

Rabbi Meyer, who was a fighter for human rights while a rabbi in Argentina
during the years that the country was under military rule, told of visiting
Rabbi Heschel in that period in the late 1960's. Rabbi Meyer recalled telling
his teacher that there had been threats against Jews because of Rabbi Meyer's
human rights activities.

"I asked Rabbi Heschel if I could endanger the lives of the Jews of Argentina by
speaking out," he said. "Heschel was quiet for a moment, and then he spoke: 'You
endanger their souls more by being silent.' "

Question of Inclusion

The nation's major Protestant ecumenical group, the National Council of
Churches, will meet next week to consider whether to grant observer status to
the Universal Fellowship of Metropolitan Community Churches, a largely
homosexual group.

Observer status would allow the denomination to be represented before the
council but forbid its voting on council resolutions. The group sought the
designation after its application for membership languished for nearly a decade.

Eastern Orthodox representatives, which represent the most conservative voices
on the mostly liberal council, had threatened to withdraw if the largely
homosexual group was admitted with full membership. These conservatives are
apparently concerned about the more limited observer status as well.

"The Orthodox have very deep-rooted concerns about what the observer status
means, and we'll see how it plays itself out at the General Board meeting," said
the Rev. Milton Efthimiou, the chief ecumenical officer of the Greek Orthodox
Church.

The General Board of the National Council will meet Wednesday through Friday in
Cleveland to act on the request.

Reply to Anonymous: Zero

Receiving an anonymous letter can be frustrating, especially if you have a good
answer and do not know where to send it. John Cardinal O'Connor, the Archbishop
of New York, got around the problem this week by responding to an anonymous
letter in his weekly column in Catholic New York, the newspaper of the
archdiocese.

"What did the Cardinal's trip to the former Yugoslavia cost?" the letter said,
referring to the Archbishop's trip this summer to Croatia and Bosnia and
Herzegovina. "How many were in his party? What was the total cost?"

The Cardinal answered that the trip cost the archdiocese "not one red cent," but
even if it had, he said, "who would we want the church to stop helping?"

Rather than leave anyone with the impression that this was a first-class junket,
the 72-year-old Cardinal went on to describe the journey:

"There was one person in my 'party,' my priest secretary. We hitched a ride in a
cargo plane. From New York to Croatia it took 18 hours. The return trip took 9.
There was no heat whatsoever in the cargo hold where we rode. The temperature
outside the airplane was 52 degrees below zero. Inside the airplane, I poured a
glass of water and made the mistake of not drinking it immediately. By the time
I picked it up it had frozen solid. We spent two difficult days and nights 'in
country.' The local bishop put us up and fed us. Total cost to the archdiocese:
Zero."

LOAD-DATE: November 7, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              216 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 November 8, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

FILM VIEW;
'Nashville': Political Prescience

BYLINE: By Caryn James

SECTION: Section 2; Page 13; Column 4; Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 955 words


Robert Altman's "Nashville" may be the perfect follow-up to the strangest
Presidential campaign in recent memory. When the film appeared in 1975, it
seemed anchored in its own political moment, a time far different from the 90's.
Watergate, the Nixon resignation and the war in Vietnam were last year's news
instead of history. But the film's mix of cynicism and hope is so eerily
pertinent today that watching it again is a revelation -- about politics and
about art.

"Nashville" has just opened at the Film Forum in its original wide-screen
format. It is also available on video, in a version that cuts off some of the
action on the sides of the screen and so loses something of the film's epic
scope. That loss matters, because the film is, above all, a rich, savvy,
entertaining epic of Americana. It was never a political tract.

As its two dozen characters wander through Nashville, bumping into one another,
each reveals something about the American drive for success: Ronee Blakley is
the country-and-western star who has an emotional breakdown on stage; Henry
Gibson is the power-hungry singer who represents old Nashville; Keith Carradine
barely takes time to breathe between women; Geraldine Chaplin, who identifies
herself only as "Opal from the BBC," wanders around gathering material for a
documentary about the city.

The Altman style -- overlapping dialogue, multiple plots, wide shots that
suggest all of life is theater -- has never been put to more effectve use. Even
after this year's critical and commercial hit "The Player," even measured
against his early masterpieces, "M*A*S*H" (1970) and "McCabe and Mrs. Miller"
(1971), "Nashville" still seems the director's shrewdest, liveliest movie.

But its political attitude is the most fascinating aspect of "Nashville" today.
A viewer might expect the film to be loaded with dated references; it is not.
There are only a few, glancing allusions to 1970's politics. Keith Carradine
makes a casual remark to a soldier that reflects the anti-military feeling of
the period: "You kill anybody this week?" One background song mentions Watergate
and gasoline shortages.

And that lack of specificity is the key to the film's artistic success and
political relevance. Mr. Altman taps into a deeper sense of disillusionment with
politics. He creates a third-party candidate for President who captures the
country's imagination. He takes it as a given that politics and show biz are
hopelessly intermingled. His fictional campaign is not so far from the one we
have just lived through.

That does not mean that Mr. Altman and his collaborators -- the screenwriter
Joan Tewkesbury and a cast that often created dialogue for their characters --
were prophets. Rather, the film's prescience about the 90's suggests how little
the political landscape has changed in 17 years.

The movie's third-party Presidential candidate, Hal Phillip Walker, is never
seen, though his voice is heard coming from the speaker of a van that drives
through the city. The folksy rhetoric, no-nonsense attitude and twangy voice
might belong to Dana Carvey doing his flawless impression of Ross Perot. "What
we need first and foremost is a common-sense approach," says Walker. "Nothing
complicated."

Walker also warns, "If the chairman of the board or the president of your
company had been running your business the way Washington has been running our
business, you'd be asking a lot of questions." And Howard K. Smith, in a
television commentary in "Nashville," says what commentators have repeated
endlessly about Mr. Perot: "Hal Phillip Walker is in a way a mystery man, out of
nowhere with a handful of students and scarcely any pros." It is possible to
make too much of the Perot factor in "Nashville." After all, Walker was not a
billionaire. But when Mr. Altman recognized the appeal of a grass-roots,
independent candidate, he discerned a political attitude that has only become
more pronounced.

He did the same with Michael Murphy's character, John Triplette, the political
handler and television strategist. Triplette comes from Los Angeles to Nashville
to set up a musical benefit for Walker, to be syndicated nationally on
television. He is a ubiquitous type today.

If "Nashville" seems dated at all, it is in the relative lack of emphasis on
television and politics. Compare it to a film it has influenced, Tim Robbins's
"Bob Roberts," and you can see how public awareness of the media's role in
politics has grown. In Mr. Robbins's film, the candidate's television image is a
central feature, shown in satires of political ads and news reports that are the
movie's funniest scenes.

The BBC documentarian who trails Bob Roberts may owe something to Opal, though
he is not a ditz. Her character would have made more sense if Mr. Altman had
included a scene he later cut, in which she admits she does not work for the
BBC. As a fraud, Opal would have offered another acerbic comment on the media.
People fall all over themselves to be interviewed by this airhead.

Still, Mr. Altman saw a lot for 1975. He recognized that the New South was
beginning to rise, that country music was moving toward the mainstream. And he
ends "Nashville" with a scene that is still chilling. After an assassination at
the music rally, the crowd is united and restored by singing: "You may say that
I ain't free/ But it don't worry me."

The ending demonstrates the wondrously effective mix of hope and disillusionment
that characterizes both "Nashville" and the 1992 Presidential campaign, in which
calls for change collided with skeptical news analyses of political commercials.
Tapping into that deep current of Americana is how "Nashville" became a great,
enduring movie.

LOAD-DATE: November 8, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Geraldine Chaplin as Opal in "Nashville" -- The director Robert
Altman saw a lot for 1975. (Paramount Pictures)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              217 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 November 8, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

ABOUT-FACE

SECTION: Section 6; Page 14; Column 3; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 68 words


Michael Norman questions the fiber of a putative leader who played it safe and
dodged "the trials and challenges of a dangerous era, an uncertain day," but he
does not go far enough (About Men: "About-Face," Oct. 11). Clinton didn't simply
escape military service with a high draft number. He set out with the intent of
dodging the draft and he shouldn't have lied about it.

DAN MCEVILY
Houston

LOAD-DATE: November 8, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              218 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 November 8, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

ABOUT-FACE

SECTION: Section 6; Page 14; Column 3; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 75 words


Daring? Nerve? Stamina? Clinton had the audacity and temerity to run for
President at a time when a Republican landslide seemed imminent and any
Democratic challenge a hopeless endeavor. Let's not forget that a little more
than a year ago most of his peers, the best and brightest of the Democratic
Party (many of them former servicemen), refused to risk in any way their
precious political careers.

JUDY CAPEL EPSTEIN
Flushing, Queens

LOAD-DATE: November 8, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              219 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 November 8, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

ABOUT-FACE

SECTION: Section 6; Page 14; Column 4; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 59 words


Wouldn't it be better if those who had little control over the war -- both those
who fought and those who escaped the draft -- avoided blaming each other? We've
come a long way in recent years in burying the antagonisms of America's most
hated war, and articles like this sabotage our fragile progress.

CHARLES BURRESS
El Cerrito, Calif.

LOAD-DATE: November 8, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              220 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 November 8, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Business Diary/November 1-6

BYLINE: By Joel Kurtzman

SECTION: Section 3; Page 2; Column 3; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1867 words



THE ECONOMY

Some Well-Placed Loopholes in the Looming Trade War


At first blush, it seemed as if the United States and the European Community
might be headed for a trade war. After years of talks under the framework of the
General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, negotiations broke down last week over
European agricultural subsidies. France, with elections looming, has refused to
take anything away from its politically potent farmers. To show the Bush
Administration's displeasure, the U.S. Trade Representative, Carla A. Hills,
imposed a 200 percent tax on European white wine, cooking oil and pet food
ingredients. The Europeans complained. The tax "constitutes an illegal position
according to GATT's rules," said Frans Andriessen, the Community's External
Relations Commissioner. But Mrs. Hills's tax contained several outs. It does not
go into effect until Dec. 5, allowing the Community to formulate a new position.
And it applies to goods worth $300 million -- not much by global standards.

Bush Veto No. 37

He may have lost the election, but President Bush still wields a mean veto. Last
week he used it -- veto No. 37 -- to kill a $27 billion urban aid and tax bill.
Mr. Bush objected to the measure because it made permanent certain tax
increases. It would have required corporations to pay more of their taxes in
advance and it limited deductions for individual moving expenses to $10,000. But
the provision also contained elements from Mr. Bush's own economic agenda:
incentives for setting up enterprise zones, expanded tax breaks for individual
retirement accounts and renewed tax breaks for research. Those items were not
enough to get Mr. Bush to unlock his jaw. "The original focus of the bill -- to
help revitalize America's inner cities -- has been lost in a blizzard of special
interest pleadings," the President said.

Uptick in Manufacturing

After sputtering along for months, the nation's manufacturing economy finally
gained a little ground last month -- but the key word is little. The National
Association of Purchasing Management's index rose to 50.6 percent in October
from 49 percent the month before. The index, which tracks purchases at about 300
industrial companies, signals expansion when it rises above 50 percent and
contraction when it falls below that mark. The rise may be encouraging, but the
index "will have to advance to higher levels for the economy to improve at a
more vigorous pace," said Robert Bretz, chairman of the survey committee.

Forecast Is Stagnation

The economy may be squeeking along now, but watch out after Inauguration Day.
The Commerce Department's index of leading economic indicators -- meant to
forecast economic activity three to nine months hence -- fell 0.3 percent in
September, the third decline in the last four months. Of the 11 indicators that
comprise the index, six posted declines. Among them were raw materials prices,
the length of the work week and the number of unfilled orders for manufactured
goods. "I think we're in a prolonged stagnation," said Lawrence Chimerine,
senior economic adviser at DRI-McGraw-Hill, a Lexington, Mass., economic
forecasting firm.

The long-dormant construction sector is advancing -- tentatively. According to
the Commerce Department, spending on new construction rose by 1.3 percent in
September.

A Glow on Retailing

For the nation's retailers -- a little relief. An index of sales at 50 chain
stores compiled by Prudential Securities registered sales gains of 6.5 percent
last month, compared with a rise of 5.9 percent during September. Wal-Mart
Stores Inc., the nation's No. 1 retailer, posted a hefty 16 percent increase in
sales at stores open at least a year. The Kmart Corporation, the No. 2 retailer,
said its overall business was up 11.1 percent. "Overall, the tone of the
business has been pretty good," said Jeffrey Edelman, a retail analyst at the
First Manhattan Company, an investment bank. "I think it will be a decent
Christmas."

Nothing Cheery on the Job Front

For the fourth time in three months, the nation's unemployment rate fell -- but
not for the right reasons. According to the Labor Department, 7.4 percent of the
work force was unemployed in October, down from 7.5 percent the month before.
But economists say only 27,000 new jobs were created -- not enough to bring
unemployment down. So what was the reason for the decrease? The size of the work
force -- those employed as well as those looking for work -- contracted by
314,000. With fewer people looking for work, the unemployment rate goes down.
"We still haven't had enough growth to create many new jobs," said Richard D.
Rippe, chief economist at Prudential Securities Inc.



INTERNATIONAL



Lufthansa Bows Out

Continental Airlines -- about to emerge from bankruptcy protection -- has been
the object of a lot of other airlines' affections. But last week, one of
Continental's suitors, Lufthansa German Airlines, said it would have to
extricate itself from the competition. Though Lufthansa's management wanted to
team up with Continental to feed more passengers into its global system, the
German airline's board said no. Lufthansa, which lost $449.9 million in the
first half of the year and has laid off workers, was in no financial condition
to go ahead with its $100 million investment in Continental and its plan to buy
an additional $300 million of Continental's bonds, its supervisory board said.
That leaves two bidders for Continental: Charles Hurwitz, the Houston financier,
in combination with Aeromexico, and Air Canada, in combination with two Texas
financiers. The bankruptcy court will decide who gets Continental in the next
few weeks.

The Gloom Rating in Germany

Polls from the Conference Board may say Americans are gloomy about the future,
but it's worse elsewhere. According to a survey of 25,000 German executives by
the German Federation of Chambers of Commerce, the mood there has also turned
positively morose. Because of pessimism about the economy, one-third of the
respondents said their companies would be cutting their work forces next year
and 34 percent said they plan to invest less next year. It all means "a
recession cannot be ruled out any longer," said Franz Schoser, the federation's
executive director. "Confidence in government and politics to solve problems is
waning fast."

Breaking the Vietnam Barrier

Last week, despite an American-led economic embargo, Japan resumed giving
economic aid to Vietnam. Japan said it would provide loans of up to $370
million, which could be used to purchase commodities and Japanese products. With
its well-educated, low-wage work force, its deposits of raw materials and its
nearby location, Vietnam is an attractive place for Japan to invest. But what
about the embargo? "We have our policy and the United States has its policy,"
said a Foreign Ministry spokesman, Masamichi Hanabusa.



COMPANIES



Big Bite for A.T.& T.

When A.T.& T. was broken up in 1984, no one ever suspected it might someday
challenge the Baby Bells -- the regional phone companies like Nynex that emerged
from it. But if A.T.& T. takes a $3.8 billion stake in McCaw Cellular
Communications Inc., the nation's No. 1 cellular phone company, as it is
negotiating to do, it would become one of the largest players in the local
markets where the Baby Bells do business. Having A.T.& T. own a third of McCaw
would add a lot of muscle to the cellular company, which has two million
subscribers. It would enable McCaw to sell its wireless services through A.T.&
T.'s 400 retail stores and to its tens of millions of customers and it would
give McCaw's wireless customers direct access to A.T.& T.'s long distance system
-- advantages its competition doesn't have. The deal will "lift McCaw one level
above the rest of the industry," said Robert B. Morris of Goldman Sachs &
Company.

$39 Million for the Songs

Rocker Elton John made a name for himself writing sensitive songs and performing
them in sequined get-ups and platform shoes. The public ate it up. Last week,
the megahit-maker and his longtime lyricist, Bernie Taupin, made a monster deal
with Warner/Chappell Music, a unit of Time Warner Inc., to sell the publishing
rights to their catalogue of songs for a cash advance of $39 million against
royalties. Mr. John and Mr. Taupin will continue to own the tunes, but
Warner/Chappell will collect 15 to 20 percent of sales over the next 12 years.

Acustar Plastics on the Block

It may have lots of snazzy new models hitting the showroom floors amid fistfuls
of rave reviews, but the Chrysler Corporation still lacks cash. And so Chrysler
said last week it would sell the plastics-making operations of its Acustar parts
subsidiary. The money would be used to pay back debt in the hopes of raising
Chrysler's credit rating, which is in the "speculative" -- a k a junk --
category. Chrysler tried to sell all of Acustar in 1988 but the plan was
scotched by the unions. The division does $200 million of business a year.

The Jaffe-Lansing Show

As an independent production team, Stanley R. Jaffe and Sherry Lansing had their
share of hits -- "Fatal Attraction," and "Black Rain" both with Michael Douglas.
But two years ago, the team broke up when Mr. Jaffe became president of
Paramount Communications Inc. Last week the team was reunited when Ms. Lansing,
who was once president of 20th Century Fox, signed on as head of Paramount's
motion picture group; she will report to Mr. Jaffe. Ms. Lansing replaces Brandon
Tartikoff, the TV-programming whiz, who resigned unexpectedly from Paramount to
spend more time with his family. "I have been offered this type of position
several times, but I always said no," Ms. Lansing said. Why did she change her
mind? The first reason, she said, "is Stanley. We were partners for 10 years. I
missed that partnership."

Piling On the Dismal at Travelers

It was already undergoing a restructuring, but last week, when it released its
third-quarter results -- it lost $358 million -- the Travelers Corporation said
it would restructure even more. Instead of eliminating 3,500 jobs over the next
two years, Travelers will cut 5,000. Its restructuring plan includes selling a
27 percent stake in the company to the Primerica Corporation. What would have
been only a poor showing was made dismal by $240 million in losses resulting
from Hurricane Andrew. Traveler's had a profit of $65 million in the same
quarter last year.

China's Steel Bargain

Exports have been the engine of growth for the economy. But plant by plant? Last
week, California Steel Industries agreed to sell China's Capital Iron and Steel
Corporation part of a steel finishing plant in Fontana, Calif. California Steel
bought the plant from bankrupt Kaiser Steel. The plant was built in 1978 for
$287 million and closed in 1982. China got itself a bargain. Kaiser had
originally wanted $60 million. Last week's sale price was $20 million. Capital
Iron will send 300 workers from Beijing to disassemble the 10-acre plant, label
it and put it on the boat.

LOAD-DATE: November 8, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Carla Hills (Andrea Mohin/The New York Times); Elton John;
Michael Douglas; George Bush.

Graphs track monthly percent change in leading indicators (Source: Commerce
Dept.); monthly unemployment rate, Oct. 1991-Oct. 1992 (Source: Bureau of Labor
Statistics)

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              221 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 November 8, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

For One Lawmaker, Allure of Capital Had Double-Edge

BYLINE: By ALISON MITCHELL

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1925 words


He was one of the brash, bold reformers who swept into Congress 18 years ago on
a wave of popular revulsion over Watergate and the Vietnam War. Elected at age
25, he was so boyish that he was carded in bars and mistaken for a Congressional
page. And no one really begrudged him when, with an immature charm, he
researched whether he could be called the youngest person ever to enter the
Congress.

Representative Thomas J. Downey of Amityville literally grew up in the marble
corridors of the Capitol. He married during his tenure in Washington and made a
home with his wife and children in a Capitol Hill townhouse.

But as the years passed, voters in Long Island's Second Congressional District
began to wonder if he had drifted away from his roots and from the people who
had elected him. And last week, they resoundingly defeated Mr. Downey in favor
of someone who was remarkably reminiscent of the Tom Downey of old: a young Turk
from the Suffolk County Legislature who said the incumbent had become too high
and mighty and distant.

'Lost Touch' With Voters

Mr. Downey, whose only adult job outside government was a brief stint in the
personnel department of Macy's, was devastated. "I did not have any sense that I
had lost touch with the community," he said, but he admitted that his opponent
had fatally wounded him with that charge. "Sadly it stuck and had nothing to do
with reality."

Some members of Congress now see Mr. Downey's defeat as a cautionary tale of how
the power and the perquisites of Washington can seduce them all; of how even the
brightest star of the post-Watergate era could eventually seem to the voters as
too much like the insiders he once scorned.

And in Suffolk County, some wonder whether the voters had turned on Mr. Downey
precisely because they had once loved him so, mothers and grandmothers cooing
over the boy Congressman, with the Paul McCartneyesque cap of brown hair.

"That kind of -- it may be too strong to say adoration -- that kind of feeling
for him, love for him, may have dissipated as he climbed up the ladder," said
Dominic J. Baranello, the Suffolk County Democratic leader.

Mr. Downey first went to Washington on a tidal wave of voter revolt against the
Nixon presidency and the Watergate scandal. Campaigning door to door and
undaunted by the seeming futility of being an anti-war liberal running in a
district that had given Richard M. Nixon 72 percent of the vote just two years
earlier, Mr. Downey prevailed over the incumbent Republican Representative,
James R. Grover. The next day's papers had pictures of the young
Congressman-elect playing basketball with his 11-year-old brother.

Symbol of His Time

In his youth, fervor and brashness, Mr. Downey was symbolic of his time. The
elections of 1974 sent 75 freshmen into the House of Representatives, Mr. Downey
the youngest among them. They were righteous, idealistic, ready to change the
world, and they promptly ran a minor revolution in the tradition-bound House by
toppling three committee chairmen. Mr. Downey did his part on the House Armed
Services Committee, where he helped deposed the aging chairman, Representative
Edward Herbert of Louisiana.

Mr. Downey quickly became one of the leaders of the Democratic newcomers, a
tight-knit circle who shared anti-establishment political views and played
ferocious basketball in the House gym. Along with Al Gore, who came to the House
two years later, he made himself into one of Washington's select coterie of arms
control experts.

His colleagues remember his utter confidence. "He would be announcing, 'We're
going to do this. We're going to that,' " recalled Representative George Miller,
a California Democrat. "We'd say that the Speaker won't like that and he'd say
it didn't matter."

Mr. Downey also emerged as one of the Democrats' most articulate -- and
vitriolic -- polemicists , a role that left him with enemies on the Republican
side of the aisle. "If he had a weakness as a speaker, it was that he'd leave
you no quarter. He'd cut you off at the knees and take a second swipe at you,"
Mr. Miller said. "That would cause you problems in the Congress because members
of Congress weren't used to being devastated publicly."

Serving the Voters

As he became an ever larger presence in Washington, Mr. Downey remained a model
of the constituent-oriented Congressman. He invited thousands of voters to his
parents' home in West Islip to talk issues. He made a van into a mobile office
to move about the sprawling South Shore district. Former Representative
Geraldine A. Ferraro of Queens, who entered Congress in 1978, remembers that Mr.
Downey was so successful that he was asked to address freshmen on how to serve
their districts.

In 1980, with the birth of his first child, Lauren, Mr. Downey and his wife,
Chris, who had been an elementary school teacher in Dix Hills, were faced with
the choice all members of Congress must wrestle with, how to mix the demands of
family and politics. They moved to Washington so that Mr. Downey could spend
more time with his daughter and later, with his second child, Theodore. On
weekends, the Congressman would commute back to Long Island.

The Downey home in Washington eventually grew into a social center for a small
circle of House Democrats. Once a week, Chis would cook dinner for a group that
could include Marty Russo of Illinois and Leon E. Panetta, Barbara Boxer, Nancy
Pelosi and Mr. Miller, all of California.

In hindsight, several of Mr. Downey's colleagues said that his relocation to
Washington might have set the stage for his defeat. "I really think that
matters," said one representative, who spoke on the condition of anonymity. "You
by nature stay in touch more if you live in your district. You live in
Washington, you just get sucked into Washington."

In fact, it was sometime in the mid-1980's that Frank R. Jones, a Republican
official who is now supervisor of Islip, first began hearing complaints about
Mr. Downey. "He had good constituent service, he absolutely did -- for the first
10 or 12 years," he said. "After that, real or perceived, it began to fall off.
I had a fellow, a staunch Democrat, who said to me, 'You know, I've had
innumerable meetings with Congressman Downey and he was always late.' "

By the late 1980's, Mr. Downey had reached the height of his legislative powers
as an influential member of Ways and Means Committee and the Select Committee on
Aging.

He also became acting-chairman of the Ways and Means Subcommittee on Human
Resources after Representative Harold E. Ford, a Tennessee Democrat, fell under
the cloud of an indictment. And there he became one of the lead legislators in
the Congress on welfare policy and child care. On an issue of key concern to
Long Island, he also led the effort that prolonged the life of Grumman's F-14
fighter plane for three years.

But in 1990, just before an election, Mr. Downey was one of many members of the
Ways and Means Committee caught by hidden cameras on ABC's "Prime Time Live" at
a junket in Barbados, jet-skiing in a bathing suit and playing football on a
beach. He apologized to his constituents and said he had made a mistake. And he
was re-elected.

'Vulnerable This Year'

But Republicans noted that he had won with only 56 percent of the vote against
an weak opponent. It was, said Suffolk Republican leader Howard C. DeMartini,
"the early warning signal that Downey would be vulnerable this year."

Mr. Downey also saw the trouble signs. "I had a sense that things were very
wrong in 1990," he said in an interview. "I have all these diary notes about
this: You've got to get to work. You've got to work a little harder." He said he
started serving his district with renewed vigor, returning to Long Island one
out of every three days in 1991 and every other day in 1992.

Then the House bank scandal struck at a time when Long Island was in deep
recession. It was bad enough that Mr. Downey had overdrafts on 151 checks
totaling $83,000. It was worse still that Mrs. Downey, who had a patronage job
working for the House sergeant-at-arms, had been hired on a budget line that
listed her job title as auditor of the House bank.

Rick Lazio, a 34-year-old two-term Suffolk County legislator, built his campaign
against Mr. Downey around the bank scandal and Barbados trip, in a race that was
strikingly reminiscent to Mr. Downey's own battle 18 years ago against an
entrenched incumbent.

Anger Toward Congress

Mr. Lazio sent out a last-minute blitz of direct mail playing on the popular
resentment of Congress. One flier offered "Tom Downey's Limousine Liberal guide
to surviving the recession," a 10-point primer.

"Tough times on Long Island getting you down?" it asked. "Move to Washington.
Rent out your multiple-family Long Island home (one of three homes he owns); put
your children in private school in Virginia." That was just point No. 1.

Mr. Downey was thrown on the defensive, forced to invite voters to drop by his
two-family house in Amityville to prove he still had a place to live on Long
Island. "I live on Long Island, I have lived here all my life," he said in a
televised debate. "If you have any doubt, come to 155 Cedar Street where I have
lived for 13 years."

Mr. Lazio, a moderate pro-choice Republican, offered a refreshing gee-whiz
quality, as evidenced in his reflections on the race a few days after victory.
"There's something bigger than how powerful you are, how many powerful people
you know and whether you get invited to powerful cocktails parties," he said. Of
the voters, he added, "what they want is to say, 'I know him. He goes to the
same diner I go to.' "

Election Day was bittersweet. The Democrats had recaptured the White House and
Washington hung on the threshold of generational change. Mr. Downey's close
friend, Al Gore, had become Vice President-elect. It should have been Mr.
Downey's time; he still so young at just 43 and yet with nearly two decades of
Congressional seniority.

But instead, he spent election night consoling his children about his defeat and
telling them they should be happy for the victory of Bill Clinton. The next day
he drove back to Washington and strove to put the best face on things. "This has
been -- all losers must have this sense -- this has been a wonderful 18 years,"
he said.  "That's how I'd prefer to remember it."

'No Tom Downey'

He showed a small hint of his old sharp tongue, when asked if he had the feeling
that he had been beaten by a new Tom Downey. "I know Tom Downey, and he's no Tom
Downey," he said of Mr. Lazio. "I'm sure there's some irony in all of this, but
it's lost on me at the moment."

Across the country, Mr. Downey's House colleagues raged that Long Island's
voters had not appreciated Mr. Downey as they had. "This is a person who is
extremely bright, very talented in knowing the possibilities of government,"
said Representative Pelosi. "He was masterful at shaping legislation and he was
very respected." She added, "It's hard to understand why there wasn't a
recognition of his value in his district."

But at the West Islip firehouse, near Mr. Downey's campaign headquarters, the
dispatcher, Mel Lauber, said he had voted against Mr. Downey although he had
supported him in the past. "I didn't like the idea of rubber checks," he said,
"and I didn't like the idea of him parading around on vacation on taxpayers'
money." All that puzzled him was why so few other Congressional incumbents had
fallen: "I thought they wanted a clean Congress."

NAME: Thomas J. Downey

LOAD-DATE: November 8, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Representative Thomas J. Downey of Amityville, left, playing
basketball with his brother Jeff in 1974 after being elected to Congress at age
25 (The New York Times), and at right, speaking at a high school in Oakdale,
L.I., last month. Mr. Downey was defeated last week by Rick Lazio, a 34-year-old
two-term Suffolk County legislator who claimed that the incumbent had become too
high and mighty and too distant. (Micahel Shavel for The New York Times); In
1990, Thomas Downey was one of many members of the Ways and Means Committee
taped by ABC's "Prime Time Live" at a junket in Barbados. Above is an ad run by
his opponent Rick Lazio. (pg. 52)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              222 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 November 8, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Mark Rosenberg, Movie Producer, Dies at Age 44

BYLINE: By BRUCE LAMBERT

SECTION: Section 1; Page 57; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 361 words


Mark H. Rosenberg, a producer of "The Killing Fields," "Presumed Innocent" and
other hit films, died Friday on a movie set in Stanton, Tex., near Odessa. He
was 44 years old and lived in Los Angeles.

The cause of death was heart failure, said Warner Brothers, the studio with
which he worked.

Mr. Rosenberg, whose early success in the film industry once caused him to be
described as one of Hollywood's baby moguls, was promoted by Warner to the
presidency of its Worldwide Theatrical Production in 1983, when he was only 35.

During his two years in that post, he produced "The Killing Fields," "The World
According to Garp," "Never Say Never Again" and "Greystoke: The Legend of
Tarzan, Lord of the Apes," among others.

After leaving Warner in 1985, he joined Sydney Pollack at Mirage Productions.
Together they produced "Bright Lights, Big City," "Major League," "Presumed
Innocent" and "King Ralph."

Partnership With Wife

In 1989 Mr. Rosenberg formed Spring Creek Productions with his wife, the
producer Paula Weinstein. They developed an arrangement with Warner and began
working on its lot. Spring Creek was the producer of "The Fabulous Baker Boys"
and "Flesh and Bone," the movie on which Mr. Rosenberg was working when he
collapsed Friday.

Mr. Rosenberg was born in Passaic, N.J., and attended Bard College and the
University of Wisconsin. During the campus unrest of the late 1960's, he was a
leader of Students for a Democratic Society, which posed fierce resistance to
the Vietnam War.

His political activity continued in later years with his opposition to apartheid
and his advocacy of human rights, for which he was honored by the American Civil
Liberties Union.

Early in his career, Mr. Rosenberg moved to Los Angeles to work for Seineger &
Associates in film advertising and marketing. Then he became a literary agent
with International Creative Management and with Adams, Ray & Rosenberg. In 1978,
he joined Warner as vice president for production.

Besides his wife, his survivors include his mother, Martha Wald of Verona, N.J.,
and a brother, Alan Rosenberg of Los Angeles, an actor on the television series
"Civil Wars."

NAME: Mark Rosenberg

LOAD-DATE: November 8, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Mark H. Rosenberg

TYPE: Biography; Obituary (Obit)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              223 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 November 8, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Edge of the Chasm -- AIDS Comes to Asia/A special report.;
After Years of Denial, Asia Faces Scourge of AIDS

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHENON,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1; Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 3105 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Nov. 7


AIDS came relatively late to most of Asia, but it is now spreading so rapidly --
and so randomly -- that scientists are convinced that AIDS will kill more people
on this continent than on any other.

Conservative estimates suggest that by the end of the decade, the AIDS virus
will infect more than one million Asians each year, more than in the rest of the
world combined.

Some researchers fear that the infection rate in Asia will be closer to three
million or four million a year, and that tens of millions of Asians will become
infected and die of AIDS during the next two decades. Reliable projections
indicate that at least 10 million Asians will be infected by the virus that
causes AIDS by the year 2000.

It is a plague, they say, that threatens some of Asia's miracle economies and
could condemn other, less fortunate Asian nations to another generation of
grinding poverty, as their governments struggle to care for the millions of
people who are now destined to become ill and die.

The World Health Organization warned in a report this year that H.I.V., the
virus that causes AIDS, may be spreading in some Asian nations at a rate close
to that found in the early 1980's across sub-Saharan Africa.

In the worst-hit nations of Africa, one-quarter to one-third of all adults in
urban areas are believed to be infected with the AIDS virus. Researchers say
that while the percentage of Asians afflicted with AIDS will never reach levels
that large -- even in India and Thailand, where the crisis is most severe -- the
AIDS death toll will be far higher in Asia given the continent's total
population of about 3 billion people, versus 700 million in Africa.

AIDS has begun to reach even the most remote corners of Asia. It can now be
found in tiny Nepalese villages nestled in the Himalayas, just as it is found in
the gaudy neon-lit brothels of Bangkok and Seoul. And it is beginning to afflict
Asian men and women in equal numbers.

In Asia, AIDS is usually spread by Asian-to-Asian heterosexual contact.
According to the World Health Organization, more than three-quarters of all
H.I.V. infections now develop from heterosexual encounters. The other major
forms of transmission, it says, are sharing dirty needles between intravenous
drug users and sex between men.

"My boss told me AIDS wasn't a problem because I was a woman," said Marta, a
22-year-old Filipino who was working as a prostitute in Manila when she learned
last year that she had contracted the AIDS virus.

"The boss was lying -- he said AIDS would only kill the homosexuals and the
foreigners," she said. "I always tried to make the foreign customers wear
condoms. Usually they would."

Fears for a 2-Year-Old Child

Although death may be several years off, Marta has returned to her native home
in central Luzon province, where she is raising a 2-year-old daughter. "I don't
know if she has AIDS," she said, nodding to the giggling child who, Marta fears,
may have contracted AIDS in the womb. "I am too scared to have her tested."

Researchers say that as Asians begin dying by the millions, AIDS will soon lose
its reputation among many people on the continent as a scourge affecting only
foreign places and people -- Africa, the Caribbean, homosexual men and
intravenous drug users in the United States.

"Nobody will be talking about AIDS as the African disease or as the gay
disease," said Don L. Douglas of the Program for Appropriate Technology in
Health, an American nonprofit group that leads AIDS education projects across
Asia. "In 10 years time, it will be seen as Asia's disease."

What discourages and infuriates many AIDS specialists is that Asian governments,
with the notable exception of Thailand and a few others, are doing little to
control it.

'Mr. Condom' Program in Thailand

"The situation in Asian countries is far more serious than most governments will
admit," said Mechai Viravaidya, who until last month ran the Thai Government's
aggressive anti-AIDS program and is known to millions of Thais as "Mr. Condom"
because of his campaigns to promote condom use to stop AIDS. Some Asian
governments, he said, are "lying about the problem" -- they have evidence or at
least a strong suspicion that AIDS is spreading rapidly across the continent,
but will not warn the public.

There is no one cause for their reticence. Some governments in Asia seem to fear
that they will frighten away investment and tourists by publicizing the AIDS
threat. Others worry that an open discussion of how AIDS is spread will offend
local standards of morality and taste; still others seem blind to how serious
the problem might be.

Michael H. Merson, director of the World Health Organization's Global Program on
AIDS, said the AIDS epidemic was threatening to overwhelm Asian governments and
health care systems and could, in some nations, wipe out the most productive
elements of the labor force.

"The economic future of some Asian nations is at stake," Dr. Merson said. "In
Asia, millions of people will get AIDS and millions of people will die, and the
economic strain on these Asian governments is going to be incredible."

The Epidemic
Little Testing, Much Ignorance

In most Asian nations, no one knows how far AIDS has spread. Few nations carry
out comprehensive testing for H.I.V. Yet when testing is done, the results can
be nightmarish, as Government health officials here in Thailand have discovered.

The Thai Government now estimates that 200,000 to 400,000 people, of a
population of 58 million, are infected with the AIDS virus. According to the
Government, those numbers could rise to two million to four million, or as much
as 6 percent of the Thai population, by the end of the decade.

In some brothels in the northern Thai city of Chiang Mai, health workers say, 70
percent of the prostitutes carry the virus, and many of them routinely see 10 to
20 men a day.

"I always carry a condom," said a 20-year-old Bangkok university student as he
tapped the sole of his shoe with a pencil and slowly eyed a group of young women
seated in front of him behind a piece of glass that stretched from floor to
ceiling. "I always use a condom if the girl looks like she has been too wild
with other customers," he said. "If she looks very innocent, sometimes I don't."

Each of the prostitutes wears a small plastic tag with a number, allowing
customers to choose a companion simply by writing the number on a small notepad
that is then handed to the mamasan, or madam.

According to the World Health Organization, more than one million people in
India, out of a population of 860 million, are now infected with the AIDS virus
-- more than in all of Europe and about as many as in the United States. Yet
only in recent months has the Indian Government started to act.

In Bombay, where nearly a third of the city's estimated 100,000 prostitutes are
thought to be infected, the first clinic for anonymous AIDS testing opened weeks
ago.

'Total Denial' Seen in India

"The Government and the medical community have been in total denial," said Dr.
I. S. Gilada, a founder of the Indian Health Organization, who leads teams of
health workers on raids of Bombay's brothels. They force their way into the
brothels armed with bullhorns and fistfuls of condoms.

Dr. Gilada's organization projects that 20 million to 50 million Indians will be
infected with H.I.V. by the year 2000. "India will be devastated," he said.

In Vietnam, Cambodia and Myanmar, formerly Burma, government anti-AIDS programs
are small and ineffective. Apart from abstinence, condoms are regarded as the
best method of preventing sexual transmission of AIDS, yet in Myanmar they are
often in short supply and too expensive.

Myanmar is one of the poorest nations of Asia, and the average laborer earns
less than $1 a day, making the purchase of a 30-cent condom a luxury that most
Burmese cannot afford. The World Health Organization estimates that there are
now more than 100,000 people infected with H.I.V. in Myanmar, out of a
population of 40 million.

Researchers say they believe that the number of Chinese infected with H.I.V. is
much higher than the official figure released by the Government, which claims
that only about 1,000 Chinese out of a population of 1.1 billion people carry
the virus that causes AIDS. Because of intravenous drug use in China's southern
provinces, H.I.V. infections are said to be growing at an explosive rate.

In Japan, about 2,400 people are reported by the Government to have the AIDS
virus, most of them hemophiliacs infected through blood transfusions. But
Japanese researchers believe the number of Japanese infected by H.I.V. is
several times larger.

Because the incubation period for AIDS can be a decade or more, relatively few
Asians have died of the disease so far and it remains, for most Asian nations,
an invisible threat. Although there are no reliable figures on the death toll in
Asia, it is thought to be less than 15,000 so far.

But the complacency of Asian Governments is bound to be shattered if, as
scientists predict, Asians now carrying the virus begin dying from AIDS at a
rate that could reach a million each year.

In some of Asia's more conservative and custom-bound nations, officials have
been reluctant to acknowledge the AIDS threat and, when they do, cultural taboos
about sex and disease can often stifle AIDS education.

In Malaysia, where 4,000 H.I.V. infections have already been confirmed, schools
have reportedly refused in recent weeks to show a video on AIDS prevention
because it included a single still photograph of a couple kissing. In the tiny
island nation of Maldives, condoms can be sold only to married couples.

In Asia's poorest countries, government officials ignore AIDS because they are
overwhelmed by more basic problems of finding enough food and shelter for their
people.

Although the Philippine Government estimates that 30,000 Filipinos now carry the
AIDS virus -- and many believe that number is far too low -- the AIDS office
within the Health Ministry has such a small budget it does not even have its own
telephone.

The Crisis
More Deaths Than War

If the AIDS specialists are right, it is not all that difficult to imagine that
AIDS will kill more Cambodians than did the Khmer Rouge, the Maoist guerrillas
who were responsible for an estimated one million deaths in the 1970's.

In Phnom Penh, the capital, the broad, tree-shaded boulevards and ochre villas
are a reminder of the days of French colonial rule in this nation of 7 million.
But this lovely city on the banks of the Mekong River has become a microcosm of
the AIDS crisis in Asia, a case study of how quickly the virus will spread if
nothing is done.

Until last year, Cambodia was largely sealed off from its neighbors because of a
civil war that began in 1978. A United Nations peace settlement, reached late
last year, ended the nation's isolation and brought a torrent of foreigners and
thousands of United Nations peacekeeping troops. They were met on the streets of
Phnom Penh by hundreds of prostitutes who had left their impoverished villages
in search of work in the capital.

A three-story brothel, called Thai Royal Massage, opened this fall, staffed by
ethnic Vietnamese women and decorated with strands of flickering Christmas
lights and advertising posters for an American beer company. But most brothels
here are simple wooden structures, roofed with tin, with one or two rooms in the
back outfitted with cots or bamboo mats.

'I Do Not Worry'

The prostitutes sit on sun-faded benches in front of the shacks, waiting for
business. On one sultry October evening, two Land Cruisers marked in large black
letters "U.N." were parked outside one of the brothels.

"I think one of my friends has AIDS, and she is in the back with a customer
now," said Berh Hay, a prostitute who said she was 18 and from Ho Chi Mihn City,
the southern city that many still called Saigon.

"She does not worry," Miss Berh Hay said. "I do not worry. We take medicines, so
I don't think it matters if the men have AIDS. The medicine will kill the AIDS."
Told that there is no medicine that can kill AIDS, and that AIDS is always
fatal, Miss Berh Hay shrugged. "All that matters is enough food to eat," she
said.

If a customer requests a condom, Miss Berh Hay's brothel will sell one for the
equivalent of about 20 cents. Most customers, she said, do not ask.

Dr. Jean-Paul H. Menu, the Phnom Penh representative of the World Health
Organization, said the Government did not have the money for an AIDS prevention
program so he has begun delivering boxes of free condoms to the brothels. The
brothels in turn sell the condoms to customers.

The only reliable indicator for the spread of AIDS in Cambodia comes from a
volunteer blood bank in Phnom Penh, which tests blood samples for the AIDS
virus. In 1991, only three of more than 1,000 samples tested was infected with
H.I.V. So far in 1992, 27 blood samples have tested positive.

The Cost
The Thais Get Serious

The epidemic that is only now taking shape in Cambodia has been killing Thais
for nearly a decade. Here in Bangkok, many Thais come each year to die on the
third floor of the Bamras Naradul Hospital.

The AIDS ward is divided into two areas, separated by hallway that is perfumed
with jasmine blossoms, which patients' families leave as offerings on a small
Buddhist altar.

On one side of the hallway are 20 men undergoing the early treatment of AIDS. "I
began visiting prostitutes when I was 13," said one patient, Dun, a 25-year-old
garage mechanic who, under terms set by the hospital to protect the anonymity of
AIDS patients, would give only a nickname to a visitor.

"Sometimes I would wear condoms," he said weakly, clutching at a white bed sheet
that prevented a visitor from seeing the scarlet lesions that he said have begun
appearing on his chest and legs. "If I had been drinking whisky, I didn't use a
condom. I think that's how I got AIDS."

On the other side of the hall are eight men who are so ill that they are
expected to die within days, or hours. One patient, an emaciated 38-year-old
whose nickname is Guy, was momentarily coherent.

"I never used clean needles, never," said Guy, a drug addict who believes he
acquired AIDS while injecting heroin from a dirty needle. Above his head was a
small golden figure of the Buddha, a reminder of the expectation of earthly
suffering. "I look forward to my death, because it will end the pain," he said
in a whisper.

Brothel visits for many Thai men are as common as stopping for a beer after work
or playing a round of golf. Studies show that on any given day, hundreds of
thousands of Thais visit a prostitute. Male promiscuity in Thailand carries with
it few social strictures found elsewhere. But this promiscuity also carries a
heavy cost: hundreds of thousands of heterosexual Thai men are now thought to be
carrying the AIDS virus, and many are already passing the infection on to their
wives, girlfriends and unborn children.

Anand Panyarachun, a former diplomat who took office as Prime Minister after a
1991 coup, appointed himself head of the government's anti-AIDS program and
doubled its budget to about $48 million this year. The Thai program that is one
of the largest in the developing world and is considered a model for its
neighbors. As a result of the Government's campaign, studies show, the use of
condoms in brothels has risen from 10 percent three years ago to 90 percent.

The Thai Government is also one of the few in Asia to try to determine how its
economy will be affected by the AIDS crisis. Survey results released last March
showed that as much as $9 billion, the equivalent to one-seventh of Thailand's
gross national product, would be lost to the Thai economy by the end of the
century as young, productive laborers grow ill and seek medical treatment at
government expense. The report said that medical treatment for one AIDS patient
costs about $1,000 a year, roughly two-thirds what the average Thai worker
earns.

The Denial
'Don't Worry About AIDS'

It is not only in the poor countries of Asia where official inaction and
ignorance about AIDS transmission are fueling the epidemic.

The AIDS crisis has so far not scared off tens of thousands of Japanese men who
each year join "sex tours," which take them to the brothels of Thailand and
other Southeast Asian nations. Scientists reported this month that at least six
Japanese men had been infected with a strain of H.I.V. commonly found among Thai
prostitutes.

The tiny, prosperous city-state of Singapore has one of Asia's most effective
AIDS education programs. Yet a recent informal survey by its largest newspaper
found that only half of Singaporeans interviewed at an AIDS awareness exhibition
were aware how the virus was spread.

In Indonesia, which has 180 million people and is the fourth most populous
nation in the world, the Government says it has detected fewer than 80 cases of
H.I.V. infection.

Dr. Gandung Hartono, who leads the national AIDS program, said that because
Indonesia is a largely Muslim nation, it has been difficult for the Government
to promote the use of condoms. Muslim clerics, he says, "always think I'm
promoting prostitution when I talk about condoms."

Islam as Ally in AIDS Battle

Yet it is Islam, Dr. Hartono said, that has helped save Indonesia from the sort
of AIDS crisis that is now afflicting its neighbors -- Muslim teachings promote
faithful marriages and discourage drug abuse.

And no matter how strong the influence of Islam, it usually takes only a short
stroll through any large Indonesian city to find a brothel, and sometimes dozens
of them, where sex without condoms is the rule.

In Surabaya, the steamy seaport in eastern Java that is Indonesia's
second-largest city, every cab driver knows the neighborhood called Dolly, where
scores of shabby brothels are lined up one against the other.

"Mamasan tells girls to use condoms," said Mary Christin, the 50-year-old
manager of one brothel, which is named Paradise but has little to distinguish it
from every other bar and brothel in the neighborhood.

"There is no AIDS here," she said, pulling a group of stiff white cards from her
desk, one for each of the dozen young prostitutes who work in Paradise. The
cards purport to show how many times each woman has been tested for the AIDS
virus.

"Don't worry about AIDS," said one of the prostitutes, a 19-year-old who gave
her name as Cat. "Most of our clients are Asians, and AIDS is a disease of you
foreigners. We Asians do not have to worry."

LOAD-DATE: November 8, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Phnom Penh, Cambodia's capital, has become a microcosm of the
AIDS crisis in Asia. The Government does not have money to support an AIDS
prevention program and health workers say that all the elements necessary for an
epidemic in the city are in place. Prostitutes and prospective clients met in
the city's red-light district. (Ira Chaplain for The New York Times) (pg. 12)

Graph/Map: "AIDS Hot Spots in Asia" - Map of Asia, indicating various countries
and occurance of AIDS in those nations. Graph tracks estimated and projected
annual adult H.I.V. infections, for North America, Asia and Africa, 1980-2000
(pg. 12)

TYPE: Special Report

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              224 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 November 8, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THE TRANSITION: Foreign Policy;
PROBLEMS ABROAD MAY FORCE CLINTON TO CHANGE AGENDA

BYLINE: By THOMAS L. FRIEDMAN,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1; Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 2004 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 7


While President-elect Bill Clinton puts together an Administration devoted to
keeping his promises on domestic affairs, the outgoing Bush team is leaving him
with a series of problems abroad that could force him to devote much more time
than he had planned to foreign policy.

Now that they are on their way out, some Bush Administration officials concede
that there has been very little top-level focus, direction or Presidential
political capital expended on foreign policy since former Secretary of State
James A. Baker 3d and President Bush went on the campaign trail last summer.

Stalled and Broken Talks

Partly because of the absence of such high-level American attention, several
sets of negotiations have stalled or broken down and some trouble spots around
the world have worsened. Subordinates of Mr. Bush and Mr. Baker have continued
to work on these problems, from arms control talks with Moscow to the
Arab-Israeli peace process.

But Bush Administration officials said that without the attention of the
President and the Secretary of State, who kept the reins of foreign policy
tightly in their own hands, lower-level officials were not being taken as
seriously abroad.

"It was obvious to a lot of people abroad that the Administration was not
engaged in foreign policy at a level that was politically significant," said a
senior Administration policy maker, who spoke on the condition of anonymity.
"The President was not paying much attention to foreign affairs, and the only
other guy with clout was Baker, and he was otherwise engaged.

"The perception of the outside world was that things here were on hold, and that
perception created a different reality. It gave some people who wanted to
redirect or redefine things in their area an opportunity."

Series of Problems

President Bush still has time to refocus on foreign affairs, but for now,
Administration officials point to a series of diplomatic problems that worsened
during the campaign:

*Backpedaling by the Russians on their commitments with Mr. Bush last June to
destroy SS-18 intercontinental nuclear missile silos and some other
multiple-warhead missiles as part of the follow-on agreement to the Strategic
Arms Reduction Treaty. Had he not been distracted, Mr. Bush would almost
certainly have sent Mr. Baker to Moscow to get the agreement back on track.

*Turkey is close to a decision to stop allowing its bases to be used by the
United States to support the no-flight zone over northern Iraq and relief
operations for the Kurds. Without Turkey, a Clinton Administration would have
much less room to maneuver against any new Iraqi military threat.

*The Arab-Israeli peace talks have stalled because high-level American pressure,
which all the parties need as an excuse for making concessions to one another,
has vanished.

At the same time, while the nation was focused on the election, several new
problems that were hidden beneath the surface have erupted, including a
potential trade war with Europe. Mr. Clinton said during the campaign that he
favored retaliating against countries that closed their markets to American
exports, but he has refrained from commenting now to avoid complicating the
matter for Mr. Bush.


In addition, the Khmer Rouge are threatening to scuttle the United Nations
election plan in Cambodia, which the Bush team helped to forge; there has been a
new surge of Haitian boat people, and the civil war in Angola, which Washington
and Moscow helped to settle, has resumed because Jonas Savimbi, the rebel leader
who had been supported by the United States, was unhappy that his party lost the
recent election.

The Challenge: Finding Continuity

This is the backdrop against which Mr. Clinton will arrive in Washington. While
Mr. Clinton used his first public statement the morning after the election to
emphasize his intention to maintain continuity in American foreign policy, his
advisers are beginning to realize that, in several major areas, there may be
little continuity to build on. In many areas they could be plugging into a
broken socket.

As a result, it is likely that Mr. Clinton's untested instincts in foreign
policy and crisis management will be challenged as quickly as his well-honed
instincts in domestic policy, if not sooner.

Lyndon B. Johnson wanted to hold the world at bay until he built the Great
Society at home, but his prosecution of the Vietnam War would not let him. Mr.
Clinton is not so naive as to think he can keep the world at bay, aides say, but
they insist he can juggle both foreign and domestic affairs. That will depend,
however, on the nature of the problems that arise abroad, and whether they are
of the boilerplate variety or those that will require the sustained attention of
the President.

"Congress may gave Clinton a honeymoon, but the world will not," said Joshua
Muravchik, a foreign policy expert at the American Enterprise Institute, who has
written several policy papers for Mr. Clinton.

For now, his advisers say, Mr. Clinton plans to continue the basic approaches of
the Bush Administration in the Persian Gulf, Arab-Israeli peace talks, Cambodia
and in the still incomplete arms negotiations with Russia.

They say he wants to move away from the Bush policies on China, where he intends
to be tougher on Beijing; on Haiti, where he has promised to let in refugees
seeking political asylum, and on Bosnia and Herzegovina, where he has vowed to
do more to protect the former Yugoslav republic from Serbian forces -- if Bosnia
still exists by the time Mr. Clinton takes office.

Mr. Clinton, they say, also plans to revamp the moribund Agency for
International Development and to transform American military strategy to put
greater emphasis on smaller, more mobile forces, and on helping military
industries shift to commercial manufacturing.

Those who have been advising Mr. Clinton on foreign affairs divide his policy
in-basket into two categories: the urgent and the important.

The Urgent: Gathering a Team

The first urgent matter is to assemble a foreign policy team that can work
together as smoothly as the Bush national security team did, Clinton aides say.

The Clinton advisers include Anthony Lake and Samuel Berger, former advisers to
Jimmy Carter; former neo-conservative Reagan Democrats like Richard Schifter,
Penn Kemble and Mr. Muravchik; young Democrats like Nancy Soderberg on the staff
of Senator Edward M. Kennedy, and academic experts like Will Marshall and
Michael Mandelbaum.

There are also lawmakers: Representatives Dave McCurdy of Oklahoma, Lee Hamilton
of Indiana and Les Aspin of Wisconsin and Senators Bill Bradley of New Jersey
and Sam Nunn of Georgia, and retired military officers like Adm. William J.
Crowe Jr. and diplomats like Morton Abramowitz.

Forging a coherent team from this group and others will not be as easy as it
might look. There are pro-Israelis and pro-Palestinians, former hawks and former
doves, and all sorts of other strands. Virtually none of these Clinton foreign
policy advisers have worked together in government before. In addition, they
will be asked to wrestle with post-cold-war issues that few of them, or anyone
else for that matter, have any experience in handling.

Once he has a team in place, Mr. Clinton's first task will be to deal with the
unease among long-time American friends or important powers, from Saudi Arabia
and Syria to China and Russia, that have been rattled by the downfall of the
Bush Administration.

"This has been the first change in party in 12 years," said a Clinton foreign
policy adviser, "and we will have to move quickly to let everyone know that in
most areas there will be continuity, and where there will be change there will
be prior consultations."

Another priority for Mr. Clinton in foreign policy will be dealing with the
American economy, say Clinton aides. Their reasoning is that without some
success in resolving domestic problems, Mr. Clinton will have no support for
playing a major role abroad, nor will he have the economic resources with which
to influence events.

The Important: Arms, Peace, Trade



In the basket labeled "important" will be a variety of negotiations that the
Clinton Administration will inherit. The follow-up agreement to the Strategic
Arms Reduction Treaty, which was negotiated by Mr. Bush and President Boris N.
Yeltsin of Russia last June, is still up in the air: the Russians have voiced
second thoughts about provisions relating to the destruction of their SS-18
missiles silos.

The Russian military is apparently trying to persuade Mr. Yeltsin to use the
recent hiatus in American foreign policy to secure a better deal. Mr. Clinton
will insist that the Russians abide by the original agreement, his advisers say.

On the Mideast, the Arab-Israeli negotiations are by no means on a smooth track.
The Syrian-Israeli and Palestinian-Israeli negotiations are basically dead in
the water.

Mr. Clinton has promised "continuity" with the Bush Administration in pushing
for progress in these talks, but says he will have a warmer relationship with
Israel. But by the time he takes over in January, his challenge may be to revive
negotiations in a state of serious decline.

Indeed, Mr. Clinton's mere election will almost certainly invite the Syrians and
the Palestinians, even the Israelis, to test the new President. They want to see
if Mr. Clinton is more amenable to their demands than was the Bush
Administration before they determine what concessions they intend to offer one
another.

The Baker-Bush peace process was primarily an effort to bring the parties to the
negotiating table. It was never really intended to get the parties to
agreements. The Clinton Administration will need new ideas for proposals, not
simply a spirit of continuity.

The North American Free Trade Agreement does not have to be renegotiated, but
Mr. Clinton has said he will only accept it as written if there is a
supplemental agreement with Mexico on enforcing Mexican labor and environmental
standards. He would also insist on additional legislation for retraining
American workers who would lose their jobs because of the accord.

Mr. Clinton has said that he will support the use of limited trade sanctions, if
necessary, to pressure the Chinese leadership on human rights. Congress will not
have to take up the question of most-favored-nation trade benefits for China
again until June 2, although Clinton advisers are pressing for him to have a new
policy in place before then.

But any change in the already volatile relations between Washington and Beijing
could create a crisis for the new President, a prospect that clearly alarms
Japan and other Asian powers.

On Bosnia, Mr. Clinton has said that he is ready to use force, in conjunction
with the United Nations, to get aid to Bosnia this winter; that he wants to
tighten the embargo on Serbia, and that he will consider lifting the arms
embargo on Bosnia.

But his foreign policy consultants note that by the time he takes office on Jan.
20, Bosnia may have been so dismembered by Serbian and Croatian forces that for
all practical purposes it will no longer exist.

The same is true with Somalia. Mr. Clinton's instinct has been to press the
United Nations harder to get peacekeeping forces in Somalia, on the assumption
that "if you can get security you get supplies in," said one adviser.  But
whether the United Nations can negotiate access with the local Somali warlords,
or should muscle its way in is something that may be determined by January.
Instinctively, Clinton aides say, the President-elect would favor a muscular
approach.

On the question of Japan, there is a clear division already between Clinton
advisers, with some preferring to move aggressively against the Japanese on what
they perceive as unfair trade practices. Others want to be tough in bargaining
trade access agreements but prefer, as one adviser put it, to do it "in the
context of building and maintaining mutual confidence."

LOAD-DATE: November 8, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: President-elect Clinton complaining to Andrew Friendly, a staff
member, about his lack of privacy as photographers cover his every move. The
Governor was playing golf at a club in Little Rock. (Stephen Crowley/The New
York Times) (pg. 1); Because the election focused the country away from foreign
policy, the Clinton Administration may find itself challenged at the start with
tough foreign policy decisions. President-elect Bill Clinton and Vice
President-elect Al Gore appeared before supporters after their election victory.
(Jim Wilson/The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              225 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 November 8, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Talking to Vietnam

SECTION: Section 4; Page 16; Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 219 words


To the Editor:

I applaud your call for United States diplomatic recognition of Vietnam in
"Coming Soon: The Vietnam Peace" (editorial, Oct. 28). However, while Vietnam
did at first demand reconstruction aid as a precondition for normalization (aid
that President Nixon had promised), it dropped this precondition in the fall of
1978. The United States had an opportunity to normalize relations then, but did
not because it felt that might jeopardize reconciliation with China. Thus,
Vietnam initially put up obstacles, but when removed, it was the United States
that failed to act.

The second point you make, that Hanoi can claim no justification for its 10-year
occupation of Cambodia, is simply wrong. While Vietnam's 1979 invasion of
Cambodia was not guided by humanitarian concern for the Cambodian people, its
occupation was not without good cause. From Vietnam's perspective an early
withdrawal would have left the Khmer Rouge in a position to return to power in
Cambodia and begin the border incursions into Vietnam that prompted the
Vietnamese invasion in the first place. From a humanitarian perspective,
Vietnamese forces were about the only thing standing between the Khmer people
and the threat of further genocide under the Khmer Rouge.

GEORGE DUTTON
Providence, R.I., Oct. 29, 1992

LOAD-DATE: November 8, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              226 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 November 8, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

The Trauma of War Persists for Soldiers Despite Safety Nets for Veterans:

SECTION: Section 13LI; Page 1; Column 1; Long Island Weekly Desk

LOAD-DATE: November 12, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Christopher Podges, top left, Vietnam veteran and counselor at
the Vet Center in Babylon, with Robert G. Lee. Jerold A. Klein, above,
processing benefits claim for Anthony Ambrosio as his wife, Dorene, and their
baby watched. Right, veterans' memorial in Hauppauge. Article, page 8. (Maxine
Hicks for The New York Times; Vic DeLucia/The New York Times)

TYPE: Caption

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              227 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 November 8, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Portrait of the Statesman as an Aging Gadfly

BYLINE: By Evan Thomas;  Evan Thomas, the Washington bureau chief for Newsweek,
is the author of "The Man to See," a biography of Edward Bennett Williams, and
the co-author, with Walter Isaacson, of "The Wise Men," a study of policy makers
at the start of the cold war.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 7; Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 828 words



DEAN ACHESON
The Cold War Years, 1953-1971.
By Douglas Brinkley.
Illustrated. 429 pp. New Haven:
Yale University Press. $35.

WHEN Dean Acheson went to see Charles de Gaulle in October 1962, the former
Secretary of State was acting as a glorified errand boy, sent by the Kennedy
Administration to brief the French leader on the Cuban missile crisis. But as he
walked through the stone corridors of the Elysee Palace, Acheson couldn't resist
playing one of the Three Musketeers. "Porthos, is your rapier loose in its
scabbard?" he stage-whispered to the startled C.I.A. briefer trudging along at
his side. "I think some of the Cardinal's men may be lurking here."

Waiting in his office, de Gaulle understood that Acheson had come merely to
inform, not to consult. Yet Le Grand Charles was suitably impressed by the
imposing presence who appeared before him. "Voila," he exclaimed, "un homme!"

Biographies of former statesmen can be a bit of a bore. So why would anyone want
to read a book about a statesman's life after he left power? But Douglas
Brinkley, the co-author, with Townsend Hoopes, of "Driven Patriot: The Life and
Times of James Forrestal," is fortunate in his subject. Dean Acheson out of
office was more interesting than most Government officials at the peak of their
careers. He had been perhaps the greatest Secretary of State ever: co-author of
the Marshall Plan, architect of the Western Alliance -- "Present at the
Creation," as he immodestly entitled his memoirs. As a polemicist, gadfly and
elder statesman, he could be tactless and overbearing. But if he was a crank, he
was a most interesting one. "Dean Acheson: The Cold War Years, 1953-1971," Mr.
Brinkley's study of Acheson from the time he left office until his death, offers
a fascinating window on the cold war, seen through the eyes of a giant who
regarded his successors as pygmies.

Acheson was particularly brutal to his replacement at the State Department, John
Foster Dulles. Acheson thought Dulles had sold out the State Department to the
McCarthyites, and he despised him for it. "Dulles's people seem to me like
Cossacks quartered in a grand city hall, burning the paneling to cook with,"
Acheson wrote to a former aide in 1953. When Dulles died in 1959, Acheson
stunned a dinner party by announcing, "Thank God Foster is underground."

Acheson missed power and was determined to make his influence felt. By his
hawkish pronouncements, he became an unofficial spokesman on foreign policy for
Democratic Party hard-liners. Yet he was just as rough on Democratic nominees
for President as he was on the Republicans. Asked his opinion of Adlai E.
Stevenson in 1952, Acheson replied, "Well, Adlai has a third-rate mind that he
can't make up."

Acheson's mouth could get him into trouble. His quip in 1963 that Britain "has
lost an empire and has not yet found a role" caused a diplomatic uproar. Still,
Presidents liked to use Acheson, who was susceptible to flattery, as their Wise
Man. John F. Kennedy, who quailed before what he called Acheson's "intimidating
seniority," said he "liked the cut of his jib." Acheson was less enthusiastic
about Kennedy, especially after the President ordered tea instead of a martini
when he came calling. (Acheson, a friend said, "never trusted a man who wouldn't
have a drink with him.")

Presidents did not always take Acheson's advice. Kennedy was wise not to heed
the old man's urging to bomb Cuba during the missile crisis. On the other hand,
he should have listened to Acheson before he launched the Bay of Pigs invasion.
"It was not necessary," Acheson told Kennedy, "to call in Price Waterhouse to
discover that 1,500 Cubans weren't as good as 250,000 Cubans." Acheson told
Lyndon B. Johnson in 1965 to stop whining about Vietnam and get on with the
fight, but he helped persuade Johnson to begin winding down the war in 1968.
When the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Earle Wheeler, conceded at a
White House meeting that the United States could not win a "classic military
victory," Acheson piped up: "Then what in the name of God are 500,000 men doing
out there? Chasing girls?"

Acheson became intemperate and rigid in his last years. He was too much the cold
warrior, unable to understand the imperatives of national wars of liberation. He
opposed black self-determination in Africa and said India and most of the people
who lived there gave him "the creeps." Mr. Brinkley sees Acheson's shortcomings
and does not shy away from pointing them out. His book, which began as a Ph.D.
thesis at Georgetown University, is more lucid and graceful than most of the
cold war tomes churned out in academia. But one wishes that the author had tried
harder to explore Acheson's inner life as he grappled with the loss of power,
his own and that of the United States. Too often in his old age, Acheson refused
to recognize that his time had passed. Yet what a time and, as de Gaulle
observed, what a man.

NAME: Dean Acheson

LOAD-DATE: November 8, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Dean Acheson, 1968. (George Tames/The New York Times)

TYPE: Biography; Review

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              228 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 November 9, 1992, Monday, Late Edition - Final

10 Years Later, the Emotions Still Run Deep

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 3; National Desk

LOAD-DATE: November 9, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Laverne Neely and Dan Doyle looking at the name of Mrs. Neely's
son yesterday as observances of the 10th anniversary of the Vietnam Veterans'
Memorial began in Washington. Volunteers began reading the 58,183 names on the
wall in a tribute that will end on Wednesday, Veterans Day. (Patrice Gilbert for
The New York Times)

TYPE: Caption

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              229 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 November 9, 1992, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Japan and Korea Fear a Vacuum If Clinton Turns the U.S. Inward

BYLINE: By JAMES STERNGOLD,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 6; Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 539 words

DATELINE: TOKYO, Nov. 8


Clearly worried that Bill Clinton's promise to emphasize domestic affairs might
reduce the United States military presence in East Asia, the leaders of Japan
and South Korea indirectly urged the President-elect today to maintain
Washington's active engagement in this rapidly changing region.

In an unusual statement tinged with anxiety, Prime Minister Kiichi Miyazawa of
Japan and President Roh Tae Woo of South Korea "agreed that a continued active
United States role is indispensable to stability in the region, and voiced the
expectation that the coming new United States Administration will not change
this policy," Korean officials reported.

The comments reflect a concern common throughout East Asia, if little
appreciated in Washington: many Asian leaders are convinced that budget
constraints and a growing isolationism are making a United States pullout from
Asia inevitable.

90% Decline in U.S. Troops

After fighting three fierce wars in East Asia in the last 50 years, and
maintaining more than a million troops in the region during the Vietnam War, the
United States now has fewer than 100,000 troops in Asia and some further
reductions are expected.

That has raised a concern that the resulting power vacuum could trigger a
dangerous arms race. Already China has purchased Russian bombers and considered
buying an aircraft carrier from Ukraine. Taiwan is to purchase 150 F-16 jet
fighters from the United States. North Korea may be developing nuclear weapons.

This issue was one of many the two leaders were said to have discussed during a
meeting in the ancient capital of Kyoto, in western Japan. Although there have
been a number of formal state visits, the one-day meeting represented the first
time in the post-war era that the leaders of these neighboring countries had
arranged for an informal exchange of views.

Japan annexed Korea in 1910 and maintained brutal control until the end of World
War II. Although the two countries normalized relations in 1965, the
relationship has remained tense because of lingering bitterness in Korea over
the colonial era.

President Roh flew from Seoul this morning and held one-on-one talks with Prime
Minister Miyazawa for nearly two hours at a traditional Japanese tea house in
the exclusive Tsuruya district of Kyoto. They continued discussions over lunch
for a little more than an hour. Shortly afterwards, President Roh returned to
South Korea.

The Abused Women

Lingering antagonism from the colonial period was evident in the fact that the
leaders discussed compensation for Korean women who were forced to provide
sexual services to Japanese troop in World War II, according to the South Korean
Government's account of the meeting.

For years the Japanese denied the Government had a role in the matter but Tokyo
has recently begun to concede the army's involvement, and negotiations are under
way on satisfying the claims.

In a sign of the growing amity, President Roh restated his Government's
eagerness to arrange a visit by the Japanese Emperor to South Korea. Mr.
Miyazawa did not respond, according to officials from both sides, but plans for
a visit are expected to begin after South Korea's presidential election, in
December.

LOAD-DATE: November 9, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              230 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 November 9, 1992, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Calvin Graham, 62, Who Fought in War As a 12-Year-Old

BYLINE: By ERIC PACE

SECTION: Section B; Page 9; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 328 words


Calvin L. Graham, who gained attention as the boy who lied so he could enlist in
the Navy at age 12 during World War II, died Friday in his house in Fort Worth.
He was 62 years old.

He died of heart failure, said his stepson, Ronnie O'Donley.

The young Mr. Graham was a gunner on the U.S.S. South Dakota while it was
buffeted by the Japanese in the Battle of Guadalcanal in 1942. He was struck in
the jaw and mouth by shrapnel while his battleship suffered 47 enemy hits.
Though seriously wounded, he helped pull other crew members to safety.

The next year, the Navy discovered Mr. Graham's age. He became known to
headline-writers as the "baby vet" after the Navy gave him a dishonorable
discharge and revoked his disability benefits and his decorations, including a
Purple Heart and Bronze Star.

Sought Return of Medals

In later years he struggled to get the decorations and the benefits back and to
get an honorable discharge, retroactively. He was aided by political figures
like the Senators Lloyd Bentsen, a Democrat, and John G. Tower, a Republican,
both of Texas.

In a 1978 interview, Mr. Graham said the discharge program for Vietnam War
deserters had given him a hope of getting his discharge at last. He said he
"damn sure" deserved one more than a deserter did.

Eventually, he got the discharge, and won back all his decorations, except the
Purple Heart. In 1988, President Ronald Reagan signed legislation that granted
him disability benefits.

Mr. Graham, the youngest of the six children in a farm family, was born in
Canton, Tex., grew up in Crockett, Tex., and quit school there to join the Navy.
For years after the war he sold subscriptions to Life, Look and other magazines
by telephone.

In addition to Mr. O'Donley, he is survived by his wife of 24 years, the former
Mary Winfield O'Donley; a stepdaughter, Lora O'Donley, both also of Fort Worth;
a step-granddaughter; and a sister, Eve Lue Sharman of Polk County, Tex.


NAME: Calvin L. Graham

LOAD-DATE: November 9, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Calvin L. Graham. (Associated Press, 1988)

TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              231 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 10, 1992, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 914 words



International A3-13

IRAQI ARMS TRIAL HALTED
Saying a Cabinet minister had changed his story, British prosecutors dropped a
criminal case against three men accused of selling arms-making equipment to
Iraq. The trial's end makes it likely that some details of the West's complicity
in the arms buildup by Saddam Hussein will not become public.  A1

TERMINALLY GREASED WHEELS
Corruption has long been a feature of life in India. But people worry it is
becoming so pervasive that the country may never emerge from poverty and
underdevelopment.  A12

STRIKING AT COLOMBIA'S HEART
Leftist rebel attacks on Colombia's oil industry are endangering the country's
economic future and clouding its hopes of becoming a major oil exporter.  A3

YELTSIN COURTS THE BRITISH
Seeking a firm show of Western backing, President Yeltsin of Russia swept
through London signing a flurry of accords on economic and political cooperation
with Britain. He appealed to the West to do more to ease his country's debt
burden.  A9

IN BOSNIA, A DASH FOR FREEDOM
With racing hearts and hopes of a new life abroad, a Bosnian couple set out on a
harrowing 23-mile journey from besieged Sarajevo to Kiseljak. To make the
journey is to cross three fronts in the Bosnian war.  A8

Bosnian Serbs breach peace plan, but mediators are skeptical.  A8

A PEACE MISSION FOR BAKER?
President-elect Clinton told Israel's Prime Minister that he wants Arab-Israeli
peace talks to move forward with "no delay." His spokesman said he would support
a last-ditch effort by former Secretary of State Baker to revive the
negotiations.  A11

Jerusalem Journal: When Israelis kill Israelis -- on the road.  A4

The P.L.O. leader warns fundamentalists against violence.  A6

German leaders insist most citizens oppose attacks on foreigners.  A10

National A14-21

BLEAK ECONOMIC VIEW
President-elect Bill Clinton took a relentlessly negative view of the nation's
economy, saying that a focus on the "gravity of the situation" would underlie a
forthcoming economic conference.  A1

AND WHAT OF THE POOR?
News Analysis: There was much talk of the middle class in the Presidential
campaign, but much less of the inner cities. It is unclear where the poor, whose
numbers are growing, rank in the new Administration's priorities.  A20

Questions of conflicts over a key Clinton appointee.  A20

PEROT FILES SEARCHED
The State Department searched the passport files of Ross Perot as it had those
of Bill Clinton, an incident that embarrassed the Bush Administration in the
closing days of the Presidential campaign.  A16

MEN, WOMEN AND OLD AGE
A new Government report finds that while American men die earlier than women,
the men who live longest are more likely to be healthy, self-sufficient and not
living alone.  A1

BUILDING A GLOBAL AIRLINE
Continental Airlines accepted a bid from Air Canada as part of a plan to merge
the two struggling North American carriers and then look for further alliances
to create a competitive global carrier.  A1

WHITE HOUSE AND THE SOUTH
The new White House team reflects the complexities of the evolving South, which
cannot be characterized in a single image any more than Bill Clinton and Al Gore
can.  A14.

A VIETNAM REUNION
Washington Journal: The whiskey was flowing, along with the tears and laughter,
as aging veterans, most nearing 50 got together to mark the anniversary of the
awful Vietnam battle of Ia Drang.  A14

WELCOME TO THE CLUB
They arrived as outsiders, but before the day was over, the crop of new United
States senators had been introduced to the privileges, politics and pressures of
their new jobs, and some of them seemed awed.  A17

A record number blacks will mean changes in Congress.  A17

AN ADVERTISING CASE
The Supreme Court heard a case that could further define how the First Amendment
applies to advertising.  A19

Metro Digest B1

CONSIDERING WACHTLER'S FUTURE
With the Chief Judge of New York State's highest court charged with an extortion
plot, his six colleagues said they would not ask him to step aside or resign
from the bench.  A1

HOW THE F.B.I. TRACKED THE JUDGE
When Judge Sol Wachtler was pulled over on the Long Island Expressway, it was
the final step in an investigation that began with a telephone call to the
F.B.I. director and ended with agents watching the judge hand an envelope to a
cabby.  A1

Business Digest D1

Science Times C1-12

What do Clinton's policies mean for science and technology?  C1

Brain found to reorganize itself even in adulthood.  C1

A species designed for survival?  C1

Fashion Page B9

Arts/Entertainment C15-22

Cultural life in the provinces of Russia.  C15

Theater: "Angels in America" in Los Angeles.  C15

Sports B11-17

Auto Racing: Petty traveling a royal route.  B11

Basketball: Nets sign a policeman.  B11

Obituaries B10

Editorials/Op-Ed A22-23

Editorials

National security, redefined.

Japan: off course on plutonium.

Bob Dole's politics of rancor.

No way to honor Mr. Rosenbaum.

Letters

A. M. Rosenthal: Clinton and the Mideast.

Russell Baker: The white and the red.

William C. Potter: Ukraine's nuclear trigger.

Matt Rohde: The generation that passed the torch.

Jack Valenti: A chief of staff? Forget it.

LOAD-DATE: November 10, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              232 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 10, 1992, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Veterans' Journal;
Back to a Valley of Death, With Love

BYLINE: By B. DRUMMOND AYRES Jr.,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 14; Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 688 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 9


Ernie Savage, sergeant 1st class, United States Army, retired, was having a hard
time of it. His voice kept choking up and the words just wouldn't come.

"Well," he stammered, "well, I'm, I'm just going to keep on till I finish. I've
been in a worse place."

The room erupted in knowing laughter that broke the verbal logjam. Everybody
there had been in that place -- the Ia Drang.

In Vietnam, it never got any worse than it did in the Ia Drang, a distant valley
in the Central Highlands, tangled in elephant grass and simmering in heat. In
four days and nights of fighting in November 1965, 234 of Ernie Savage's
comrades in the First Air Cavalry Division died. The North Vietnamese lost at
least 3,000 men.

Now, 27 years later almost to the day, Sergeant Savage -- everybody still called
him "sergeant" -- had gathered in a hotel ballroom with the other members of the
Ia Drang Alumni Association for a bittersweet night of reminiscing. The whisky
was flowing, along with the tears and laughter, and these veterans, most nearing
50, some missing an arm or leg, many with the combat infantryman's badge pinned
to lapels, were fumbling along with the old sergeant from Columbus, Ga., for
words.

"The bullets were clipping all around us, hitting men and trees and cutting the
grass," said Sergeant Savage, whose unit was surrounded for several days and is
known as the "Lost Platoon" in First Cavalry lore. "On the radio, we were being
told to hang on because help would be awhile getting to us. But after a bit, we
realized that we had held on, we'd managed, and we just figured, 'Well, we're
going to make it.' And we did."

The hotel ballroom was only a few hundred yards down a road from Arlington
National Cemetery and the graves of too many fallen comrades. Here there were
only survivors.

Harold G. Moore, a retired lieutenant general who, as a lieutenant colonel, led
the Cav into the Ia Drang, took the floor. Now 70 years old, out of uniform the
better part of 15 years and living in Crested Butte, Colo., he still looks
poised to leap from the skids of a hovering helicopter and, with Joseph L.
Galloway, a Washington journalist who was in the Ia Drang, has just completed a
book about the campaign, "We Were Soldiers Once . . . and Young" (Random House).

"Listen up, people," he commanded, half general, half surviving comrade.
"Sergeant Ernie Savage is what good soldiering is all about. Even though his
unit was surrounded and cut off and losses were so heavy that he eventually
ended up commanding it, he got his men out. And when they came out, they had
ammo left over. Now that's discipline. Discipline!"

The room erupted in cheers.

Then it was Rick Rescorla's turn to talk. As a second lieutenant, he led a
platoon in the Ia Drang and then went on to become a colonel before retiring a
couple of years ago to a home in New York City.

"A man is dying down there in the valley and what do you do?" he began, a
distant fix in his eyes. "You hold him in your arms and you say to him -- it's
all you can say to him -- you say: 'You're not alone, son. You're not alone.'
And he's gone. We were plain men, trying to survive."

During a break between speeches, Bud Alley, a former Cav communications officer
from Dayton, Tenn., gave John Howard, a former medical services officer from
Carlisle, Pa., a bear hug. "This is a healing experience that I've needed for 27
years," Mr. Alley said.

Then it was time to go. An order was given for a roll-call of the dead.

Suddenly the room filled with the sound of whirling helicopter blades --
thump-thump-thump-thump-thump. With that background recording, memories came
crashing back. The roll call began -- Bouknight, Calvin; Metsker, Thomas C.;
Mitchell, William B.; Bernard, Ramon -- on and on and on for the better part of
10 minutes, until all the names inscribed on Panel 3-East of the Vietnam Wall
have been read.

The final word went to James Scott of Columbus, Ga., retired Cav sergeant-major,
six bronze stars and three purple hearts. "These dead did not give their life
for their country," he declared. "They forced someone to take it from them."

LOAD-DATE: November 10, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              233 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 11, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1070 words



International    A3-13

COLLECTING TAXES OVERSEAS

Japan's largest consumer electronics company has reached an agreement with the
I.R.S. on a formula for calculating its American taxes. The accord uses a new
method for reducing disputes over the taxation of multinational corporations.
A1

FRANCE'S TRADE DILEMMA

News analysis: President Mitterrand faces a tough choice on world trade: incur
Germany's anger by continuing to resist a deal, or enrage the powerful French
farmers' lobby by signing an accord.  A1


ISRAELI TROOPS MOVE NORTH

Israel massed troops and tanks at its northern border as a deterrent to attacks
by Lebanese guerrillas. It said it would respond powerfully if provoked further.
A7

COLD WAR? HONG KONG SHIVERS

Britain and China are engaged in an increasingly bitter dispute over the degree
of democracy Hong Kong will have when it reverts to China in 1997. The invective
from China is unnerving people on the island, particularly those in business.
A3

LETDOWN FOR SARAJEVO EVACUEES

A plan to evacuate more than 6,000 people from besieged Sarajevo went awry when
Serbian forces ordered Muslim men off buses after the convoy crossed the siege
lines.  A10

The U.S. seeks tighter measures to block Serbian trade.  A10

A TINY REGION DEFIES RUSSIA

The leader of breakaway Chechenya threatened to take action unless Russian
troops withdrew from a region where they are trying to put down ethnic fighting.
It is the first conflict in Russia that President Yeltsin has tried to resolve
with force.  A6

Ending a visit to Britain, Boris Yeltsin vows to thwart his foes.  A6

With no land law, a Russian land auction proves confusing.  A4

BRITAIN WILL REVIEW IRAQI SALES

Seeking to blunt accusations of a Government cover-up, Prime Minister Major
ordered a judicial inquiry into British sales of arms-making equipment to Iraq.
A13

Challenging times for the West's international broadcasters.  A12

The release of a Muslim insurrectionist unsettles Trinidadians.  A11

National    A14-22, D19-20

BUSH OUSTS OFFICIAL

President Bush dismissed the State Department official responsible for searches
through the passport files of Bill Clinton, Mr. Clinton's mother and Ross Perot
shortly before the Presidential election, searches that embarrassed Mr. Bush in
the closing days of the campaign and perhaps cost him crucial votes.  A1

WHAT NOW FOR F.B.I.?

An Election Day note to colleagues at the F.B.I. from Director William Sessions
has brought to the fore questions about Mr. Sessions' survival in a Clinton
Administration.  A1

THE NEW CLINTON

Political memo: Bill Clinton the candidate was decisive, vigorous and remarkably
open. Bill Clinton the President-elect has so far been reclusive and remarkably
deliberate in decision making. Which man will the President be?  A1

CLOSE CALL IN G.O.P.

Senator Phil Gramm narrowly won re-election as head of the National Republican
Senatorial Committee, beating back a challenger who said Mr. Gramm would give
more attention to raising money for his own Presidential campaign than for the
campaigns of others.  D19

HOUSE DEMOCRATS OPTIMISTIC

House Democratic leaders met again with newly elected Representatives and later
said they were sure the freshmen in their party would work closely with the
Clinton Administration instead of pressing an independent agenda.  D19

REPUBLICAN SOUL-SEARCHING

With President Bush's defeat, all the factions in the Republican Party must
address a question of crucial importance for elections to come: What are now the
doctrinal foundations of Republicanism? Party conservatives and liberals are
already staking out positions.  A22

GAY SAILOR VINDICATED

Rebuking the Navy for ignoring a previous order, a Federal district judge again
ordered the reinstatement of a sailor who was discharged because he is
homosexual. The Navy said it would comply.  A14

HEALING AT THE WALL

The Wall of the Vietnam Veterans Memorial was born in controversy but has since
been a healing influence. That power remained in evidence of the eve of a 10th
anniversary ceremony at the site.  A14

HEART PROCEDURE QUESTIONED

About half of all special X-ray procedures to examine the heart are unnecessary
or could be safely put off for long periods, a study said, immediately drawing
fire from the head of the leading group of American heart specialists.  A16

NEW ALZHEIMER TREATMENT

A new study showed that a much-debated drug to treat Alzheimer's disease can
slow loss of memory and reasoning but that the improvements were modest. In
addition, the drug, tacrine, has side effects.  D20


Industry pulls back on spending for research and development.  A21

A double agent's revelations jolted the anti-Castro movement.  A14

Education Page    B10

PRESSURES ON COLLEGES

For the first time since the start of their explosive growth in the 1960's,
community colleges are being forced to narrow their open-access admission
policies and deal with fiscal constraints that will determine, to a large
extent, whether they offer legitimate opportunity or just second-rate schooling.
A1

Campus Journal: At Southern Methodist, tenure denial sparks protest.

Metro Digest    B1

NEW YORK'S TOP JUDGE RESIGNS

Sol Wachtler, the Chief Judge of New York State's highest court, resigned hours
after a Federal judge ordered him detained in his home, monitored by electronic
surveillance, until his Federal trial on attempting to blackmail a woman who
broke off an affair with him.  A1

Business Digest    D1

Living Section    C1-13

Health Page    C14

Arts/Entertainment    C15-24

Obituaries    D20-21

Sports    B11-16

Baseball: Giants to stay in San Francisco.  B11

Basketball: Knicks beat Nets.  B11

Boxing: Holyfield seeks respect.  B16

Football: Taylor's surgery deemed successful.  B11

Editorials/Op-Ed    A24-25

Editorials

Priorities, priorities.
Promises, promises: which ones?
Sol Wachtler's fitting departure.
A Vietnam Veterans Day.

Letters

Anna Quindlen: A (rest) room of one's own.

James S. Rosebush: Support, advice, candor.

Christopher Wood: Japan's blowup.

Oscar Arias: A call to disarm.

LOAD-DATE: November 12, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              234 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 11, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

HEARINGS OPENED ON KOREA M.I.A.'S

BYLINE: By STEVEN A. HOLMES,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 12; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 496 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 10


The top-ranking Republican on the Senate Select Committee on P.O.W.'s and
M.I.A.'s asserted today that American prisoners had been transferred to China
and the Soviet Union after the Korean War ended in 1953, and he suggested that
some might still be alive.

The Senator, Bob Smith, Republican of New Hampshire, also said Government
documents showed that United States officials knew about prisoners in the Soviet
Union and North Korea and hid the facts from the public.

The Government "has covered up what it knew through a pattern of denial,
misleading statements and, in some cases, lies," Mr. Smith said.

Other witnesses said the Senator misinterpreted the documents he had studied.

Aversion to Conflict

The Senator did not offer any reason why the Government would conceal the
existence of prisoners. But one witness, Philip A. Corso, a member of the
National Security Council staff in the Eisenhower Administration, suggested that
Washington did not want to provoke a war with China or the Soviet Union by
pressing them on the issue.

Mr. Corso said he believed that as many as 1,200 prisoners had been transferred
to the Soviet Union during the Korean War.

Today's hearing, the first of two days the committee is devoting to missing
service personnel from the Korean War, had the look and feel of recent sessions
on Vietnam M.I.A.'s, with family members and advocates in the audience, some
wearing satin jackets with "POW/MIA" emblazoned on the back.

Senator Smith released a sheaf of documents that he said provided conclusive
evidence that at the end of the Korean War, North Korea failed to repatriate
Americans it had captured.

"It's a document that shows in explicit detail that the Government of North
Korea did not return a large number of American servicemen at the end of the war
and that some of the men left behind were sent to Communist China and to the
Soviet Union," Mr. Smith said.

'Bad Research'

But Paul M. Cole, a researcher from the Rand Corporation who was hired by the
Defense Department to look into the issue, said much of the intelligence reports
and other data that Senator Smith drew upon were flawed.

"What you're dealing with is bad research," Mr. Cole said. "I'm a university
professor as well. You're dealing with C stuff in some cases."

Although the Government officially listed more than 8,000 Americans who served
in Korea as unaccounted for, Mr. Cole said he doubted that more than 100 were
moved to the Soviet Union or China. He said most of those were interrogated by
Chinese or Soviet aides, returned to North Korean prison camps and later
repatriated.

Still, Mr. Cole and Alan C. Ptak, Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for
P.O.W./M.I.A. Affairs, said they could not rule out the possiblity that
Americans had been sent to Russia and that some might still be alive. The men
said that until Moscow grants fuller access to its archives, it would be
impossible to preclude that possibility.

LOAD-DATE: November 12, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              235 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 11, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

After 10 Years of Tears, Memorial Keeps Healing

BYLINE: By B. DRUMMOND AYRES Jr.,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 14; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 727 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 10


The Wall.

It has been there 10 years now, almost to the day, and still they come, alone
and in two's and three's, mothers, fathers, sons and daughters, widows,
neighbors, total strangers and buddies wearing battered old campaign hats.

Survivors all of a long ago war in a far away place called Vietnam.

They trudge slowly down the length of that black granite V slashed into the
gentle green of the Mall, pausing now and again to study the names of the 58,183
who fell, perhaps fixing on a single one.

Some are seized by an impulse and reach out to touch the letters inscribed
there. Some leave a memento, pilgrims making a sacred offering -- a single red
rose a sealed letter, a combat infantryman's badge. Many weep.

From Controversy to Praise

In the decade since the Wall was dedicated on Nov. 13, 1982, a testament to
those who served and survived as well as to those who served and died, it has
been visited by at least 25 million people. Though it started out in controversy
-- some though it an insult to both veterans and good taste -- it has ended up
the most popular memorial in the country.

The Wall has helped heal a nation. And the healing continues.

Elaine Cerone, a retirement counselor from Burtonsville, Md., stood this
afternoon before Panel W-3 and found the name of John Woodrum, engraved a good
10 feet up. Several times she reached out as if to touch, though she knew full
well the name was beyond her reach.

There were tears on her cheeks. She dabbed at them.

"We went through school together in San Diego," she said. "He went into the
Army. I never saw him again. This wall makes things better."

Then she turned and was gone.

Thousands Gather

At 1 P.M. Wednesday, Veterans Day, there will be a 10th anniversary ceremony at
the site, officially known as the Vietnam Veterans Memorial. Already thousands
of men and women who served in the war are crowding into Washington for the
event, as well as for the many unit reunions, rallies, wreath layings and
parades that also will take place that day.

Since noon on Sunday, an around-the-clock reading of every name on the Wall has
been under way, starting with the very first to fall, Dale R. Buis. The reading,
which will end with the name of the last to fall, Richard Vande Geer, is not
expected to be completed until shortly before the start of Wednesday's
anniversary ceremony.

While there is a loud drone of voices this week at the Wall as the names are
read, normally there is only quiet here. Most conversations are carried on in
reverent whispers.

Always there is a steady coming and going of visitors, even into the middle of
the night. And the man in ragged combat fatigues who is kneeling in prayer draws
no intruding stares, nor does the father bending to leave a folded American flag
as a memento.

Mementoes are one of the great mysteries of the Wall.

Flowers are a common sight at the base of most memorials. But the leavings at
the base of the Vietnam memorial go far beyond flowers and they come in
tremendous profusion -- 30,000 articles in all, to date, so many that the
Smithsonian Institution recently opened a display.

Collection of Memories

Here are some of the things that were scattered along the base of the Wall by
mid-afternoon today: a black parachutist patch embroidered with the words "Death
From Above"; an olive drab can of field rations; a can of ginger ale, on which
rested a pack of cigarettes, on which rested an airline miniature of buorbon
whiskey; an album of family pictures, including children frolicking with fuzzy
dogs and a pretty woman standing next to a cherry red convertible; a dog tag; a
tasseled baby's shoe; a pair of jungle boots, stained with the red dust of
Vietnam's Central Highlands; a football; a cigar, half-smoked, resting carefully
on a can of beer, and a steel helmet on which was scribbled, "Just you and me,
God, right?"

Chuck Luley of Parker, Colo., a Army tank mechanic when he was in Vietnam, left
no memento today when he visited the Wall and found the names of a dozen
comrades who never made it back. Rather, he took something away.

"When I came home in 1969," he said, "there was no 'Welcome back, buddy!' And it
was the same for every other veteran. I admit it, I was a little bitter. But
this Wall -- this Wall make me feel better about America. I can go home in
peace."


LOAD-DATE: November 12, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: In the decade since the Vietnam War Memorial was built, it has
become the most popular memorial in the country. Chris Taylor of Allegan, Mich.,
who was wounded in Vietnam in 1967, visited the wall. (Associated Press)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              236 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 11, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Community Colleges Forced To Restrict Access, and Goals

BYLINE: By ANTHONY DePALMA

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 1; National Desk; Education Page

LENGTH: 2111 words


With tuition at four-year colleges climbing and a sluggish economy forcing
workers back to school to retrain for new jobs, students of all ages have been
flocking to the relatively inexpensive classrooms of the nation's community
colleges. But they do not always get in.

For the first time since the start of their explosive growth in the 1960's,
community colleges -- which now enroll 36 percent of all students in higher
education, and more than 50 percent of all freshmen -- are being forced to
narrow their open-access policies and deal with fiscal constraints that will
determine, to a large extent, whether they offer legitimate opportunity or just
second-rate schooling.

More Harm for Some

The colleges have been criticized for failing to keep their promise to America's
most economically and academically disadvantaged students. Intellectual rigor
can be flabby, classroom discipline loose, academic standards abstract. An
associate's degree can be of little help in finding a good job.

And yet, for many who are willing to work, these colleges are a genie's lamp
that can transform the unlucky, and it is they who are most likely to get hurt
by the current squeeze.

In California, for example, the nation's largest community college system is
turning away students because the state, for the first time, has refused to
provide the financial support for everyone who wants to get in. Until now the
state paid the 107 colleges, with an enrollment of over 1.5 million students, a
set fee for each student no matter how many enrolled.

The California colleges also have raised their fees and for the first time are
charging students who already have a degree $50 a credit more than other
students, presumably to discourage them from taking up classroom space.

In Pennsylvania, officials have alerted community college presidents that the
state will run short of money and not fully finance the colleges this year for
all the students they admit. One of the largest community colleges in the
nation, Miami-Dade Community College, capped enrollment earlier this year but
was able to lift it two months ago only because voters in that hurricane-damaged
region approved a special tax increase to support the school.

Officials of the American Association of Community Colleges say the picture is
grim in most states and getting worse. Even where colleges have not limited
enrollments they have been unable to schedule enough classes for new students,
thus, in effect limiting their access to an education.

"This is a crucial period," said David R. Pierce, president of the association.
He said financial imbalances have placed open access, the "centerpiece of our
institutions, in very real jeopardy."

Although maligned as "high schools with ashtrays" or safe havens for students
who cannot get into real colleges, the nation's 1,158 publicly financed
community colleges, private junior colleges, and technical colleges have grown
so much that they now enroll about 6.4 million students. For more than half of
all entering freshman in higher education, going to college means going to the
local community college.

Without community colleges, many of the 6.4 million would not go to college at
all. But half of them are casual students who never earn more than 12 credits,
and of the rest, only about a quarter go on to a senior college, down from more
than 45 percent in the 1950's.

Still Providing Some Opportunity

The colleges are as unorthodox as their students, and administrators point out
that, for many, the goal may not include a traditional academic course leading
toward a degree. The students' average age is 29. Almost 65 percent attend part
time, going to class at night or on the weekends. On average they take three
years to get an associate's degree that used to take two years. Many, however,
stretch the schooling to four or five years.

The degree itself is no lock on success. Someone holding an associate's degree
can expect to make 29 percent more than a high school graduate, but far less
money and social progress than someone with a bachelor's degree. Although
occupational training programs can lead to attractive careers in computer
science, many students end up in low-paying jobs in a field like cosmetology.

Nonetheless, community colleges in recent years have served as crucial portals
for minority students, and the recent cutbacks threaten hard-won advances in
that area. While community colleges enroll 37 percent of all white students in
higher education, they enroll 38 percent of Asians, 42 percent of blacks and 54
percent of Hispanic students.

Community colleges have long been seen as salvage operations, giving the least
advantaged students -- people like Nilda Ortiz of Homestead, Fla., -- a chance
to grab the American Dream.

"Andrew didn't stop me and nothing is going to keep me away," said Ms. Ortiz. It
was her first day of class at Miami-Dade Community College's battered Homestead
campus, and though her home had been badly damaged by Hurricane Andrew, she was
determined to begin her college career. "I've been waiting for this for a long,
long time," she said.

But for every teary-eyed story of students overcoming adversity, there is a
corresponding story of failure, like the student who was finally thrown out of
Essex County Community College in Newark in 1980 after officials discovered he
had taken 70 credits without getting more than a zero grade in any course.

College officials themselves agree that too few of their students complete their
courses, too few get their associate's degrees and too few transfer to four-year
colleges and earn the bachelor's degrees that can change their lives.

Critics go further and say community colleges routinely water down academics and
allow perennial students to live off financial aid. They also sometimes accuse
the colleges of channeling their minority students -- who often need to take
remedial courses that cannot be counted for credit at four-year colleges -- into
occupational training programs that dampen aspirations and lead to low-paying
jobs.

"The rhetoric is terrific, but the reality is in transferring people, and that
record is not good," said L. Steven Zwerling, an expert on community colleges
with the Ford Foundation, which has been trying for years to improve the
colleges. "What's going on in general is that people are coming in and they're
getting washed out or directed to low-skill, low-wage kinds of jobs."

Original Mission Is Diverted

The first junior colleges date back to the turn of the century, and even then
they were seen as transitions, helping to give less-prepared students a boost
toward a four-year college. In the 1970's, when new community colleges were
opening at the rate of one a week, they expanded their mission, offering
occupational training that led to jobs as a medical technicians or beauticians.

In the 1980's, they expanded again, offering job retraining for older workers
who needed new skills.

But with the new focus on jobs, many of the colleges seemed to have lost sight
of their original academic mission. Now, just 24 percent of community college
students transfer to four-year colleges according to the Center for the Study of
Community Colleges at the University of California, Los Angeles.

Even that figure can be misleading because it refers to only those students who
accumulate 12 or more credits (about four courses). Nationally, half of all
entering community college students never even get that far.

"These colleges are not necessarily transforming anybody," said Valerie E. Lee,
an associate professor of education at the University of Michigan who has
studied community college education. "The best students tend to transfer, and
the weaker students do not."

Community college administrators are wary of making too much of transfer rates
because they say it is not fair to expect that every student who enrolls intends
to, or should, go on to a four-year college.

But they generally do concede that they have got away from their original
purpose and need to move back toward academic preparation, even though the
current financial squeeze will make that more difficult.

The colleges' support generally comes from three sources: the state, the local
community and tuition. At a college like the Community College of Philadelphia,
the financially strapped city has not fully financed the college for six years.
Last year, the president, Ronald J. Temple, led students on a march to City Hall
to demand greater support.

The city has shorted the college again this year. The state said it would
probably not fully finance the college for every student it enrolls. And
tuition, now at $61 a credit, is as high as the law allows it to be.

As a result, the library's book acquisition budget has not increased for 10
years, even as book prices have soared. Class size has jumped to 26 from 23 over
the last two years. The college cannot offer enough courses to meet the needs of
all students.

So Janice St. Clair, who has multiple sclerosis and uses a wheelchair, has to
take a math course at the main campus, which is an hour's drive from her home,
because the Northeast regional campus, which is two minutes away, canceled the
course.

Hung Vong, who came from Vietnam six years ago, is not sure when he can take the
literature course he needs to transfer next fall to Temple University, where he
will pursue a bachelor's degree in education. Next semester the course is only
available in the morning, when he is at work.

"It's going to slow me down a little bit," said Mr. Hung with the frontier
spirit typical of many community college students.

Good and Bad In Diversity

At Lucy Aghazarian's Humanities 102 class, the 21-year-old Mr. Vong struggles in
his new English to explain a stanza from Thomas Hood's 19th-century poem "The
Song of the Shirt." A few seats away, Joseph Leone aces it. Mr. Leone, a
20-year-old honors student, had planned to go to Drexel University but could not
afford it. He enrolled at the community college three years ago. Next year he
will transfer to Temple University and pursue a double degree in pharmacy and
medicine.

"I have no regrets," he said of his decision to save money by living at home and
attending the community college, where tuition is less than half as much as at
Temple. He said he enjoyed the community school's cultural diversity, small
class size and the attention of the faculty. "I'm perfectly happy here," he
said.

The diversity of community colleges is their strength and their weakness. When
open admissions rose out of the idealism of the 1960's, poorly trained students
were welcomed; they represented pedagogical challenges just begging to be
overcome.

As the number of those students increased, and their academic preparation
plummeted, the colleges were overwhelmed. At some, more than 90 percent of
students take remedial courses and reading skills can hover around the
fifth-grade level.

This is generally attributed to a lack of preparation in high school, not a lack
of commitment by the community college faculty. Surveys show they love teaching,
do little research and do not rely on graduate assistants.

But surveys also show they often feel dispirited and sometimes they deliberately
lower their academic standards to match the skills of their students.

Under current financial conditions, the colleges have been hiring more part-time
faculty members. Now more than 65 percent of all community college faculty are
part-timers, who cannot devote as much attention to student needs as full-time
faculty. Some colleges are experimenting with televised courses or videotape
class lecture libraries to fill the need, but teachers' contracts limit the use
of such innovations.

Community colleges show other signs of stress. In California, David Mertes,
chancellor of the state system, said the colleges have had to clamp down on
registration and often are not able to offer students the courses they need.

The president of Miami-Dade Community College, Robert H. McCabe, says he would
have been in serious trouble had not voters approved the tax increase that will
establish a $100-million endowment for the college.

He said that community colleges are often misunderstood because they do so many
different things. But the surprising results of the September vote, he said,
testify to the strength of a college that is truly part of its community.

"People decided," he said, "that despite anti-tax sentiments, despite the
devastation of the hurricane, that this is an institution that believes in
giving everybody an opportunity."


LOAD-DATE: November 12, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Many community colleges are being forced to deal with fiscal
restraints affecting both the number of students who will still be able to
attend and the quality of the education. Hung Vong, a student at the Community
College of Philadelphia, may not be able to take the one class he needs to
transfer next fall to Temple University because the course is only available in
the mornings when he is at work; "I have no regrets," said Joseph Leone, a
20-year-old honors student who chose to go to the Community College of
Philadelphia to save money. (Photographs by Bill Cramer for The New York Times)
(pg. B10)

Graphs/Charts: "A College's Financial Straits" The Community College of
Philadelphia has a $58.9 million budget this year that is supposed to be
financed by equal contributions from the City of Philadelphia, the State of
Pennsylvania and students' tuition. Pie graph shows the ideal three-way split of
the total 1992-93 budget into three equal pieces of $19.6 million each; "The
Real World," however, reveals the ideal to be faulted.

The financially struggling city can pay only $12.5 million.

The state's share increased to $21.3 million (but it may come up short $3
million).

The college has been forced to dip into reserves for $800,000.

Tuition was increased to $61 a credit, the legal maximum, raising $21.3 million.

Other sources, including investments, provide $1.9 million. (pg. B10)

Graph: "The Growth Of 2-Year Colleges" tracks fall enrollment at community,
technical, and junior colleges since 1945:

1945 --  294,475

1955 --  765,551

1965 -- 1,292,753

1975 -- 4,069,279

1985 -- 4,730,235

1992 -- 6,400,000

(Source: American Association of Community Colleges) (pg. B10)



Total 1992-93 Budget: $58.9 million

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              237 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 11, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

ABOUT NEW YORK;
For Veterans at the Shelter, A Parade of Painful Memories

BYLINE: By Michael T. Kaufman

SECTION: Section B; Page 3; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 800 words


TODAY we are all supposed to remember. But at the Borden Avenue Shelter for
homeless veterans in Long Island City, they remember all the time. Sometimes
they remember things they have tried to forget, things that happened in war, and
sometimes the recollections are more recent, memories of getting high, getting
drunk, trying to get straight, trying to keep warm after the battles ended.

Some basic statistics: A third of the city's homeless men are veterans. Of
these, 400 are living at Borden Avenue, a five-year-old shelter run by the
Salvation Army in a former tie factory. Of these, 60 percent were in the Vietnam
War, 15 percent served during Korea and 5 percent in World War II. More than
four-fifths are alcoholics or drug addicts and 60 percent are H.I.V. positive.

For those who make it past the first two weeks at the shelter, the average stay
is 18 months. While living there the veterans are plugged into programs
providing medical treatment, psychological counseling, vocational training, job
placement and help in finding housing. The idea is to put lives back together.
Sometimes it works but often it does not. The recidivism rate is 40 percent. The
waiting list has 2,000 names.


Joe Anderson is there for the first time. His story is not unusual in the
context of Borden Avenue biographies. Lots of purple hearts have passed through.
Lots of ex-cons too. One resident had been dug out of the rubble in Beirut three
days after the Marine barracks there were blown up in 1983, killing 241 American
servicemen. Alfred Peck, the director, stepped on a mine when he was a platoon
leader in Vietnam. Many people at Borden Avenue saw buddies die. What makes Mr.
Anderson's story remarkable is that after 22 years he can finally tell it.

"I was 17 years old when I enlisted, 18 when I was in the jungle and 19 and a
half when I came back to Bed-Stuy," said the stocky 42-year-old veteran.
"Everybody told me I changed, that I was a different man."

He had nightmares and constant feelings of sadness and he kept away from friends
and relatives. Once soon after his discharge in 1970 he went to a Veterans
Administration hospital. "I heard this nurse say, 'Here's another one of those
crazy Vietnam veterans,' and I just left," he said.

"I thought that after a while the feelings would go away but they never did."

Unlike most of the people with whom he has been living in the shelter, Mr.
Anderson has not had problems with alcohol or drugs. Also unlike many of the
residents, he never had trouble getting or holding jobs. "I'm a good plumber and
electrician," he said. "I can fix boilers." For the last 10 years he was a
superintendent of a building in East New York.

"I was depressed all the time. The nightmares kept coming. I had no friends, but
I was living with it. Then the building was sold. I was getting $15 an hour and
the new management told me they were cutting me back to $5. The new owners were
Asian, Chinese. I started to think that I was back in the jungle, that the new
management were the same people who had been shooting at us and trying to kill
us. I started to think about making bombs to blow up the building. That's when I
came here."


During the first two weeks of evaluation he was diagnosed as suffering from
post-traumatic stress disorder. That happened eight months ago, 22 years after
the events that caused the condition. Mr. Anderson was sent to a special program
at a Veterans Administration hospital in New Jersey, where for the first time he
met others who had been feeling as he did.

"That was the most important thing," he said, "realizing that I wasn't the only
one. I could talk to people about what I had seen and what I had done and what I
felt. Fear? Hell, yes, there was fear. Fear and guilt. Fifteen months in the
jungle moving every two weeks. I saw 22 men in my unit killed. For years I would
ask myself why was I alive when they were dead. The others said they felt the
exact same thing. The counselors made us see that whatever happened back then,
we should talk about it. Whatever we did, we did to survive. It wasn't our
fault."

Now, back at Borden Avenue, Mr. Anderson is part of a post-traumatic stress
disorder group at which he and the others coax memories into speech. He is
taking courses in electrical work and will soon start looking for an apartment.
"The feelings won't go away but I'm learning to cope with them. For instance, I
know now I can't work in a job where there are too many people around and I know
I have to let go of what I kept inside so long."

Today, Joe Anderson will be marching in the Veterans Day parade for the first
time. He will be with a 150-man contingent from the Borden Avenue Shelter for
Homeless Veterans, alongside the band from West Point, and with his memories.

LOAD-DATE: November 12, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing:

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              238 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 11, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Chuck Connors, Actor, 71, Dies; Starred as Television's 'Rifleman'

BYLINE: By BRUCE LAMBERT

SECTION: Section D; Page 21; Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 502 words


Chuck Connors, a former professional basketball and baseball player who gained
stardom as an actor on the television series "The Rifleman," died yesterday at
Cedars-Sinai Medical Center in Los Angeles. He was 71 years old and lived on a
ranch in Tehachapi, Calif., north of Los Angeles.

He died of lung cancer, the hospital said.

Mr. Connors had a lackluster sports career, but his towering height of 6 feet 5
inches and his square-jawed masculinity made him a natural for rugged acting
roles. When his struggling athletic career landed him with the Los Angeles
Angels, a minor-league baseball team, he began picking up minor movie parts and
soon gave up sports.

His big break came when he played Lucas McCain, the sharpshooting good guy in
the popular "Rifleman" series, which originally ran from 1958 to 1963, in the
heyday of television westerns. The character, a homesteader and single father,
disposed of varied frontier villains with his Winchester rifle.

Mr. Connors appeared in at least 45 films and numerous television series and
specials. He was nominated for an Emmy Award for his portrayal of a slave owner
in the mini-series "Roots" and also won a Golden Globe Award in 1959.

He was politically active in Republican and conservative causes. He marched in a
parade in New York City in 1967 supporting the Vietnam War. He campaigned for
Ronald Reagan, a friend.

When President Richard M. Nixon invited several celebrities to meet Leonid
Brezhnev in 1973, Mr. Connors presented the visiting Soviet leader with United
States armaments -- two Colt .45 six-shooters -- and a cowboy hat.  Brezhnev, a
western fan, was delighted. He and the actor locked in such an enthusiastic bear
hug that Mr. Connors briefly lifted him off his feet.

West From Brooklyn

Despite his western image, Mr. Connors was born in Bay Ridge, Brooklyn. His
first name was originally Kevin. He was offered numerous sports scholarships as
a young man and played at Seton Hall. In World War II he served four years in
the Army, much of it as a tank instructor at West Point.

After the war he returned to sports, playing in the National Basketball
Association as a forward for the Boston Celtics. He went on to baseball, playing
first base in the Dodgers farm system. He had one at-bat in Ebbets Field but
haplessly hit into a double play, and he was promptly sent off to Montreal.

As an athlete, he was a bit of clown, reciting poems in the locker room and
turning cartwheels while rounding the bases on a home run. From the Dodgers, he
went to the Chicago Cubs, which sent him to its farm team in Los Angeles and his
new career.

In the 1950's he started acting with roles in "Pat and Mike," "Target Zero,"
"Hold Back the Night" and "The Big Country," among others. His later movies
included "Geronimo," "Old Yeller," "Flipper" and "Airplane II."

Mr. Connors was married and divorced three times. He is survived by four sons,
Steven, Jeffrey, Michael and Kevin, all of Los Angeles, and three grandchildren.


NAME: Chuck Connors

LOAD-DATE: November 12, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Chuck Connors in the television series "The Rifleman." (1960)

TYPE: Biography; Obituary (Obit)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              239 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 11, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

A Vietnam Veterans Day

SECTION: Section A; Page 24; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 472 words


Veterans Day is generally viewed as a time to honor Americans who have served in
all wars. But Veterans Day this year also marks a reconciliation -- between
those who fought in America's most unpopular war and those who refused to serve
because they viewed the war as unjust.

President-elect Bill Clinton did not serve in the military and worked vigorously
in the anti-Vietnam War movement. Vice President-elect Al Gore served in
Vietnam. In electing these two, the voters have ratified the idea that honorable
people stood on both sides of the debate over the war. That's an important step
toward finally getting through the traumas of that era.

The Vietnam issue figured prominently in this Presidential campaign. The most
dramatic instance came during the New Hampshire primary in February. Mr. Clinton
had just released the letter he wrote in 1969 thanking an Army officer for
"saving me from the draft" and apologizing for hiding his true feelings about
the war.

Mr. Clinton had promised the officer that he would go into the R.O.T.C. He
didn't. He later made himself available for the draft to protect his "political
viability." By then his vulnerability had diminished, and he was not drafted.

There was sophistry in this sequence. But in his letter, Mr. Clinton wrote
movingly of the conflict between his love of nation and the revulsion he felt
for "a war I opposed and despised with a depth of feeling I had reserved solely
for racism in America." The letter also passionately defended a friend who had
resisted the draft even at the peril of having to flee the country: "He is one
of the bravest, best men I know," Mr. Clinton wrote. "His country needs men like
him more than they know."

The evening after he released the letter, Mr. Clinton faced a packed audience at
the Elks Lodge in Dover, N.H. The primary was five days away. The Clinton
campaign was battered; the Vietnam letter seemed destined to bring it down.

Mr. Clinton had often seemed glib. But the Dover speech was from the gut.
Reporters registered the change and looked up from their notepads to listen. Mr.
Clinton's life's work was slipping into the rift left by Vietnam. He fought
tenaciously to pull it back, arguing that "character" had to do not so much with
service in war but with caring for citizens at home.

As he saved his candidacy, Mr. Clinton brought the nation closer to a
reconciliation on Vietnam. The voters resisted Republican attempts to make
service there a litmus test. Veterans voted 41 percent for Mr. Clinton, 38
percent for President Bush, 21 percent for Ross Perot -- not much different from
the overall result.

In effect, Americans said: Enough -- let's put the divisiveness of Vietnam
behind us. Perhaps now those who fought in the war and those who fought against
it can come together in mutual respect.


LOAD-DATE: November 12, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              240 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 12, 1992, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

On Veterans Day, Remembering Those Who Served in Vietnam

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 3; National Desk

LOAD-DATE: November 12, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Participants huddling in the rain during a ceremony at the
Vietnam Veterans Memorial in Washington. (Associated Press)

TYPE: Caption

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              241 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 12, 1992, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Moscow Says Some G.I.'s Held in Camps Are Alive

BYLINE: By STEVEN A. HOLMES,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 5; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 670 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 11


A high-ranking Russian official said today that some American P.O.W.'s interned
in the Soviet Union after World War II are still alive in Russia.

The official, Dmitri Volkogonov, said that the Americans who live in Russia are
doing so voluntarily.

Mr. Volkogonov, a historian and military adviser to President Boris N. Yeltsin
of Russia, told a Senate committee that more than 22,000 American soldiers were
liberated by the Soviets from German prisoner-of-war camps.  He said that most
were returned to the United States shortly after the war, but that 119 American
citizens with Russian, Ukranian or Jewish names were kept behind.

Of the 119, most were subsequently returned to the United States, but 18 died in
Soviet custody and some who had been forced to renounce their citizenship
remained in Soviet prison camps "for a long time," he said.

"Some of them still reside on the territory of the former Soviet Union," Mr.
Volkogonov said, reading from a letter from Mr. Yeltsin dated Nov. 5. "Their
names and addresses have been identified and communicated to the U.S. side."

Mr. Volkogonov did not say how many prisoners were still living in Russia, but
he said that they would be made available to American officials and journalists.

Senator John Kerry, a Massachusetts Democrat and chairman of the Senate Select
Committee on P.O.W.-M.I.A. Affairs, said committee staff members would contact
the Americans to ask if they would like to return to the United States.

Mr. Volkogonov, a retired general, gave what was perhaps the most complete
accounting by a ranking Russian official of American prisoners held in the
former Soviet Union. Mr. Volkogonov said that 730 American aviators, forced down
during the cold war, had been interned in Russian prison camps, then sent back
home.

The Russian official said nine American deserters were transferred to the Soviet
Union during the Vietnam War, a number of them coming through Japan, where they
were aided in their defection by a Japanese group working with the K.G.B.

But Mr. Volkogonov said his search of the Soviet archives provided no evidence
that any United States prisoners from the Vietnam or Korean Wars had been held
on Soviet soil.

In July, Mr. Volkogonov released the names of 39 American civilians who
officials said were imprisoned by the Soviet Union during World War II.

In his testimony today, Mr. Volkogonov provided seemingly contradictory
information. He spoke of six Americans who were arrested in Soviet-bloc
countries who were charged with espionage.

He said three were executed, but the names he provided -- Oggins, Clifford and
Hopkins -- were the same as those made public in September. At that time he
indicated that the three victims had been arrested before the Korean War.

Wearing a lapel pin made of American and Russian flags, Mr. Volkogonov said that
despite his search, "we have found no confirmation of the presence of other
American citizens located on the territory of the Soviet Union."
 Still, the Russian official said that he had not completed a search of all
Soviet documents and that he did not preclude the possiblility of finding "new,
interesting documents."

While Mr. Yeltsin continues to offer the full cooperation of his Government,
three staff members of the joint United States-Russian commission looking into
the matter told a Senate Committee that their search was being thwarted by
bureaucratic inertia, intimidation of Russian witnesses and the instability of
Mr. Yeltsin's Government.
 "That's part of the problem because they see this instability in the
Government," Al Graham, the committee's chief investigator, said in response to
Senator Kerry. "They see things sort of falling apart. Things were a lot easier
when I was over there in May and June. It was a lot more open. Now, people are
becoming very reticent to speak because they don't know, maybe tomorrow he's
gone, and if they speak, if they say something, they could lose their job, lose
their pension or whatever."

LOAD-DATE: November 12, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              242 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 12, 1992, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

THE TRANSITION: The President;
Bush in Florida After Mournful Evening

BYLINE: By STEPHEN LABATON,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 22; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 721 words

DATELINE: BOCA GRANDE, Fla., Nov. 11


After a cathartic evening in which he wistfully reflected on his future and paid
an unplanned midnight visit to the Vietnam Veterans Memorial, President Bush
arrived here this afternoon for five days of recreation and seclusion.

Veterans Day observances and the first Republican function since the election
combined for an emotional and mournful evening in Washington for the departing
President. He attended a Republican leadership dinner that he said he expected
would be "something like a wake," and later went to the Vietnam Veterans
Memorial for what he called an "extraordinarily moving" ceremony. In the
darkness and with his wife, Barbara, by his side, the President read aloud the
names of some of the fallen soldiers listed on the shiny black granite wall.

Leadership Passes to Dole


The dinner was intended to honor incoming and departing Republican lawmakers,
but it quickly turned into a service marking the symbolic passing of party
leadership from Mr. Bush to Senator Bob Dole of Kansas, the minority leader, who
will be the ranking Republican in Washington after Jan. 20.

In paying tribute to the President, Mr. Dole struggled several times to choke
back tears as his voice wavered. Forgotten was the brutally bitter primary
contest between the two men four years ago, and the fact that Mr. Dole, in his
later campaign advertisements, preferred the endorsement of former Senator Paul
E. Tsongas, a Democrat, over that of Mr. Bush.

"Just as I know that you've changed the world, I also know the best man didn't
win on Election Day," Mr. Dole said. "George Bush helped change the world. You
didn't just watch the Berlin Wall come down; you helped dismantle it brick by
brick."

In describing the outcome of last week's election, Mr. Bush repeatedly used
life-and-death terms and spoke of how sorry he felt about "the demise" of two
Republican incumbent senators who had been "swept up in a whirlwind," losing to
Democratic challengers in Wisconsin and California. Like a coach making a
locker-room speech after his final loss, he tried with visible awkwardness to
look past the defeat to an uncertain future.

"The idea that this party has seen its demise -- I don't believe it for one
single minute," the President told the Republicans who had assembled for dinner
at Washington's Union Station."

The President said: "Don't worry about the Bushes. We are looking ahead now. I
didn't think we would about a week ago today, but we're doing it."

Around midnight, after returning to the White House, Mr. Bush decided to visit
the Vietnam Veterans Memorial, where since Sunday veterans and their families
and friends had been commemorating the 10th anniversary of its dedication by
reading aloud the 58,183 names of that war's dead and missing.

Mr. Bush, who tried to make Mr. Clinton's account of his avoidance of the draft
the decisive campaign issue, today spoke of the "extraordinarily moving"
experience of the midnight trip.

Calls His Successor

Aboard Air Force One on his way to Florida, Mr. Bush telephoned President-elect
Clinton and, in a five-minute conversation, invited him to visit the White
House. Mr. Clinton is planning to come to Washington next week, and may visit
President Bush then.

The groundwork for that visit were laid today when the White House chief of
staff, James A. Baker 3d, met in Washington with Vernon E. Jordan, the chairman
of Mr. Clinton's transition team.

Mr. Baker said: "Vernon and I, we go back a long way. What I intend to do is
make it clear to him we want to see as smooth and efficient and effective
transition as possible. And that's the promise that President Bush has made to
President-elect Clinton."

The Bushes arrived today in Boca Grande at the waterfront home of Bayard Sharp,
a relative of Mr. Bush's friend Will Farish. The Gulf Coast town of about 400 is
on Gasparilla Island, about a one-hour drive south of Sarasota. White House
staff members said they expected the President to fish and golf during the trip,
to contemplate his future, and to unwind.

Before he arrived, Mr. Bush signed two measures into law. One is a technical
correction to the Government's debt-collection program and sets up a pilot
project for the Justice Department to hire private lawyers. The other provides
new benefits for homeless veterans.

LOAD-DATE: November 12, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: President Bush reacting to a speech during a Republican
leadership dinner honoring him as well as incoming and departing Republican
lawmakers on Tuesday night at Washington's Union Station. (Reuters)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              243 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 12, 1992, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Phone Link To Vietnam

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section D; Page 6; Column 4; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 73 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Nov. 11


The American Telephone and Telegraph Company signed an agreement today to
re-establish direct telephone links between the United States and Vietnam, A.T.&
T. said.

Hanoi accepted the deal following a Treasury Department ruling last week. It
permitted Vietnam to access its revenues from the service directly, rather than
freezing those funds as provided under the trade embargo that the United States
has maintained since 1975.

LOAD-DATE: November 12, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              244 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 12, 1992, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Home Video

BYLINE: By Peter M. Nichols

SECTION: Section C; Page 20; Column 5; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1239 words


Promoting the Famous

Video distributors seem to be able to hitch their products to just about any
occasion. This month at least eight major tie-ins are being promoted. The
occasions are four big new films about to open in theaters and the 20th
anniversary of an old political drama.

Three of the tapes are related to Spike Lee's "Malcolm X," which opens on
Wednesday. That day CBS Video will release "The Real Malcolm X: An Intimate
Portrait of the Man" ($19.98), featuring interviews with Malcolm's widow, Betty
Shabazz, and many others.

"Malcolm X: El Hajj Malik El Shabazz" (Xenon, $19.95, (800) 468-1913), is a
documentary by the newsman and producer Gil Noble. "Death of a Prophet"
(Tapeworm, $39.95, 800-367-8437), includes dramatic re-enactments of events in
Malcolm X's life by Morgan Freeman, among others.

To accompany Richard Attenborough's "Chaplin," which will open in theaters Dec.
25, CBS/Fox has re released more than a dozen Chaplin films, from "The Kid" to
"The Great Dictator." The tapes are $19.98 each.

There being little ready-made material to complement "Hoffa," the coming film by
Danny DeVito starring Jack Nicholson, MPI of Oak Forest, Ill., made a
documentary of its own. "Where's Jimmy Hoffa?" ($59.95) includes journalists'
and colleagues' reflections on the Teamsters leader, who disappeared in 1975.

Perhaps the closest tie-in of all, also from MPI, will follow "Bram Stoker's
'Dracula,' " directed by Francis Ford Coppola, which opens tomorrow. On Dec. 9
MPI will release another "Bram Stoker's 'Dracula' " ($59.98), a little-known
television film from 1972 starring Jack Palance.

The film, MPI says, was scheduled to be shown on Oct. 12, 1973, in the time slot
pre-empted by Richard Nixon to announce the nomination of Gerald Ford as Vice
President to replace Spiro Agnew. A later broadcast of the film went relatively
unnoticed.

And not to forget Mr. Nixon and the 20th anniversary of Watergate, MCA/
Universal has released "The Nixon Interviews With David Frost" (five cassettes,
$19.98 each), originally broadcast in 1977. Next week CBS Video will release
"Watergate: The Secret Story," a documentary narrated by Mike Wallace and Dan
Rather.

First of 8 Million

Ivy Classics of Charlotte, N.C., is known for an eclectic list of titles, among
them "The Moon and Sixpence," Albert Lewin's adaptation of the Somerset Maugham
story, starring George Sanders and Herbert Marshall, and "The Fighting
Sullivans," based on the true story of five brothers who went down with their
ship at Guadalcanal.

Ivy Classics' newest is Jules Dassin's "Naked City" (1948), with Barry
Fitzgerald and Howard Duff, the inspiration for the television series that began
each episode by announcing, "There are eight million stories in the naked city."
Information: (704) 333-3991.


NEW VIDEO RELEASES

Far and Away
1992. MCA/Universal. $94.99. Laser disk, $39.98. 2 hours 18 minutes. Closed
captioned. PG-13.

Ron Howard's film about two young Irish emigres (Tom Cruise and Nicole Kidman)
goes strictly by the saga handbook: big and lush for the look, sweeping if not
towering for the effect. Joseph and Shannon voyage from the almost painfully
green sod to Boston and then head west. Things shouldn't go too smoothly, of
course. Shannon, a high-spirited rich girl, loses her money. Joseph boxes to
make ends meet. But his dream is a place of their own, and on this scale the
only appropriate property-hunting, complete with racing wagons and tumbling
horses, is the Oklahoma land rush. This kicks up some dust, but by then, wrote
Caryn James in The New York Times, "the real race is toward the story's
suspenseless end."

City of Joy
1992. Columbia Tri-Star. $94.95. LD, $39.95. 2:15. CC. PG-13.

Distraught over a failed transplant operation, Dr. Max Lowe (Patrick Swayze)
wanders off to Calcutta, where his debauchery eventually lands him in a clinic
run by Joan Barthel (Pauline Collins). The starchy Joan calls her establishment
the City of Joy Self-Help Dispensary and says things like, "There are three
choices in life: to run, to speculate, to commit." Max gets in step by
performing medical and social works. Soon knife wounds heal without a trace.
Roland Joffe's film treats Calcutta like a magical place, but in this view the
city is "more like a severely depressed Disneyland" (Vincent Canby).

Encino Man
1992. Hollywood. $94.95. 1:28. CC. PG.

Defrost a Cro-Magnon man and make him a high-school prom king, and you could
have the likes of Bill and Ted, or maybe even Wayne and Garth. Dave (Sean Astin)
comes across this guy (Brendan Fraser) frozen in a glacier, and he and Stoney
(Pauly Shore of MTV fame) clean him up and take him to Encino High, where the
ice man is passed off as an Estonian exchange student. The fossil may be a
natural hip-hopper and do cave drawings on the computer, but with its
Hollywood-cookie-cutter style Les Mayfield's film is "surprisingly not buff
(cool)" (James).

K2
1992. Paramount. $91.95. LD, $34.95. 1:44. CC. R.

Patrick Meyers's 1983 Broadway play strands two mountain climbers on a ledge on
K2, the world's second highest mountain, and lets the pair test their mettle.
Franc Rodman's film of the play takes the two (Michael Biehn and Matt Craven)
and makes them members of a team that slips and slides up and down the entire
mountain. With the cinematographic possibilities of locations in Canada and
Pakistan, that approach is understandable, but it does nothing to recreate the
intensity of the original, becoming instead "an excuse for some picturesque
thrills and mystical talk about the siren sound of danger" (Canby).

FROM YEARS PAST

Perennials at the Store: Some of the Varieties
Tom Cruise and Patrick Swayze are fixtures in video stores. Here are some of
their films on tape.

 TAPS. George C. Scott is school commandant, and Timothy Hutton and Mr. Cruise
are cadets in Harold Becker's film about a student takeover of a military
academy. $59.95. Fox. 2:01. PG.

THE OUTSIDERS. Mr. Cruise and Mr. Swayze are teen-agers in Francis Ford
Coppola's film set in Oklahoma during the 60's. 1983. Warner. $19.95. Laser
disk, $29.98. 1:27. PG.

RISKY BUSINESS. A Chicago teen-ager (Mr. Cruise) sets up a home bordello. 1983.
Warner. $19.95. LD, $34.98. 1:39. R.

RED DAWN. What are those Soviet troops doing in Calumet, Colo.? Mr. Swayze helps
with the resistance. 1984. MGM/UA. $19.95. LD, $34.98. 1:54. PG-13.

THE COLOR OF MONEY. Paul Newman passes the pool hustler's torch to Mr. Cruise in
the Martin Scorsese film, which also called attention to Mary Elizabeth
Mastrantonio. 1986. Buena Vista. $19.95. LD, $44.99. 1:57. R.

TOP GUN. Jet jockeys (Mr. Cruise, Anthony Edwards, Val Kilmer) still land on
tape best-seller lists. 1986. Paramount. $14.95. LD, $29.95. 1:50. PG.

DIRTY DANCING. Mr. Swayze and Jennifer Grey meet in the Catskills. 1987. LIVE.
$14.95. LD, $39.95. 1:41. PG-13.

RAIN MAN. Mr. Cruise heads cross-country with his autistic brother (Dustin
Hoffman) in Barry Levinson's film. 1987. MGM/UA. $19.95. LD, $29.98. 2:13. R.

BORN ON THE FOURTH OF JULY. Mr. Cruise is a paraplegic Vietnam veteran in Oliver
Stone's film (with a cameo appearance by Abbie Hoffman). 1989. MCA/Universal.
$19.95. LD, $39.98. 2:25. R.

GHOST. Mr. Swayze, Demi Moore and Whoopi Goldberg star in Jerry Zucker's film,
an all-time favorite on tape. 1990. Paramount. $19.95. LD, $29.95. 2:22. PG-13.

LOAD-DATE: November 12, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: The 1948 movie "Naked City," which inspired the television
series, is available on video. It stars Barry Fitzgerald, left, and Howard Duff.
(Universal Pictures); Tom Cruise stars in a story of Irish emigres, "Far and
Away." (Phillip Caruso/Universal)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              245 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 12, 1992, Thursday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

THE TRANSITION: The President-Elect;
CLINTON TO OPEN MILITARY'S RANKS TO HOMOSEXUALS

BYLINE: By THOMAS L. FRIEDMAN,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 1088 words

DATELINE: LITTLE ROCK, Ark., Nov. 11


Addressing a specific policy decision for the first time since he was elected
President, Bill Clinton said today that he would rescind the Defense
Department's ban on homosexuals in the military after he takes office in
January.

Mr. Clinton disclosed his plans after a Veterans Day speech in the Arkansas
State House.

In the speech, Mr. Clinton, whose avoidance of the Vietnam War draft became a
central campaign issue, seemed to go out of his way to signal veterans of that
war that as Commander in Chief he would protect their interests and insure that
they are not left "out in the cold" after the cold war.

Reassuring Doubters

Mr. Clinton also used his first major address as President-elect to try to
reassure members of the armed services that he would be as tough with national
security affairs as any of the Republicans who had questioned his mettle in the
campaign.

Mr. Clinton vowed that his Administration would not establish normal relations
with Vietnam as long as that nation was suspected of withholding information
about missing American servicemen.

He said that his Veterans Affairs secretary would seek to improve the veterans
health-care system, and that he would support initiatives to give military men
and women cut from the armed forces for budgetary reasons a chance to earn their
20-year pensions by working for local police departments, as teachers or in
other public-service jobs.

Mr. Clinton also used his address to sketch the outlines of his defense policy,
saying he intended to restructure the armed forces to put an even greater
emphasis than the Bush Administration on smaller, more mobile, high-tech forces.


A Talk With Bush

To make it much easier for military contractors to move back and forth between
civilian and military manufacturing, he said he would adjust Government
regulations and spending plans.

Even after the speech Mr. Clinton seemed bent on tempering his hotly debated
stand on the issue of homosexuals in the military by promising to consider the
views of the uniformed services.

Mr. Clinton spoke on a day in which he had a telephone conversation with
President Bush, who called him from Air Force One. The two men agreed that Mr.
Clinton would go to Washington next week for a visit of two or three days. Mr.
Clinton also invited the Democratic leaders of Congress to Little Rock for a
meeting on Sunday.

Advisers to Mr. Clinton said today that two more transition aides would be named
this week. One is likely to be Samuel R. Berger, a 46-year-old former deputy
director of the State Department policy planning staff in the Carter
Administration. He would advise the President-elect on appointments of national
security aides.

Mr. Berger, a Harvard-educated lawyer who is a partner in the Washington law
firm of Hogan & Hartsen, has known Mr. Clinton since they worked together in the
1972 Presidential campaign of George McGovern.

Robert B. Reich, 45, a professor at Harvard's John F. Kennedy School of
Government, was said to be the leading candidate to head the transition team's
search for economic officials. He is a proponent of a national industrial policy
that would use Government subsidies and tax regulations to support industries in
areas where the United States faced strong foreign competition, an idea that has
been central to Mr. Clinton's economic proposals.

View on Homosexuals

After the speech, reporters asked Mr. Clinton whether he intended to keep his
campaign promise to lift the 48-year-old ban on homosexuals in the uniformed
services. "Yes, I want to," he answered. "My position is that we need everybody
in America that has got a contribution to make, that's willing to obey the law
and work hard and play by the rules." He said sexual orientation alone should
not, "in the absence of some destructive behavior, disqualify people."

The current regulations prohibit homosexuals from serving in the uniformed
services. This ban, however, does not apply to civilian Defense Department
employees. It can be lifted by an executive order of the President.

Any lifting of the ban could make the campaign debate over Mr. Clinton's draft
status seem minor. The idea is already opposed by the current chairman of the
Joint Chiefs of Staff, Gen. Colin L. Powell, as well as by most other senior
Pentagon officers.

Regarding the question of relations with Vietnam, a sensitive issue among
veterans' groups, Mr. Clinton declared, "There will be no normalization of
relations with any nation that is at all suspected of withholding any
information" on missing Americans.

President Bush's position has been that the United States and Vietnam were close
to normalization, in light of the recent declaration by Hanoi that it would open
up its archives for American experts to search for information about missing
servicemen.

Mr. Clinton said he, too, was encouraged by this move, and he seemed to share
Mr. Bush's general view that if the Vietnamese are as open as they say they will
be, he, too, would proceed with normalization. His remarks today seemed intended
in part to prod Hanoi to continue cooperating.

Speaking more broadly about his plans for the military, Mr. Clinton said, "It
will be my responsibility to do two things at once which may sometimes seem
inconsistent."

He said the first of those would be "to continue the build-down of our military
forces, consistent with the end of the cold war." The second would be to insure
that while reducing the size of the military, his Administration nevertheless
maintained "the strongest and most appropriate defense forces to meet the
missions of this nation at the end of the cold war."

To that end, Mr. Clinton said he intended to put a high priority on training,
technological development of weapons systems, "both offensive and defensive" and
to adjust the forces to make the military more available for rapid deployment to
regional trouble spots instead of being massed along the old East-West divide in
Europe.

Governor Clinton wants to shrink the military to 1.4 million from 1.8 million
men and women, a cut of 200,000 more than Mr. Bush proposes. He also wants to
reduce the full-scale "Star Wars" missile defense program and focus on a
cheaper, land-based anti-missile shield and to have Government become much more
involved in converting military industries to civilian use.

"We must rededicate ourselves as a nation to being far more serious than we have
been in the last five years with the whole business of conversion," Mr. Clinton
said.

LOAD-DATE: November 12, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: November 13, 1992, Friday

CORRECTION:

An article yesterday about President-elect Bill Clinton's statements on the
military misidentified the law firm in which a Clinton adviser, Samuel R.
Berger, is a partner. It is Hogan & Hartson, in Washington.


GRAPHIC: Photo: President-elect Bill Clinton, listening to a speaker during a
Veterans Day ceremony yesterday at the State Capitol in Little Rock, Ark.
(Stephen Crowley/The New York Times) (pg. A22)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              246 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 13, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Gay Sailor, Blazing Path for Others, Returns to Base After Court Order

BYLINE: By JANE GROSS,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 12; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 983 words

DATELINE: MOUNTAIN VIEW, Calif., Nov. 11


Keith Meinhold returned to work here this morning at the Moffett Field Naval Air
Station, reinstated by a court order and determined to be a pathfinder for
uncounted thousands of military personnel who are secretly gay.

"I don't know if I see myself as a hero," said Mr. Meinhold, a 30-year-old petty
officer discharged by the Navy in August after he declared his homosexuality on
national television. "But it's important to me to do this right. I will be a
test case, if you will, and hopefully I won't make any mistakes that will
jeopardize my position or the position of other gays and lesbians."

Although Mr. Meinhold was back as a result of a temporary ruling, the Federal
judge in the case has made it clear that he believes the ban on homosexuals in
the armed forces is unconstitutional. The Navy hopes to convince him otherwise
at a hearing Monday on reconsidering his injunction. The official tasks of Mr.
Meinhold's first day back were relatively simple.

A Watching Nation

With Capt. Greg Markwell, his commanding officer, presiding, Mr. Meinhold was
sworn in. He reopened his pay records, filled out medical and dental forms and
put back on the uniform that he had not worn for three months. Then he returned
to Hangar 1, home of Patrol Squadron 31, where until his forced discharge he had
taught young aviators how to operate the sonar equipment on submarine-hunting
P-3 Orions.

But the simplest of tasks echoed with meaning for Mr. Meinhold, who knows the
nation will watch closely how he comports himself and how he is received at
Moffett and consider this a preview of what will happen if President-elect Bill
Clinton signs an executive order permitting avowed homosexuals in the military,
as he has promised.

One of the first to challenge the military's longstanding ban, James W. Woodward
of San Diego, predicted difficult times but ultimate success Mr. Meinhold. "I
envy him that he gets to be on the cutting edge of the winning wave," said Mr.
Woodward, now a public health administrator, who was discharged from the Navy
for homosexuality and whose case the Supreme Court refused to hear two years
ago.

In an interview today, Mr. Meinhold was hopeful that his re-entry would be
smooth, and he pointed to the recent past as indication that it might be.

Support and Slaps

Many of his colleagues knew he was gay before his television appearance and
shielded him. Several officers testified on his behalf at the Naval discharge
board. Another officer apologized for any inadvertent prejudice and said he had
changed his opinion about homosexuals as a result of knowing Mr. Meinhold.

The slaps that did come, Mr. Meinhold said, were mostly from Navy brass, like
the Moffett officials who barred him from visiting his friends on base after his
discharge. Similarly, on Monday, after the Federal judge in Los Angeles ordered
his reinstatement, Mr. Meinhold was turned back at the gates by officials who
said they did not have the authority to let him in without a directive from the
Pentagon. That came a day later, after a second, angry order from the judge.

When Mr. Meinhold arrived at the main gate on Monday, he was met by an icy stare
from one base official, who avoided shaking his hand. Today his formal reception
was somewhat more polite. Mr. Meinhold said he had received a call from a base
official saying that everyone had been instructed to show him no disrespect.

Reporters Are Barred

John Shackleton, a Navy spokesman, declined to discuss these instructions. He
made a terse statement to the press, explaining that Mr. Meinhold "will be
reinstated to his former job, at his former squadron and to his former duties."
Then Mr. Shackleton declined to answer any questions and refused to allow
reporters on the base.

One aviation electronics technician who used to fly with Mr. Meinhold and who
spoke on condition of anonymity predicted that "the people he works with will be
receptive" and noted admiringly that "he turned out to be a real strong-willed
individual."

By the end of the day, the technician seemed prescient. Leaving the base, Mr.
Meinhold said people had at best welcomed him and at worst kept their distance.

In recent days, as the judge and the Navy jockeyed over his fate, Mr. Meinhold
withstood the harsh whirl of celebrity with grace and humor. At dawn today, on
the verge of what was sure to be a trying day, he invited a handful of reporters
and photographers to his Palo Alto home and cheerfully answered questions while
preparing breakfast.

His nervousness was betrayed only when he took four bites of toast and then
pushed the plate away with a telltale gesture toward his upset stomach. Alone in
his yellow convertible during the drive to Moffett Field, his face was stiff
with anticipation.

Mr. Meinhold, a high school dropout from Stuart, Fla., enlisted at 17 rather
than repeat the 11th grade, and blossomed in the Navy. He did not recognize his
homosexuality until after he joined the military, he said, and then found
friendship in the gay community in San Francisco.

Mr. Meinhold said he had always been surrounded by other gay men in the Navy,
including, unbeknownst to him at the time, the apprentice who was the first
person he confided to about his sexual identity. But since becoming a public
figure, he has learned of many more, who have called him for advice. Now, when
he flips through his old Naval yearbook, he said, "you can go right through the
book -- 1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9, gay."

He had a similar impression last weekend when he visited the Vietnam War
memorial in Sacramento, the state capital, where thousands of names are engraved
in stone. "I could feel the rough part of the names under me," he said. "I
thought to myself, somebody under my hand is gay. I felt very emotional, like I
was bonded. I also thought I had to continue what I was doing because they
died."

NAME: Keith Meinhold

LOAD-DATE: December 10, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Keith Meinhold displaying his uniform yesterday as he reported
for duty at the Moffett Field Naval Air Station in Mountain View, Calif., after
being reinstated by court order earlier this week. (George Olson for The New
York Times)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              247 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 15, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

BEST SELLERS: November 15, 1992

SECTION: Section 7; Page 34; Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1390 words



          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Fiction

 1      1   4   THE TALE OF THE BODY THIEF, by Anne Rice. (Knopf, $24.) To
                prove he is still a hero among the living dead, Lestat embarks
                on a dangerous enterprise; "The Vampire Chronicles," continued.

 2      2   5   THE STARS SHINE DOWN, by Sidney Sheldon. (Morrow, $23.) The
                fortunes of a successful businesswoman are suddenly imperiled
                by secrets from her past and present relationships. (LP)

 3      4   3   MOSTLY HARMLESS, by Douglas Adams. (Harmony, $20.) In the fifth
                volume of the "Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy" series, a
                survivor tries to cope with new predicaments.

 4      3   3   DRIVING FORCE, by Dick Francis. (Putnam, $21.95.) An
                ex-jockey's horse-transport business is besieged by a series of
                mysterious deaths.

 5      5   5   SABINE'S NOTEBOOK, by Nick Bantock. (Chronicle Books, $17.95.)
                Continuing the epistolary romance between two talented people
                begun in "Griffin & Sabine."

 6      9  11   GRIFFIN & SABINE, by Nick Bantock. (Chronicle Books, $17.95.)
                The romance of an artist and a secret admirer, told through
                cards and letters.

 7     14   2   MEXICO, by James A. Michener. (Random House, $25.) While
                researching the lives of his ancestors, an American journalist
                learns about the history of the land south of the border. (LP)

 8      8  36   THE PELICAN BRIEF, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $22.50.) A
                woman law student probes the murder of two Supreme Court
                justices.

 9     11  12   WHERE IS JOE MERCHANT? by Jimmy Buffett. (Harcourt Brace
                Jovanovich, $19.95.) A couple on a wild chase through the
                Caribbean on the trail of a deceased rock star who has been
                sighted there.

10      7   5   THE SHADOW RISING, by Robert Jordan. (Tor/ Doherty, $24.95.)
                Book Four of "The Wheel of Time," a fantasy saga.

11     12  14   THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner,
                $14.95.) A photographer and a lonely farmer's wife in Iowa.

12     10   9   THE SECRET HISTORY, by Donna Tartt. (Knopf, $23.) Close friends
                at a small college must deal with the consequences of a crime
                they committed.

13      6  25   WAITING TO EXHALE, by Terry McMillan. (Viking, $22.) The
                friendships and romances of four black women in Phoenix.

14     13  18   GERALD'S GAME, by Stephen King. (Viking, $23.50.) Twenty-eight
                hours of horror suffered by a woman handcuffed to a bedpost.

15     16   5   LEAVING COLD SASSY, by Olive Ann Burns. (Ticknor & Fields,
                $21.) The story of a marriage that survives many strains; a
                sequel to the 1984 novel "Cold Sassy Tree."



          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Nonfiction



 1      1   2   SEX, by Madonna. (Warner, $49.95.) Erotic photographs of the
                pop star by Steven Meisel, and her reflections on them.

 2      2   9   THE WAY THINGS OUGHT TO BE, by Rush H. Limbaugh 3d. (Pocket,
                $22.) Anecdotes and opinions offered by the talk show host.

 3      3   6   IT DOESN'T TAKE A HERO, by H. Norman Schwarzkopf with Peter
                Petre. (Linda Grey/ Bantam, $25.) The autobiography of the
                general who commanded the allied forces in the gulf war.

 4      4   4   I CAN'T BELIEVE I SAID THAT! by Kathie Lee Gifford with Jim
                Jerome. (Pocket, $22.) The autobiography of the co-host of the
                television show "Live With Regis and Kathie Lee."

 5      5  25   THE SILENT PASSAGE, by Gail Sheehy. (Random House, $16.) The
                psychological and social significance of menopause for today's
                women.

 6      6  11   EVERY LIVING THING, by James Herriot. (St. Martin's, $22.95.)
                Continuing the memoirs of the Yorkshire veterinarian.

 7      9   3   BANKRUPTCY 1995, by Harry E. Figgie Jr. with Gerald J. Swanson.
                (Little, Brown, $19.95.) The authors predict the collapse of
                America under Government debt and suggest ways to cope with it.

 8      7  23   EARTH IN THE BALANCE, by Al Gore. (Houghton Mifflin, $22.95.)
                The Vice President-elect discusses the environment and what
                must be done to save the earth.

 9      8   8   THE TE OF PIGLET, by Benjamin Hoff. (Dutton, $16.) Aspects of
                Taoist philosophy explained through the actions of an A. A.
                Milne character.

10     10  14   WOMEN WHO RUN WITH THE WOLVES, by Clarissa Pinkola Estes.
                (Ballantine, $20.) A Jungian analyst reinterprets myths and
                folk tales to enable women to understand their psyches.

11     11  22   TRUMAN, by David McCullough. (Simon & Schuster, $30.) A
                biography of the 33d President.

12     13   2   GENIUS, by James Gleick. (Pantheon, $27.50.) The life and
                achievements of Richard Feynman, the Nobel Prize-winning
                physicist.

13     14  11   YOUNG MEN & FIRE, by Norman Maclean. (University of Chicago,
                $19.95.) An account of a disastrous fire in a Montana forest in
                1949.

14     15   3   THE CHANGE, by Germaine Greer. (Knopf, $24.) An extensive
                survey of the physical, psychological and social effects of
                menopause.

15          5   THE CREATORS, by Daniel J. Boorstin. (Random House, $30.) Three
                thousand years in the history of religion, philosophy,
                literature and the arts, told through the lives of those who
                made it.



          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous

 1      1  18   HARVEY PENICK'S LITTLE RED BOOK, by Harvey Penick with Bud
                Shrake. (Simon & Schuster, $19.) Anecdotes and tips about
                playing golf, by a legendary teacher.

 2      2   7   ARE YOU THE ONE FOR ME? by Barbara De Angelis. (Delacorte,
                $21.) How to choose and keep the right partner in love and
                marriage.

 3          1   YOUR MONEY OR YOUR LIFE, by Joe Dominguez and Vicki Robin.
                (Viking, $20.) Ways to adapt your financial situation to a more
                frugal, satisfying style of living.

 4      4  37   A RETURN TO LOVE, by Marianne Williamson. (HarperCollins, $25.)
                Inspirational advice about ways to replace feelings of fear
                with feelings of love in daily life.

 5      3   7   THE AMERICAN HERITAGE DICTIONARY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE.
                (Houghton Mifflin, $39.95.) The third edition.


These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,050
bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 28,000 other
retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets. The figures are
statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United
States.

*An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect
the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of
the book above.

LP indicates that a book is available in large print.


And Bear in Mind

(Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)

WE WERE SOLDIERS ONCE . . . AND YOUNG. Ia Drang: The Battle That Changed the War
in Vietnam, by Harold G. Moore and Joseph L. Galloway. (Random House, $25.) A
general and a journalist, both of whom were there, narrate and analyze this
agonizing 1965 encounter as a prototype for the developing war.

THE AMERICAN WAY OF BIRTH, by Jessica Mitford. (William Abrahams/Dutton, $23.)
The supercharged social critic of "The American Way of Death" takes no prisoners
(especially not men) on her march through the other end of life in this country.

BLACK DOGS, by Ian McEwan. (Nan A. Talese/Doubleday, $19.50.) A short, shocking
novel that explores what happens between a husband who thinks a rational society
can solve its problems and a wife who believes, through revelation, that evil is
alive and busy.

CITY OF LIGHT, by Michael Doane. (Knopf, $22.) Mr. Doane's ambitious, topical
novel takes the international political thriller into a whole new landscape --
the innards of a computer network.

A DUBIOUS LEGACY, by Mary Wesley. (Viking, $21.) This generous British
country-house novel, which concerns love and friendship and how to live, shows
again how smart one can become by paying attention for a long time (the author
is 80 now).

THE FIRST DISSIDENT: The Book of Job in Today's Politics, by William Safire.
(Random House, $23.) With clarity and verve, Mr. Safire renders Job as the
matchless investigator of innocent suffering and the prototype of resistance to
authoritarian rule.

THE CALL OF THE TOAD, by Gunter Grass. (Helen and Kurt Wolff/Harcourt Brace
Jovanovich, $19.95.) Mr. Grass returns to his own Danzig/Gdansk for this novel
whose endearing exemplary couple (he German, she Polish, both widowed) keep on
keeping on.


LOAD-DATE: November 15, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              248 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 15, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

To The Mat;
Now Clinton Decides Which Promises Came First

BYLINE: By THOMAS L. FRIEDMAN

SECTION: Section 4; Page 1; Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1663 words

DATELINE: LITTLE ROCK, Ark.


WHEN President Franklin D. Roosevelt was addressing a rally at Madison Square
Garden during his re-election campaign of 1936, someone up in the rafters held
up a sign that read: "We love him for the enemies he has made."

Indeed, Presidents are defined as much by the promises they keep as by the
enemies they are willing to make by breaking or postponing campaign vows. The
intriguing question about Bill Clinton is: now that he is President-elect, which
of his campaign promises will he push and which will he push aside?

One thing is clear. Mr. Clinton simply cannot ram through Congress in the first
100 days, or even in the first year, anything more than a fraction of his
campaign pledges. But this is not only because he would choke the Congressional
committees. More important, it is because the consensus at the center of the
political spectrum -- which he will need to get his most important programs,
health care and economic renewal, through Congress -- almost certainly would not
hold if he tried to take too many controversial steps at once.

It is an axiom of American politics that Presidents govern at the center -- by
nudging it in one direction or another. The fun in the coming year will be
watching Mr. Clinton juggle in the center ring -- juggling Democratic supporters
who will be alienated by the special interest promises he fails to keep and
juggling Republican and Perot conservatives who will be outraged by the special
interest promises on which he delivers, while all the time trying to hold
together a center coalition for what really counts: healing the economy and
reforming health care.

President John F. Kennedy promised during the 1960 campaign that he would "end
discrimination with the stroke of a pen on his first day in office," recalled
the Presidential historian Michael R. Beschloss. But when Mr. Kennedy got into
office, not only did he not fulfill his civil rights pledge, he appointed a slew
of conservative judges opposed to civil rights in order to hold the support of
conservative southern Democrats in Congress for other issues he held more dear.
Instead of acting on civil rights in January 1961, he waited until June 1963 to
submit a civil rights bill.

What happened in the interim?

"People sent him a lot of pens," Mr. Beschloss said.

It is hard to know what Mr. Clinton will get in the mail, but the White House
post office better be prepared, because something is going to have to give.

Consider just last week. Mr. Clinton declared on Veterans Day that once in
office he would move to lift the 48-year-old ban on gay men and lesbians in the
military. Just that act alone, a relatively small item in his overall agenda,
would involve the most radical change to the social fabric of the American
military since President Harry S. Truman ordered the army integrated in 1948.

Colin Powell's Against It

The Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Gen. Colin L. Powell, has already
declared that lifting the ban would be "prejudicial to good order and
discipline."

Now, imagine that on top of fulfilling just that one campaign promise, Mr.
Clinton also fulfills his promise to adopt a more aggressive posture toward
humanitarian relief for Bosnia, even if it requires American military
intervention as part of a United Nations operation. The Pentagon, under General
Powell, has vigorously opposed such intervention. Will President Clinton, who
will come into office with his own baggage of having avoided the Vietnam War
draft, want to overrule the military on two highly controversial issues in his
first few weeks or months in office?

For interest's sake, add one more promise that Mr. Clinton has made -- that he
will move quickly to make it easier for Haitian refugees to gain political
asylum in the United States. That could stimulate a flood of Haitian refugees to
already overburdened Florida, setting off all sorts of fireworks.

Just those three initiatives could get a Clinton Presidency tied up in knots
before it even takes up the explosive questions that will probably be involved
in economic restructuring -- gasoline taxes, deficit reduction, entitlement
trimming, free trade, middle-class taxes and the like. Taking on those issues
will aggravate many in Mr. Clinton's Democratic constituency.

Mr. Clinton, of course, is no fool and he did not get where he is without being
able to juggle. His actions during this first week since the election provide a
lot of clues as to the techniques he will employ.

One is that he may announce his intentions to take certain steps on social
policy -- like lifting the ban on homosexuals in the military or the ban on
abortion counseling at Federally funded clinics -- without necessarily doing it
right away, but instead by convening a commission to study the matter first and
make recommendations on how to proceed. As Governor, Mr. Clinton was a master at
using study groups to buy himself time for difficult political decisions, and to
give him political cover when the decision was made.

On Wednesday, Mr. Clinton told reporters flat out that he intended to lift the
ban on homosexuals in the military. But at his news conference on Thursday he
soft-pedaled his commitment and stressed instead the careful manner in which he
would approach this delicate issue, saying: "What I plan to do is to put
together a group of people and let them advise me on how we might best do this."


The Balm of Rhetoric

Another of Mr. Clinton's techniques will be to use the balm of rhetoric. He
clearly has an innate ability to explain things in terms that the average person
can understand, speaking in sentences and paragraphs -- in contrast with the
fractured prose of George Bush, whom it was virtually impossible to quote in a
coherent sentence without the aide of ellipses and parentheses to patch his
thoughts together.

Mr. Clinton's abilities in this regard were most apparent in his carefully
crafted answer on why he supported homosexuals in the military. First he cited a
study by President Bush's Defense Secretary, Dick Cheney, noting that
homosexuals who have served in the military did so with distinction. Then he
observed that the Army needs every man or woman ready to serve -- who can argue
with that? -- and closed by saying that it is behavior on the job, not sexual
preference, that should determine eligibility.

This was a series of rapid fire arguments, seamlessly woven together, that might
have given even the most homophobic American something to think about. In an era
of scarcity of both resources and tolerance, having a President who can heal
with his words and not just his wallet could be a great asset. But even Mr.
Clinton's masseur's touch with the English language, which recalls Lyndon
Johnson's ability to soothe angry constituencies, is something he will also have
to balance. Quite simply, sometimes he can seem too smooth, too eloquent for his
own good. Sometimes you want to check your wallet when he's done talking -- just
to make sure all your credit cards are still there. He is obviously aware of
this tendency, and seems to be feeling for the right balance in his voice.

Finally, it appears that Mr. Clinton will look to pay off different groups in
different currencies. The trick, said Norman Ornstein, an expert on the
Presidency at the American Enterprise Institute, "is finding ways to placate
constituencies without giving up resources you cannot afford or political
capital you don't want to expend."

For instance, he will probably engender a lot of good will from traditional
Democratic constituencies early on through executive orders lifting the gag rule
on abortion counseling and, as a payoff to labor, imposing restrictions on
union-busting.

"If Clinton is clever, he can find a few things that have great symbolic weight
for certain interest groups," said Mr. Ornstein. "If dispensed judiciously, they
will not fracture the center."

Another interesting act to watch will be Mr. Clinton taking on his own party by
putting in place what he vows will be the highest ethical standards imposed by
any Administration on its staff. On Friday, his transition team announced
guidelines restricting post-inauguration lobbying by transition officials or
their involvement in transition affairs from which they might benefit.

The Clamor for Jobs

The delicate balance here will be between the clamor for jobs, especially from
those tied to the Democratic party Washington establishment -- the Clinton
transition chairman, Vernon Jordan, is as Establishment as you can get -- and
the very real public demand to break the hold of the three-martini lobbyists on
Congress. On the one hand, Mr. Clinton clearly seems committed to being an agent
of change, but on the other he wants to tap into the networks of power and
influence, from the think tanks to the top law firms and investment banks. It
was precisely his link to that network in years past that kept him, the Governor
of a small backwater state, from being marginalized. In formulating and, more
importantly, in applying his ethics rules, he will have to confront those two
sides of his own politics.

"People will say that fixing the economy or fighting drugs is what's really
important and ethics can be taken for granted," said Dennis F. Thompson, who
runs an ethics study program at Harvard. "But I say that ethics is the most
important issue. Nothing will do more to restore lost confidence in government
than higher than normal ethics standards and nothing will paralyze an
Administration more quickly than an ethics scandal."

Strict ethics guidelines, added Mr. Thompson, are not some liberal indulgence,
but rather "a precondition for getting on with the business of addressing the
major public policy issues."

That is certainly how Mr. Clinton has approached ethics in theory, where he has
made a sharp departure from the past. But practice will be the real test. This
is one area where he cannot afford to play the juggler.

LOAD-DATE: November 15, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              249 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 15, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THE NATION;
Russians Move Mountain of Files

BYLINE: By SERGE SCHMEMANN

SECTION: Section 4; Page 5; Column 2; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 403 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW


RUSSIA'S efforts to track down all the Americans who became caught up in the
Soviet Union's terror machine have been an admirable act of compassion and
contrition. What is equally remarkable is that Dimitry Volkogonov, the Russian
military historian charged with working with the Americans, has been able to
find them at all.

Even now, with some access to official archives and few constraints on free
discussion, nobody can say even within several million souls how many people may
have perished in the purges, camps, famines and executions, nor how many
perished in World War II. Only in the period from Nov. 1, 1935, to June 22,
1941, do records show that 19,840,000 were arrested and 7 million were shot.

And even if records were kept, the sheer volume is staggering. The archives that
Mr. Volkogonov's team has scoured amount to millions upon millions of files
scattered across various repositories in Moscow.

Yet in all this, Mr. Volkogonov, a former general, has been able to find
evidence that 119 American citizens with Russian, Ukrainian and Jewish names
were detained after the war. They were among the more than 22,000 soldiers the
Soviets liberated from German prison-of-war camps. Most were returned to the
United States, but 18 died in custody. Some, forced to renounce their
citizenship, were imprisoned and are now living voluntarily in Russia.

Savagery Documented

The record may never be complete, and there are certain to be Americans who will
not accept Russia's assurances that no prisoners of the Korean or Vietnam
conflicts were imprisoned in the Soviet Union.

But the fact that so many have been identified is a testimony both to the
paranoia of the Communist system and to the compulsion of all totalitarian
regimes to document their own savagery, as if a bureaucratic file somehow
legitimizes the outrage. In Soviet eyes, people who had been abroad, whether
foreigners or their own, were considered especially dangerous, and their files
were maintained with special care.

The vaults of the K.G.B. have long issued a steady stream of names,
rehabilitation certificates and death warrants to families and victims. Former
inmates who become classified as "falsely repressed" receive modest cash
payments and special benefits. Families that receive a formal death notice --
many with the cause of death marked "shot" -- can at least lift the terrible
anguish of not knowing.

LOAD-DATE: November 15, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Gen. Dmitri Volkogonov, a military historian, who told a Senate
committee last week that some American P.O.W.'s still live in Russia. (Reuters)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              250 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 15, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section 1; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 874 words



International 3-17

MOOD OF HIGH NOON IN MOSCOW

With two weeks left before a crucial session of the full Russian legislature,
Moscow has been plunged into a swirl of feverish maneuvering, brutal power
struggles and dark rumors of impending upheaval.  1

STUDYING RELICS OF A WAR

In a museum of the People's Army of Vietnam, U.S. investigators are trying to
end what for many American families is the continuing torment of the Vietnam
War.  1

LIBERIA WAR MAY SPREAD

The civil war in Liberia threatens to engulf other nations as troops from
neighboring West African countries fight rebel forces there.  1

2 ATOM REACTORS CAST ADRIFT

The breakup of the Soviet Union created orphans of two nuclear reactors of the
type that blew up in 1986 in Chernobyl, and the uncertainty of their fate is
creating anxiety.  3

JEWS FLEE SARAJEVO

More than 200 people escaped from Sarajevo in an evacuation effort by Bosnian
capital's Jewish population.  10

The police in London seized a truck carrying a ton of explosives.  6

The acquittal of six youths accused of rape stirred outrage in Israel.  8

Turkey, Iran and Syria condemned plans for a Kurdish state in Iraq.  9

Germans demonstrated in Bonn to protest rightist violence.  11

Panamanians vote in a constitutional referendum today.  16

The Mozambique war is creating many refugees.  13

A tribe's village in India is supported by a bordello.  14

National 18-40

IN THE ASHES OF THE RIOTS

Half a year after the worst urban riots in the history of 20th-century America,
Los Angeles seems to be a city coming apart rather than coming together.  1

VARIED ACCOUNTS IN SEARCH CASE

A top State Department official denied approving a search of Bill Clinton's
passport files and said he alerted Secretary of State Eagleburger to the search
only a day after it had begun.  1

NEW PRESIDENT, OLD ORDER

News analysis: Bill Clinton campaigned and won as the candidate of a new
Democratic Party. The trouble is that the old one is alive and waiting for him
when he arrives in Washington in January.  34

Clinton's biggest financial backers are set to call in their chits.  34

From long-frustrated Democrats, pent-up advice for Clinton.  36

Recipe for the inaugural: dignity but down-home.  36

Many civil servants are worried about their fate under Clinton.  26

Friends and relatives say Bush has been depressed.  36

CLINTON AND GAY AMERICA

News analysis: The President-elect's commitment to reversing the military's ban
on homosexuals has demonstrated how especially difficult it will be for him to
take steps in support of gay rights.  22

A largely gay church failed to gain ties with the National Council.  22

Colorado's anti-gay-rights measure was challenged in court.  20

A QUIET BUT RADICAL CHANGE

With far less fanfare than referendums elsewhere received, Colorado's voters
approved a measure that overturned the power of state and local governments to
increase taxes. Any rise in taxes now requires voter approval.  18

SLOW PLANE-SECURITY PROGRESS

Nearly four years after the bombing of a Pan Am jetliner over Scotland started a
search for better ways to find hidden bombs, the widespread use of advanced
detectors is still years away.  18

LITTLE GAIN FOR THE ABORTION PILL

Despite the President-elect's willingness to encourage its marketing, there is
little prospect that the French abortion pill will be available in the United
States soon.  38

Metro 41-59

UNRAVELING OF AN AFFAIR

The affair between Sol Wachtler and Joy A. Silverman is a story of a tandem rise
in the world of power and of two intertwined lives that were changed irrevocably
not by the end of the relationship, but by Mr. Wachtler's inability to accept
it.  1

Wachtler's role at issue in dispute over a will.  48

SURGE IN FORECLOSURES

The number of homes in foreclosure in New York, New Jersey and Connecticut has
almost doubled since the middle of last year, reflecting the region's job
losses, falling real-estate values and a growing backlog of cases that have
clogged the courts.  41

BROTHER WORKS TO AVENGE DEATH

As political and religious leaders clash over the jury's verdict in the stabbing
death of Yankel Rosenbaum in Crown Heights, Brooklyn, his older brother has
become a highly visible player in the city's racially charged debate.  41

TROOPER'S FALL SHAKES POLICE

A special prosecutor is looking into dozens of closed cases to find out if a
former New York state trooper, who admitted faking evidence in four crimes, used
his forensic skills to frame other defendants.  41

Who to blame for corruption of school custodians?  43

Quietly, an accord is sought on teaching about homosexuals.  43

Brownsville produces its second heavyweight champion.  43

Brooklyn lead-reduction effort draws criticism.  42

Deputy mayor thaws relations between business and the city.  44

Killings in Rochester bring up fearful memories.  52

Westchester budget proposed without tax increase.  52

Obituaries 58

Richard Smart; owner of big cattle ranch in Hawaii.

LOAD-DATE: November 15, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              251 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 15, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Difficult First Step

BYLINE: By JEFFREY SCHMALZ

SECTION: Section 1; Page 22; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1196 words


Since the moment Bill Clinton won election, gay groups have been pressing the
President-elect to move quickly on his campaign pledge to improve gay rights.
But little did they know just how quickly he would move. In his first specific
policy decision, Mr. Clinton focused on a gay issue, affirming his commitment to
reverse the ban on homosexuals in the military.

His decision, which touched off a cry of protest from military leaders, presents
the first clash between his campaign promises and the reality of running
Government. It also shows how especially difficult steps on gay rights will be
for the President-elect, who supported gay rights as the Democratic candidate
and who received wide support, both financially and in votes, from gay
Americans. The gay vote, some poll takers said, accounted for at least 4 percent
of the ballots cast nationwide, making it equal to the Jewish vote.

Mr. Clinton has said little in the last few days about his decision on the
military, but in an interview on gay issues on Aug. 20 as he was being attacked
at the Republican National Convention for his support of gay rights, he chatted
at length about his reasons for wanting the ban reversed.

Citing Costs of Discharges

"In the aftermath of the Gulf war," Mr. Clinton said, "was a study saying there
was no real evidence that homosexual status, per se, disabled people from
distinguished service in the military. And Dick Cheney, the Defense Secretary,
who I think basically has done a good job, in a remarkable burst of candor said,
'It's just a quaint little rule, but we're not going to change it.' "

Mr. Clinton, who seemed knowledgeable about the issue, rattling off dates and
statistics, then went on to cite the cost of discharging homosexuals from the
military -- "$500 million in the decade of the 80's to discharge 16,800, more or
less, gay people from the service."

"The difficulty, it seems to me," he said, "is to get people to focus on what I
believe the real issue is, to say that we don't have a person to waste."

But Mr. Clinton, who said he had been consulting on the issue with Senator Sam
Nunn, the Georgia Democrat who is the chairman of the Armed Services Committee,
did hint at some reservations.

'Not a Totally Simple Issue'

"By the way, it's not as simple a question as it seems," he said, "because the
sexes are segregated in the services to guarantee a certain level of privacy, a
certain level of security against sexual overtures, a certain level of cohesion,
you know. So it's not a simple issue. But what I think the rule ought to be is
in the absence of some inappropriate behavior, if someone has been in the
service and they're serving well, that alone should not be grounds for
dismissal.

"I want to be very clear about this, because it is not a totally simple issue.
There would have to be something besides the simple statement of status. But I
think everybody understands that any kind of inappropriate behavior would be
grounds for dismissal."

Mr. Clinton said he would take political heat for his stand. "I knew that when I
decided to deal with this," he said, adding that he would win over the public.

Many gay-rights leaders can only smile at what they see as the President-elect's
naivete. While it is true that Mr. Clinton is an advocate of gay rights, he has
generally tried to avoid confronting the issue head on, instead usually
incorporating it into broad statements about civil rights for all Americans.

Concern About Perceptions

In a campaign appearance in Oregon, he criticized a referendum, which was later
voted down, that would have restricted gay rights and called homosexuality
"perverse." But he did so only when he was asked about it. Mr. Clinton talks
passionately and often about AIDS. But gay-rights groups are not sure he
understands that the public's attitude toward AIDS, which often invokes strong
strains of compassion -- is altogether different from that toward gay rights.

About 80 percent of Americans say they believe homosexuals should have equal
rights to job opportunities, The New York Times/CBS News Poll conducted after
the Republican National Convention in August found. But that number begins to
fall when people are asked about specific job categories. Fifty-seven percent
percent support the idea of homosexuals in the military. Only 38 percent think
homosexuality is an acceptable alternative life style.

"I think the Clinton Administration," said David Mixner, a gay friend of the
President-elect, "is just beginning to get an idea of what I live every day, of
the depth of anger and discrimination that we face."

In some ways it is remarkable that it is the military issue that Mr. Clinton is
tackling first. It has become a central gay-rights issue only in the last five
years or so.

Nation's Largest Employer

The Defense Department's regulation requiring the dismissal of gay men and
lesbians was officially promulgated in 1949. In the McCarthy years, efforts to
oust homosexuals heated up. "Perverts Called Government Peril," read a headline
in The New York Times on April 19, 1950.

But when the gay-rights movement began in the late 1960's, there was little
interest in the military, in part because gay-rights leaders tended to be
opponents of the Vietnam War. That began to change in the mid-1980's as
gay-rights leaders realized that the military was the nation's largest employer
and its policy a bad symbol. The change accelerated as lesbians became more
active in the gay-rights movement.

Lee Michaelson, a former Air Force chaplain who works with the Lambda Legal
Defense Fund on gay military issues, calculates that lesbians are especially
hard hit by the military policy. Of all discharges from the Marine Corps, for
example, a women is seven times more likely than a man to have been removed for
homosexuality.

Now that they have settled on it as a main issue, gay groups, like Lambda, have
become adept at picking the test cases, choosing only those who are telegenic
and have near-perfect records. Mr. Clinton, in the interview, seemed especially
moved by one such case. He talked of Margarethe Cammermeyer, a National Guard
colonel who won the Bronze Star in Vietnam and was dismissed this year after
disclosing her sexual orientation. "She came to my town meeting in Seattle," he
said proudly, adding: "A very impressive woman."

For now, the Clinton camp and the gay camp seem to be a little wary of each
other. Expectations are high. Gay groups worry that by naming a panel to study
the issue of homosexuals in the military, Mr. Clinton may be looking for a way
to water down his campaign pledge. They worry that no one openly homosexual was
named to his transition team.

The Clinton camp, meanwhile, finds itself with what may become a growing
problem. There is no one leader of the gay-rights movement, meaning that there
is no central figure for the Clinton people to deal with. Little Rock has
received drafts of an executive order on the military from half a dozen gay
groups and individuals, all of whom seem to think they were asked to draft the
final order. In fact, the Clinton people say, none of them were.

LOAD-DATE: November 15, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Margarethe Cammermeyer, left, a National Guard colonel who won
the Bronze Star in Vietnam, was dismissed this year after she disclosed that she
is a lesbian. (Associated Press) Defense Secretary Dick Cheney, right, was
quoted by President-elect Bill Clinton as saying that the rule against
homosexuals was "just a quaint little rule, but we're not going to change it."
(The New York Times)

TYPE: News Analysis

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              252 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 15, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

U.S. Team in Hanoi Studies Relics of the Missing

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHENON,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1; Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1713 words

DATELINE: HANOI, Vietnam, Nov. 14


Up a musty stairwell in a museum commemorating the triumphs of the People's Army
of Vietnam, a team of American investigators sit hunched over laptop computers
and a camera tripod, trying to end what for many American families is the
continuing torment of the Vietnam War.

Every half hour or so, a group of Vietnamese museum workers slowly make their
way up the steps, lugging another assortment of relics collected from the enemy,
the United States, in that long-ago war.

The relics examined by the Pentagon investigators one morning this week included
an American-issue military parachute, a pocket flare gun, an airman's helmet
with the wearer's name on it, a blue-felt Air Force captain's cap, a plastic
flap from the fuel tank of an American military jet, a single pink cotton
handkerchief and a pair of red-and-white socks -- all of it hidden away for
years in unlit storerooms in the Museum of the People's Army, the national war
museum in Hanoi.

2,265 Still Missing

This, the American investigators say, is what they have been waiting for.

If they are correct, these bits and pieces of metal, rubber and cloth -- along
with thousands of black-and-white photographs stored elsewhere in the museum --
will allow the United States to determine the fate of many of the 2,265
Americans who are still officially listed as unaccounted for from the Vietnam
War.

It was only last month, after an American researcher alerted the Pentagon to the
treasure trove in the museum, that the Hanoi Government agreed to allow a
Defense Department team to come in to study the full collection.

Breakthrough Is Seen

The commander of the American investigators now working in Vietnam, Lieut. Col.
Jack Donovan, described Vietnam's new open-access decree as a breakthrough.

"I've heard this described as the central biggest development since 1973 in
terms of accounting for missing Americans," he said. It was in 1973 that United
States ground forces pulled out of Vietnam.

Until last week, Americans investigators had only guessed at what might be found
in the war museum, three blocks from Ho Chi Minh's mausolem in the heart of the
Vietnamese capital. Only a small fraction of the articles were actually on
public display in the museum, which draws a steady stream of visitors. Now they
know it contains personal items and military gear taken from scores, and perhaps
hundreds, of American soldiers, pilots and sailors who were captured or killed
in North Vietnamese territory.

"My gut feeling is that our work is going to be very valuable," said James
Minihan, a 26-year-old Navy petty officer from Jacksonville, N.C., who spends
his days at the museum tapping away on the keyboard of a laptop computer,
cataloging the relics as they are placed on the floor on a white sheet of paper
and photographed. "The Vietnamese have kept very complete records on this
material."

Vietnam is eager for normal diplomatic relations with the United States and is
desperate for Washington to lift the economic embargo it has imposed since the
end of the war. Since 1988, it has allowed Pentagon investigators into the
country to search for the remains of Americans missing from the war. The Defense
Department opened an office in Hanoi last year.

No Single Depository

There is no single repository in Vietnam for wartime army records and artifacts
gathered from American soldiers. Instead, records and relics are scattered
throughout the country in dozens of war museums and archives, some built by
individual provinces and cities to commemorate their local contribution to the
war against the Americans and, earlier, against the French.

The Americans, who until last month had been granted access to only a few
museums and archives in Vietnam, are now discovering how meticulous the
Vietnamese record-keeping was.

In the Army Museum in Hanoi, the well-preserved relics range from military
penknives and wristwatches to bicycle-sized chunks of jagged metal from the
wings of B-52 bombers shot down over North Vietnamese territory. Virtually all
of the items inspected so far have been carefully tagged to show where and when
they were found.

The artifacts may help the Pentagon determine exactly where individual soldiers
died and how, or where American planes went down and whether their pilots
survived. That in turn will help American search teams decide which areas of the
Vietnamese countryside should be combed for human remains.

'Pieces of the Puzzle'

"The end result of work does not take place here in Hanoi," said Chief Warrant
Officer Gary Fulton of West Des Moines, another of the investigators working at
the museum. "We're getting pieces of the puzzle that will take us back out into
the field."

As he spoke, a Vietnamese museum worker carefully laid an American aviator's
helmet on the paper-covered floor so it could be photographed from several
different angles.

"That could be valuable," said Chief Fulton, motioning to a small, worn name tag
that had been affixed to the outside of the helmet, apparently by the airmen who
had once worn it. Mr. Fulton showed the helmet to a reporter on condition that
the name not be used.

Some of the relics inspected by the investigators will be of no use in
determining the fate of missing Americans.  They were taken from prisoners of
war who were freed by the Vietnamese years ago, or they are so innocuous that it
will be impossible to link them to any one person.

"We were given a brown leather wallet -- empty, no identification, no pictures
inside," said Petty Officer Eric Frandsen, 28, of Lansing, Mich., the team's
photographer. "I photographed it. I don't know how valuable something like that
would be."

Many Bear Identification

But many other artifacts turned over so far by the Vietnamese do bear a name, a
serial number or some other notation that could help American investigators tie
them to a missing soldier or pilot, or to a particular battle, crash or ambush.

The Pentagon team has inspected American-issue military parachutes and life
vests in recent days that, while they have no name tags, are stamped with a
series of inspection dates, which should make it possible to determine with some
accuracy when the survival equipment was used by a serviceman.

The names and other details can be checked against information stored in the
laptop computers carried by the American investigators. The computers hold a
detailed electronic dossier on each of the 2,265 Americans -- 2,262 men, 3 women
-- who remain missing in Vietnam, Laos and Cambodia. Of these the vast majority
are assumed to have been killed in combat, and are listed as missing because
circumstantial evidence of death has yet to be backed up with physical proof.

The Pentagon investigators are still in the very early stages of their work, and
they are reluctant to guess how long the inspections in Hanoi and elsewhere in
the country will take.

Wary of Raising Hopes

They are even more reluctant to estimate how many of the 2,265 cases of missing
Americans might be solved by their work. They say their optimism, which is
palpable here, might raise false hopes among the families of the missing,

"This work is going to help us answer questions concerning the fate of a number
of missing Americans," said Robert J. Destatte, a Defense Intelligence Agency
analyst whose career has been dedicated since 1979 to the search for missing
Americans. "I'm confident we're moving in the right direction. But it's going to
be a long process."

Some of his colleagues say the search for missing Americans is likely to
continue for years.

The Vietnamese Government has already provided the Bush Administration with the
thousands of photographs of dead Americans taken by Vietnamese military
photographers during the war and stored in the People's Army Museum.

Librarian Was the Key

The exact sequence of events that led Hanoi to turn over the photographs and to
announce last month that it would grant the Pentagon full access to the war
archives remains a mystery, although it is one clearly linked to the unusual
relationship between the Vietnamese Government and an American researcher, Ted
Schweitzer, who was given access to photographic archives at the Army Museum
earlier this year.

According to the Vietnamese, Mr. Schweitzer, a 50-year-old librarian, was
allowed to rummage through the museum's collection after he told museum
directors that he was writing a book about the war. Vietnamese officials say
they were later surprised and irritated when he turned over the results of his
research to the Pentagon.

During a search of the archives, Mr. Schweitzer found thousands of photos of
American servicemen who had been captured or killed by the Vietnamese. Last
summer, after telling associates that he had failed to interest New York
publishers in a book, Mr. Schweitzer turned the photographs over to the Defense
Department.

Mr. Schweitzer is now back in Hanoi, this time as a Pentagon consultant. But the
other American investigators here say they rarely see him and know almost
nothing about him. He did not respond to repeated requests for an interview.

Hiding Material Denied

Mr. Schweitzer's disclosure of the photos raised new questions about whether
Hanoi has been hiding information that might have resolved the fate of missing
Americans years ago.

Le Van Bang, director of American affairs at the Vietnamese Foreign Ministry,
said that material in the museums had always been available to the United
States, but that Pentagon investigators had chosen to conduct their
investigation on a case-by-case basis -- requesting information about a specific
soldiers instead of requesting access to everything in the museum archives. "We
were not hiding anything," he said.

But Pentagon investigators working in Vietnam say the recent disclosures prove
that they have been misled for years by the Vietnamese. They add, however, that
the new Vietnamese pledge of cooperation is so important that there is nothing
to be gained by attacking the Vietnamese publicly.

"If there was a misunderstanding with the Vietnamese, it is not so important now
as the fact that we have an agreement that pleases everybody," Mr. Destatte
said. "Certainly it pleases everybody on our side."

LOAD-DATE: November 15, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: An American investigator, Eric Frandsen, photographing a pair
of boots in Hanoi, Vietnam, that belonged to an American pilot. (Reuters) (pg.
1); Pentagon investigators have finally been allowed to investigate the relics
of American soldiers that have been hidden away for years in storerooms in the
Museum of the People's Army, the national war museum in Hanoi. James Minihan, a
Navy petty officer, catalogued the objects. (Hoang Dinh Nam for The New York
Times) (pg. 14)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              253 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 16, 1992, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Flow of Vietnamese to Hong Kong Seems Over, to Hong Kong's Relief

BYLINE: By NICHOLAS D. KRISTOF,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1602 words

DATELINE: HONG KONG, Nov. 11


After 17 years in which more than 1.5 million Vietnamese fled their homeland,
the exodus appears to have ended, and refugee experts say they believe that the
long catastrophe of the "boat people" is finally winding to a close.

The exodus was one of the tragedies of the latter part of this century. Tens of
thousands of Vietnamese were drowned at sea or killed by pirates while trying to
escape, and nearby countries sometimes tried to deter the boat people from
landing by firing on them as they approached the shore or by towing their
rickety boats back out to sea.

12 This Year, 20,000 Last Year

Even for those who landed safely in places like Hong Kong, there has been no
quick deliverance. About 48,000 Vietnamese are still living in bleak camps in
this British territory, with some having waited for a decade to be resettled in
the West.

Recent statistics suggest that the huge migration may finally have ended. Only
nine Vietnamese arrived in Hong Kong in the first nine months of this year, and
only three since then, compared to more than 20,000 in the similar period last
year.

New arrivals have also slowed to a trickle elsewhere in Southeast Asia. In the
first eight months of this year, only 18 Vietnamese landed in Indonesia, 9 in
Thailand, 1 in Malaysia and none in Singapore, Macao or the Philippines.

"Everything points to the fact that this is a problem that is passing into the
pages of history," said Brian J. Bresnihan, refugee coordinator for the Hong
Kong government. "The decline in the exodus is one of the most important
elements of this, and the other is the increased willingness of people in the
camps to return to Vietnam."

No one entirely rules out the possibility of a resumption in the exodus; a lull
in the early 1980's was followed by another surge of migrants chasing rumors of
relaxed resettlement policies. But most experts believe that a resumption is
quite unlikely, in part because the returning Vietnamese are now carrying with
them the message that flight is a dead end.

Just a year or two ago, the problem of the boat people was regularly modified by
the adjective "insoluble." Last year, 21,900 Vietnamese arrivals were reported
by Southeast Asian countries, on top of 32,100 in 1990 and 70,000 in 1989.

Until recently, the number of Vietnamese born in the camps in Hong Kong exceeded
the number returning to Vietnam. Some young children have no memories of
anything but life behind the barbed-wire fences, locked in a world that is
virtually a prison -- except that it is run by gangs more than by guards.

"There is a repressive regime of unimaginable ghastliness inside these
concentration camps here," said Michael T. Darwyne, a Hong Kong lawyer and
advocate for the Vietnamese. "Hong Kong has persecuted the asylum seekers -- to
a degree less than they are persecuted in Vietnam, but it has persecuted them
nonetheless.

"We are imposing on them a psychological torture and physical deprivation of
unparalleled proportions. Under the stress of that, they are moving back away
from the countries where they have sought asylum, and particularly from Hong
Kong. In that sense, what Hong Kong perceives as its problem is being solved."

Mostly Off Limits

Hong Kong officials acknowledge that the camps are grim but note that there are
Vietnamese-language schools and other facilities, and they say conditions are
not as bad as critics like Mr. Darwyne suggest. One reason why conditions are
difficult to gauge is that journalists are allowed in the camps only
occasionally, on supervised tours arranged by the authorities.

Only a tiny proportion of the boat people are deemed to be political refugees
eligible for resettlement in the West. The rest are locked up in the camps and
told that their only way out is to return to Vietnam. In the past, most stuck it
out, hoping against hope that the United States would change its policies and
take them in.

Since autumn 1991, however, the number agreeing to return to Vietnam has picked
up sharply, to an average of about 1,000 a month. A record 1,400 are expected to
return this month. While Hong Kong has as many Vietnamese as all other countries
in the region combined, the numbers are also going down in Indonesia, Malaysia
and other countries.

'Realities' Are Tough

The exodus of the boat people began with a specific event, the collapse of South
Vietnam in 1975. Its apparent end is the result of a complex web of factors that
help to explain why the Vietnamese are no longer fleeing their homeland and
those abroad are beginning to go back.

While the phrase "boat people" is often used as shorthand for the Vietnamese,
some arrive by other means. In recent years, many were "bus people" who traveled
by land through China before taking a boat for the final hop to Hong Kong.

The Vietnamese Government initially encouraged the flight, seeing it as an
opportunity to confiscate the wealth of the emigrants and to rid the country of
its ethnic Chinese minority. Now Hanoi, eager to improve ties with the West,
seems to want to curb the outflow and take back those who fled.

Foreign lands are much less alluring than they used to be: Vietnamese have
learned, through the tragedy of lost and wasted lives of their friends and
relatives, that other countries will not offer them a better life.

"The message is getting through about what the realities are," said Robert Van
Leeuwen, chief of the Hong Kong mission of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees.

Home Has Some Attractions

Another factor is the improvement in living standards in Vietnam as the economy
opens up. Special videos have been shown in the camps in Hong Kong, emphasizing
the new opportunities if the Vietnamese return home.

It also helps that the European Community has paid for projects that offer
returning boat people vocational training or small loans to start businesses.
The United States said in September that it would contribute up to $2 million
for similar programs.

While the horrors of piracy and drowning are now fading, new tragedies are
unfolding in the lives of people like 26-year-old Cam Jia Ninh, who has been
living in a camp in Hong Kong for more than five years. Mr. Cam married another
Vietnamese, Pham Thi Thuy; they have a six-month-old son.

The Family No One Wants

Now the family is about to be split up, perhaps forever. Hong Kong will send
Pham Thi Thuy and her son back to Vietnam and her husband to China. Vietnam
expelled Mr. Cam, an ethnic Chinese, to China in 1978 and will not take him
back; China refuses to take Ms. Pham; Hong Kong refuses to allow them to stay.

Mr. Bresnihan, the refugee coordinator, said that while this kind of separation
is a terrible thing, allowing such couples to settle in Hong Kong would lead to
a flood of similar marriages.

The Hong Kong government interviews all the Vietnamese arrivals to screen out
those whom it regards as genuine political refugees, and they are resettled in
the West. But human rights groups such as Asia Watch have criticized the
screening procedures.

"The real question is whether screening is adequate, whether Hong Kong is
identifying those at risk," said Dinah PoKempner, a researcher at Asia Watch.

There has been no proven case of a boat person being persecuted after returning
to Vietnam, but it is not clear that the West would find out if it had happened
only occasionally.

Almost all of the returning Vietnamese are described as volunteers, but the spur
in many cases is the forced repatriation program that Hong Kong instituted in
May. Some of the 38 Vietnamese on the first flight had to be dragged onto the
plane, and Hong Kong was widely criticized for the action. But the threat of
being forcibly repatriated has encouraged people to "volunteer."

Sympathy in Hong Kong for the boat people seems to be extremely limited, in part
because illegal immigrants from China are forced back all the time -- about 60 a
day. Many Hong Kong Chinese see no reason why the Vietnamese should be treated
differently.

People in Hong Kong say the territory, a speck of land crowded with 5.8 million
people, has already done more than its due. Many officials and ordinary citizens
are indignant that Americans should complain about the repatriations when the
United States forces migrants back to Mexico daily and has been shipping
refugees back to Haiti, where they appear to face greater risks than those
returned to Vietnam.

Even though the exodus from Vietnam appears to have ended, it will take several
years for the camps to be emptied. More than 18,000 are still waiting to be
screened to determine if they are political refugees or simply economic
migrants, who will be sent back. The screening will not be completed until 1994.


Camps Here, Camps There

Other countries in the region have not begun the kind of forced repatriation
program that Hong Kong has initiated, and perhaps as a result it could take them
longer to clear their camps. Outside Hong Kong, Indonesia has the most
Vietnamese, with 15,000, followed by Malaysia, with nearly 11,000.

In the meantime, conditions in the camps remain grim. Just a few weeks ago, in a
dispute about money, several Vietnamese chased another man into a Red Cross
clinic and stabbed him to death in front of horrified nurses.

Ms. PoKempner said that she had just returned from a trip to refugee camps in
Bosnia and that conditions there were much better than at the camps in Hong
Kong: "Morale was better and food was better, and there wasn't the despair and
complete social breakdown you have at the camps in Hong Kong."


LOAD-DATE: November 16, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Although the exodus of Vietnamese fleeing their homeland seems
to have ended, about 48,000 are still held in camps in Hong Kong; some have
waited for a decade to be resettled in the West. Vietnamese children played at
the Whitehead detention center in early September. (Agence France-Presse) (pg.
A8)

Graph/Map: "Fleeing Vietnam"

Through August, 37 Vietnamese refugees had arrived in Southeast Asia countries
since the beginning of the year. As of last Tuesday, 12 had arrived in Hong
Kong. Graph tracks annual arrivals of Vietnamese refugees in Southeast Asian
countries and Hong Kong since 1979. (Source: Hong Kong Government) (pg. A8)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              254 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 16, 1992, Monday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 886 words



International    A3-9

VIETNAMESE EXODUS APPEARS OVER

After 17 years in which more than 1.5 million people fled Vietnam, the exodus
appears to have ended, and refugee experts say they believe that the catastrophe
of the "boat people" is winding to a close.  A1

Vietnamese find more reasons to remain in their homeland.  A8


CLAN WARFARE IN SOMALIA

Clan warfare in Somalia, in which automatic weapons have replaced spears, has
killed one-third of the country's livestock and has helped shatter a pastoral
existence that had changed little for centuries.  A1

About 3,000 Somali refugees aboard a freighter wait for aid at sea.  A6

BLOCKING A NEO-NAZI MARCH

The German authorities, intending to show that they are serious about
confronting rightist violence, sent 1,500 police officers to a village to
prevent a march by neo-Nazis.  A3

U.S. OPENS MASH UNIT IN CROATIA

The U.S. Army opened a 60-bed mobile hospital in Zagreb to provide emergency
care for the 20,000 U.N. troops in war-torn regions of Croatia and Bosnia and
Herzegovina.  A5

ISRAEL STEPS BACK FROM WAR

Israeli forces eased tensions at the Lebanese border by withdrawing some
artillery batteries, troops and ammunition trucks, lessening the likelihood of a
showdown with Iranian-backed Islamic guerrillas.  A3

BRITON DENIES COVER-UP ON IRAQ

Britain's Prime Minister denied that he had taken part in any cover-up of the
decision to sell sensitive machinery and technology to Baghdad in the late
1980's.  A7

PANAMA REFORMS APPEAR DEAD

Opponents of constitutional reform in Panama cited early returns as proof that
voters were rejecting a referendum on a range of changes, including proposal
that would prohibit an army.  A9

Nankan Journal: Japan's last surviving lute priest.  A4

A coup attempt's aftermath in Peru has brought skepticism.  A9

National    A10-15

SEEKING A FAST START

President-elect Bill Clinton sat down to dinner with three Democratic
Congressional leaders to begin planning his agenda.  A1

THE NEW FIRST LADY

The pressures on Hillary Clinton to behave like the career woman she is are
bound to collide with the traditionalists' views of her place.  A1

'SAVINGS' THAT AREN'T

About 20 states have offered early retirement to their workers on the theory
that it is a more humane money saver than layoffs. Many of those states are
finding that early retirement costs more.  A1

The President-elect's transition team was in transition itself.  A14

GRATIFIED BUT WORRIED

Gay men and women in uniform are pleased that President-elect Bill Clinton wants
to lift the ban on homosexuals in the military, but they fear trouble.  A10

OLD AND OLDER STILL

There is reason to believe that the numbers of the very oldest, those over 85,
will greatly increase. Biologists are coming to believe that there is no cut-off
of life expectancy.  A1

HOW HIGH AN AUTHORIZATION?

The State Department official dismissed for her role in the search of Bill
Clinton's passport file said she was told the request had come from a White
House official.  A1

RHODE ISLAND ROULETTE?

Politicians want to turn to gambling to raise state revenues, but many voters
don't like the idea.  A13

Boeing is recalling the bolts that hold the 747 jet engines to wings.  A10

A Vietnamese has been elected to a California city council.  A11

National guardsmen pack up after hurricane duty in Florida.  A15

After a killing, a Boston neighborhood turns to outside help.  A11

Metro Digest    B1

Arts/Entertainment C11-16

The fate of the Federal Council on the Arts.  C11

Art and science disagree on a building's fate.  C11

"Dracula" is a hit in its first weekend.  C16

Theater: "Joined at the Head." C16

Music: Philip Glass's "Low" Symphony.  C11

Gilberto Gil at Town Hall.  C11

Al Jarreau's joy.  C12

A Britten cello rarity.  C13

Beethoven's "Emperor." C14

Dance: In Review.  C14

Word and Image:

"Dolores Claiborne," by Stephen King.  C15

A look at Elizabeth II.  C16

Business Digest    D1

Editorials/Op-Ed    A16-17

Editorials

A health insurance horror.
Iran resurgent.
The uncommon cold.
In Washington: What before who

Letters

Anthony Lewis: Cold war wreckage.

William Safire: Rogue white elephant.

Jon Katz: Dial-a-President.

Nancy Lubin: Central Asia's drug bazaar.

Daniel Patrick Moynihan: A landmark for families.

Sports    C1-10

Auto Racing: Petty goes out with a bang.  C3

Basketball: Knicks get going-away present.  C2

Nets beat Bullets.  C2

Boxing: Bowe will be busy.  C3

Column: Anderson on Giants C7

Football: Jets beat Bengals.  C1

Giants fall to Broncos.  C1

Houston upsets Minnesota.  C8

49ers edge Saints.  C4

Chiefs wallop Redskins.  C5

Rams upset Cowboys.  C6

Eagles fall to Packers.  C7

Brister leads Pittsburg over Detroit.  C8

Hockey: Rangers search for a remedy.  C2

Soccer: St. John's eliminated from tournament.  C3

Sports People C9

Tennis: Capriati reroutes her career.  C1

Obituaries    B8

LOAD-DATE: November 16, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              255 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 16, 1992, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Cuban Airliner Carrying 20 Crashes on Caribbean Flight

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 8; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 152 words

DATELINE: SANTO DOMINGO, Dominican Republic, Nov. 15


A Cuban airliner carrying 14 passengers and a crew of 6 crashed into a wooded
peak near the northern resort city of Puerto Plata today, the authorities said.
Crews evacuating bodies reported no survivors.

The Aero Caribe plane, en route from Santo Domingo to Havana, crashed shortly
before a stopover in Puerto Plata, 105 miles northwest of Santo Domingo, airport
authorities said.

Civil Defense and Red Cross teams working into the night recovered two bodies
and were searching for more, according to Puerto Plata Radio.

                             --------------------

HANOI, Vietnam, Nov. 16 (Reuters) -- A Vietnam Airlines airliner with 30 people
aboard, including nine foreigners, crashed in a typhoon Saturday after taking
off from Ho Chi Minh City, the airline said today.

Search teams were still trying to find the crash site today, and there was no
news of any survivors, a spokesman said.

LOAD-DATE: November 16, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              256 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 16, 1992, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Home Is a Bit Less Humble, So Fewer Leave

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHENON,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 8; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 523 words

DATELINE: HANOI, Vietnam, Nov. 15


Vietnamese officials and foreign diplomats stationed in Hanoi agree that the
exodus of illegal emigrants is slowing because of changes in the Vietnamese
economy, a growing awareness that there is no opportunity for them to resettle
in other countries and the end of financial incentives to leave from the United
Nations.

Few here doubt that the Vietnamese who braved the seas in unsafe boats in the
mid-1970's were fleeing mostly from a fear of political persecution in a newly
reunified nation.

But in recent years, Vietnamese officials and diplomats say, the chief
motivation was financial -- a long-stagnant economy that left millions
unemployed and underfed.

That is changing. Although Vietnam is still controlled by a rigidly
authoritarian Government, since 1986 its leaders have championed free-market
economic reforms, and the economy is now expanding at an annual rate of about 4
percent. It is expected to boom if the United States lifts its economic embargo.

"For Vietnamese this is incredible growth," said a Vietnamese official. "I do
not say our Government is perfect, but our human rights situation is obviously
better than in China or Burma. Surely this is the moment that Vietnamese men and
women should stay in Vietnam. I think many people realize if they leave now,
they will miss the boom."

The Government has tried to discourage illegal emigration by publicizing the
squalid conditions that await Vietnamese who travel to Hong Kong and the virtual
impossibility that the United States or any other nation will accept them as
refugees.

The slowing of the exodus can be credited in part to international efforts to
help Vietnamese emigrate legally, especially the program run by the United
States.

Although Washington does not have diplomatic relations with Hanoi, State
Department employees frequently visit to interview candidates for emigration.

So many Vietnamese enter the program that a chartered United States jumbo jet
regularly visits Ho Chi Minh City, the southern capital once known as Saigon, to
pick up families heading for the United States.

Last year, the United Nations ended a growing stream of so-called doublebackers,
purely economic migrants who had fled Vietnam at least once before. Large
numbers traveled to Hong Kong not by risky boat but safely, by bus, through
southern China.

End of an Incentive

The doublebackers left Vietnam a second or third time not because they had any
hope of being resettled in a third country, but to take advantage of a
repatriation package offered by the United Nations to Vietnamese who agreed to
return home: about $400 per person, nearly double the annual per-capita income
in Vietnam.

In September 1991 the United Nations, seeing the program was being abused, said
it would not longer pay the repatriation fee to doublebackers.

"Without that financial incentive, the doublebackers stopped leaving," said a
Western diplomat. "Simple as that. The word went out among the general
population that the United Nations and the world community couldn't help them
anymore. People began to realize that it was probably smarter to stay home."

LOAD-DATE: November 16, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              257 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 16, 1992, Monday, Late Edition - Final

A Vietnamese-American Becomes a Political First

BYLINE: By SETH MYDANS,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 11; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 990 words

DATELINE: WESTMINSTER, Calif., Nov. 14


His motto was "Tax Fighter, Crime Fighter," he had the endorsements of the
police, the Mayor and local mobile-home owners, and his campaign posters were a
bold red, white and blue.

It would be hard to be more all-American than Tony Lam, described by national
officials as the first Vietnamese refugee to win elective office in the United
States.

A restaurant owner and community leader in the Vietnamese enclave here known as
Little Saigon, Mr. Lam, a short, energetic man of 56 years, topped a field of
six this month to win a seat on the Westminster City Council.

"I feel I am opening up the door to my children, paving the way," Mr. Lam said
in an interview in his campaign office above a bustling, modern Vietnamese
supermarket. "I will always be grateful. I consider this country has been our
sheltering tree, and we have to pay back what has been given to us."

But Mr. Lam, who has been in this country for 17 years and is now an American
citizen as well as a member of the Republican Party, insists on describing
himself as "just like any other normal candidate."

As with Asian-American politicians in most places, demographics gave him little
choice. Few communities in the United States include Asian constituencies large
enough to support candidacies in the way that Hispanic or black communities
often do.

Even here in Westminster, 30 miles south of Los Angeles, with one of the
nation's largest concentrations of Vietnamese immigrants, Mr. Lam was elected
primarily by non-Vietnamese voters. His winning total was about 6,500 votes in a
city where only 2,000 Vietnamese-Americans are registered to vote. About
one-fifth of the 80,000 residents of Westminster are Vietnamese.

Mr. Lam said he looked forward to building bridges between his Vietnamese
constituents and the community at large, to seeking more bilingual police
officers and more business for the impressive Vietnamese shopping malls here.

But, he says, he knows that his success on the City Council will depend on his
ability to serve the needs of his main electoral constituency: non-Vietnamese
voters.

Since the fall of Saigon in April 1975, the Vietnamese population of the United
States has grown to about 700,000, nearly half of whom live in California.

The number of these who are American citizens and the number who are registered
to vote has been growing, and this year Mr. Lam was one of the first three local
Vietnamese refugees to run for political office.

One of these, Jimmy Tong Nguyen, was among Mr. Lam's opponents for the
Westminster City Council seat. The other, Henry Le, was defeated in a race for a
City Council seat in neighboring Santa Ana, where the population is 60 percent
Hispanic.

Randy Arndt, an official at the National League of Cities in Washington, said
Mr. Lam was the first Vietnamese refugee to win elective office in the United
States, according to information from Asian-American groups.

Yen Do, editor of Nguoi Viet Daily News, the nation's largest
Vietnamese-language newspaper, also said Mr. Lam was the first
Vietnamese-American officeholder. He said a half dozen local Vietnamese were
already looking ahead to running for office in 1994.

'A Turning Point'

While most Vietnamese immigrants have become Republicans, Mr. Yen said this
year's elections signaled the emergence of a strong Democratic wing, known as
Viet Democrats. He said a considerable portion of this more liberal vote came
from a growing class of educated, professional young Vietnamese-Americans.

Since the Vietnamese arrived here as refugees from a repressive Communist
Government, they here have been natural constituents for the Republican Party,
Mr. Yen said. But grass-roots organizing by the Democrats has made inroads,
employing the message of change and economic improvement made by Bill Clinton in
this year's Presidential election.

"Paralysis of Republicans in the mainstream led to paralysis among ethnic
Republicans," Mr. Yen said.

As an active, can-do, American-style pragmatist, Mr. Lam is not cut from the
traditional cloth of intellectual Vietnamese politicians, Mr. Yen said.

Indeed, Mr. Lam was reared in northern Vietnam with what he described as
American values, fending for himself from an early age as a cowherd and singer
and heeding his father's advice to work hard and not be selfish.

Fleeing south when Vietnam was partitioned in 1954, Mr. Lam said he worked his
way up in business, forming construction and food-processing concerns and
becoming a multimillionaire by Vietnamese standards.

Quickly Climbing Ladder

Using his connections, he was able to take his wife and six children from South
Vietnam on the eve of the fall of Saigon, but he lost virtually all his assets
in the Communist takeover.

But Mr. Lam began building a new life from the day of his flight. He spent his
first three months in Guam, helping to run a camp for his fellow refugees and,
among other things, teaching youngsters to play baseball.

After reaching the United States, he said he worked for just 10 days as a
service station attendant and then began another climb up the economic ladder,
as a supervisor for a shipping company, insurance salesman, immigration
consultant and advertising executive.

Today he owns three popular Vietnamese restaurants, where he is known for
serving his customers personally.

Among the many refugee stories in America, Mr. Lam stands out as a man who has
adapted and thrived. But like his fellow refugees, he is nevertheless a victim
of history, and he carries a spark of anger with him over the United States'
failure to fight on in Vietnam.

"I feel that we were led down the primrose path 17 years ago," he said as he sat
in his office, surrounded by American flags. "I lost my assets and everything.

"But I never feel bitter. I learned to have a thick skin. And now I've got to
have the courage to stand up like a man again. We've been beaten down so many
times."


NAME: Tony Lam

LOAD-DATE: November 16, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: "I consider this country has been our sheltering tree, and we
have to pay back what has been given to us," said Tony Lam, who is described as
the first Vietnamese refugee to win elective office in the United States. He was
recently elected to the Westminster, Calif., City Council. (Gary Moss for The
New York Times)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              258 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 16, 1992, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Guard Troops Ending Post-Storm Work in Florida

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 15; Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 321 words

DATELINE: HOMESTEAD, Fla., Nov. 15


The National Guard shut down post-hurricane operations in south Dade County
today, leaving just a few dozen people behind to pack up.

"The official word is that all of the troops are out of the hurricane area,"
said Steven Gerrish, a spokesman at Florida National Guard headquarters in St.
Augustine.

"We have about 65 people left to clean up after ourselves and repair some
equipment so we can get it on the road, but our law-enforcement missions have
ended, for all intents and purposes," he said.

Curfew to End on Monday

The Guard deployed 6,300 people to help residents after Hurricane Andrew ravaged
the area on Aug. 24. The Guard troops were joined by nearly 30,000 regular Army
troops.

The soldiers helped clean up, direct traffic, provide food and water, and
enforce the 10 P.M. to 5 A.M. curfew in effect from the Kendall community south
about 20 miles to Florida City.

The authorities planned to end the curfew on Monday, bowing to residents'
complaints and a lawsuit filed by the American Civil Liberties Union.

Master Sgt. Terry Brabham helped prepare for the closing of the Florida National
Guard's hurricane headquarters in a motel that was damaged by the storm.

"One man in Cutler Ridge said, 'Who's going to watch my home when you guys are
gone?' I said, 'Who was watching it before we were here?' " Sergeant Brabham
said.

Sergeant Brabham, a Vietnam War veteran who runs a scuba-diving shop in Boynton
Beach, said south Dade County reminded him of a battle-torn village in Vietnam.

He and other Guard troops said the lengthy deployment in South Florida provided
excellent training and experience for future disasters. Many of the the Guard
troops and officers also said they felt the assignment had been rewarding.

"The morale has been high, the troops have felt appreciated and liked helping
other Floridians in their own home state," said Lieut. Col. Ken Forrester of the
Guard.


LOAD-DATE: November 16, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Veronica Mosqueda, left, Elizabeth Quiroz and Maria Munoz
practicing cheerleading routines yesterday at a new trailer park in Homestead,
Fla., that was built on the site of one destroyed by Hurricane Andrew. (Susan
Greenwood for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              259 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 16, 1992, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Parks Workers Challenging Stereotype of Public Jobs

BYLINE: By MICHAEL JANOFSKY

SECTION: Section B; Page 3; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1304 words


George Marchese and two co-workers needed less than 90 minutes the other day to
cut down and remove a dead silver maple tree in front of Teresa Mele's house in
Bensonhurst. Two men would return later to remove the stump and fill the hole
with soil. Before this month, as many as seven workers might have done the same
job.

While it hardly mattered to Ms. Mele how many people disposed of her 50-foot
eyesore, how a tree goes in Brooklyn and elsewhere in the city is vitally
important to the Parks and Recreation Department, other city agencies and union
workers who lost their jobs after recent cutbacks in the city budget.

Mr. Marchese and his crew are part of a two-month test by the department to
learn whether employees given new freedoms to set their own working conditions,
like planning their own routes and workloads, can improve performance and save
the city money.

Attack on a Stereotype

Stretched for resources in recent years, New York and other cities have
increasingly used private contractors for jobs traditionally done by public
employees. The theory is that private contractors are more efficient, and that
cities can save money by cutting less productive or higher-paid workers from the
public payroll.

But the Parks Department experiment is a bold attempt to show that the trend is
flawed. If the new approach proves more efficient than outside contracting, the
department could cut back on contractors and use the money to hire back some
laid-off workers. At the same time, it could help break a common stereotype of
public workers as lazy and inefficient.

"If we're successful, the Mayor should jump on this," said Betsy Gotbaum, the
Parks and Recreation Commissioner, who designed and championed the program.
"We're now reshaping how we can deliver services."

Though officials acknowledge that early totals may reflect a "gung-ho start"
that workers might not sustain, Ms. Gotbaum said she was "absolutely blown
apart" by the results.

Preliminary results show that for the first week, city workers in Queens cut
down 51 trees, for which the contractors would have charged $10,688. The city's
projected costs were $2,644, a saving of $8,044. In the Bronx, workers removed
37 trees, for a projected saving of $2,578.

City officials say warily that without guarantees that performance will stay
high, the program cannot justify rehiring laid-off workers or expanding the
approach to other agencies.

"There are benefits, but it's a tricky thing," said Philip R. Michael, the
city's budget director. "We have to be very cautious that there is true
productivity. Unless there is measurable improvement, it's not worth it."

But if the experiment succeeds, he said, the concept could be "selectively
applied" to other city agencies.

The program grew directly out of citywide budget reductions two years ago, which
caused most agencies to lay off workers and reduce services. At the Parks and
Recreation Department, for example, a $4.8 million budget for 104 climbers and
pruners like Mr. Marchese was cut to $640,000, forcing layoffs of 84 people.

Tree Averages 7 Years

Climbers and pruners, who make about $33,000 a year, cut down diseased, dying or
dead trees with chain saws and use wood chippers to turn them to mulch. The
workers also remove the tree stumps and fill in the holes. The life expectancy
for city trees is only seven years, a result of abuse from sources like dogs,
car fumes, oil seepage, collisions by vehicles and insufficient drainage.

With 700,000 street trees to care for in the five boroughs, plus two million
more in city parks (which are outside the scope of this test), the department
faced an overwhelming backlog of work even before the budget cuts. People like
Ms. Mele, with trees not in immediate danger of falling, routinely waited three
years for service. The cutbacks added at least two more; some stumps have waited
almost a decade to be removed.

When the budget for the 1993 fiscal year restored the parks department's
allowance for climbers and pruners to $1.8 million, Ms. Gotbaum saw an
opportunity to solve several problems at once. First, she persuaded Mr.
Michael's office to let her split the money, using half to pay for outside
contractors and half for the existing 20 climbers and pruners, plus 22 others
who had lost their jobs.

Then, she devised a competition of sorts to measure the performance of the
city's workers, with their new responsibilities, against two outside contractors
being paid per tree, as they have been since the city began using them in 1988.
To determine costs for its workers, the department established a dollar value
for all parts of the job, including each worker and piece of equipment.

If the city workers show they can remove more trees, they will not only have
saved money and reduced backlogs, but will also have made a case for bringing
back more laid-off workers like Mr. Marchese. He and his crew were rehired when
the budget was increased.

"We welcome the competition," said George Tangel of the Lewis Tree Service in
Holbrook, L.I., one of the city's contractors. "We're professionals at what we
do, and I feel we can do the job as fast as anybody. That's how we became low
bidders for the job."

The union, meanwhile, is so eager to try to restore jobs that it agreed to waive
the time-honored use of larger crews. Frank Edwards, president of the Climbers
and Pruners Local 1506, said the city employed 366 people in those jobs a decade
ago.

But while he hailed the greater autonomy, he questioned whether some of the
smaller crews, in their eagerness to justify more jobs, might sacrifice safety
measures to work faster. In more flush economic times, a crew of four or more
would take down a tree; later, another crew would remove the stump, and a third
would fill the hole with soil.

"When crews were five and six people, it was a lot safer," he said.

Mr. Marchese said that his crew would never jeopardize safety, saying smaller
crews were more flexible. If the worker sawing branches grows tired, he can
switch jobs with a co-worker feeding fallen branches into the chipper, or with
the worker directing traffic out of the way.

Special Reason for Effort

He acknowledged, however, that the chance that more laid-off city workers might
be taken back if the program succeeds "is the only reason we're working so
hard."

Motivations aside, if the experiment shows that municipal workers with more
autonomy can do the job as well or better than contractors, it might shake a
common perception that government cannot work as efficiently as private
business.

"For almost 50 years out of the depression, the feeling was government could
solve everything," said Steven Cohen, a public management expert who teaches at
Columbia University. "Then Vietnam began an era of anti-government rhetoric out
of Washington which said governments can't solve anything. The truth is in
between. It requires a mix of public and private."

Ms. Gotbaum and her colleagues met with climbers and pruners in devising the
test.

Planning Their Own Jobs

In a major departure from tradition, workers in four boroughs -- Manhattan is
not included in the test -- were allowed to plan their own strategies. In
Brooklyn, crews of three take down the tree and remove the debris; the same crew
or another later removes the stump and fills the hole. In Queens, crews of four
cut down trees and deliver the branches and trunk to Sanitation Department
trucks. On Staten Island, crews cut trees down and repeat the route on another
day to pick up the debris.

Workers were also allowed to plot the day's schedule, another big change. Often
in the past, Mr. Marchese said, crews were forced into a haphazard route because
local politicians or friends of a supervisor would get preferential treatment.

LOAD-DATE: November 16, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: A test is being conducted by the Parks and Recreation Department
to learn whether employees given more autonomy can improve performance and save
the city money. Don Jayson worked in Hollis, Queens. (Andrea Mohin/The New York
Times)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              260 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 16, 1992, Monday, Late Edition - Final

For Afro-Amerasians, Tangled Emotions

BYLINE: By DAVID GONZALEZ

SECTION: Section B; Page 1; Column 2; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1830 words


When Luong Hung looks in the mirror, he says, shame ripples through his body.
His sad-eyed visage, his tightly curled dark hair, are daily reminders of the
relationship between his Vietnamese mother, a waitress in Saigon during the war,
and his father, a cargo pilot he knows only as John.

"I feel ashamed that my mother was with a black man, and now I have to carry
that," said the slender 26-year-old refugee, his knees almost touching his chest
as he perched atop a child-sized plastic chair in his Bronx apartment. "I wish I
were a white Amerasian."

Luong Hung is an extreme example of the tangled emotions twisting inside these
children of the Vietnam War, now young adults in the land of the fathers they
will probably never know. Black or white, their lives were forged through
discrimination and hardship in Vietnam where they were derided as "the dust of
life."

Ridiculed and Beaten

But for those whose fathers were the black foot soldiers, sailors and airmen of
that turbulent era, their upbringing in Vietnam's ethnically homogeneous and
patrilineal society was doubly hard -- disenfranchised for having no father at
home and scorned because that absent father was black. They recall childhoods
spent hidden away by fearful parents, ridiculed or shunned by neighbors and
beaten by other children.

Many of them live in places like the Bronx -- one of 55 resettlement communities
nationwide -- where they receive education, jobs and counseling help as they try
to shake loose the memories of years of a hardscrabble existence. For the first
time in their lives, many say they feel they have a chance to succeed or fail on
their own merits, blending into racially mixed communities.

At the same time, refugee workers who are guiding their transition to American
life fear that these young people are still suffering the after-effects of
racism they endured in their early lives. Tugged among three worlds, they say,
the black or Afro-Amerasians exhibit more anger, anxiety and depression, if not
self-hatred, than their white cousins.

Culturally Vietnamese, politically American and physically black, they do not
easily fit into any one category.

"We almost saw these kids as tri-racial but in a sense disenfranchised in every
domain," said Mark Johnson, a clinical psychologist and the co-author of a study
on the mental health of Afro-Amerasians. "It's difficult to find a space or
cultural home for these kids."

Taunted by Children

Dat Thach, 21, knows that confusion. The Afro-Amerasian who came to the United
States this year said he was always perplexed by the taunts of neighborhood
children in Vietnam who told him he should "go to your country" because he was
black.

"I didn't know my country," he said.

Some 65,000 Amerasian refugees and their relatives have arrived in the United
States since Congress passed the Amerasian Homecoming Act in 1988. The
Amerasians themselves accounted for a quarter of the refugee total, with some
4,000 of them being Afro-Amerasian, said Michael Kocher, director of the
Amerasian Resettlement Program at InterAction, a Washington-based coalition of
resettlement and relief agencies.

Speaking in general terms, Mr. Kocher said the sons of infantrymen who once
walked point in the jungle were left behind to bring up the rear of a social
order that shunted them to the margins of Vietnamese life.

"It is such a homogenous society, 'ethnically pure,' that it's difficult for
anyone with mixed blood," he said. "For whatever cultural reasons, they tended
to be even more marginalized."

Lee, a 21-year-old Afro-Amerasian who arrived in the United States two years
ago, spoke on the condition that his family's name not be used. He speaks
haltingly of his childhood in Saigon, one whose themes resonate in the stories
of his fellow refugees.

His mother, who had married a black serviceman, hid Lee and his sister, Linda,
in the closet for months after the fall of Saigon. Later, when she sent him to
school, he said, he was teased relentlessly and often arrested by the police,
who he said tried to coerce confessions from him for crimes he did not commit.

The ultimate indignity came in the fifth grade, when his classmates pounced on
him, pummeling him until half his face was swollen. When his mother confronted
the school's principal, he told her to stop sending her son to school because he
could do nothing to prevent the beatings.

Feeling Some Kinship

Lee and his family came to the United States in 1990, settling into an apartment
in the Kingsbridge Heights section of the Bronx. He attends Martin Luther King
High School in Manhattan, where he said his black classmates have welcomed him.
He said he did not know much about black culture, although he said he intended
to read more about it once his command of English improved. Nonetheless, he
feels some kinship to his classmates.

"At the beginning I was surprised to see so many people with the same color skin
as me," he said. "That makes me feel surprised and comfortable. I belong to this
society."

His mother says, perhaps only partly in jest, that he now wants to forget the
part of him that is Vietnamese. He listens grim-faced, slumped in a chair.

"Forget," he said, slowly shaking his head. "I don't want to remember."

The relief many feel for no longer being hounded because of their skin color can
be supplanted by urgent economic concerns. Several refugee experts said the
Afro-Amerasians were often denied access to education because of their color,
arriving in this country with only a few years of formal schooling, if any. Now,
many worry about catching up, enrolling in high school at an age when other
teen-agers have graduated.

Others fret about finding work with little English and few marketable skills at
a time when jobs are scarce for many in their neighborhoods.

Needing Federal Help

"When I first got here my face was always angry," said Minh Nguyen, 21, who
arrived in the Bronx last year and now is studying English and other subjects at
St. Rita's Asian Center. "The language was difficult and this is a big country.
I didn't know where to look for work. I don't know what is out there in the
future."

There is a sense that time is limited, a sentiment shared by refugee workers who
said that because the Amerasians were older, they should be eligible for more
assistance from Government social-service programs. They said it was more
critical for the Afro-Amerasians, given their frequent lack of education.

While some of the youths have black friends, their tightest bonds often seem to
be with other Amerasians. They refer to living life "in the middle," identifying
themselves as Amerasian.

Their blackness, the focal point of their abuse in Vietnam, is something that is
either played down or avoided here. Mr. Hung said all he knew about black
Americans came from a movie about the antebellum South he saw in his youth.

"I heard in Vietnam that black poeple were slaves," he said. "I didn't want to
be a slave."

He still may be hostage to his decidedly derogatory view of black Americans,
fearfully associating them with crime and homelessness. When asked if his time
here has helped persuade him otherwise, he nodded affirmatively.

"Of course it changed," he said. "In the United States there is freedom. I don't
have to live in the black community."

Although Mr. Hung said he felt more comfortable in New York, not all of his
countrymen have been accepting. "Vietnamese here, especially the higher-educated
Vietnamese, do not allow their children to make friends with black Amerasians
like me," he said.

Psychologists and others who have looked into the experiences of Amerasian
refugees said the lasting effects of the young people's difficult years in their
homeland were unclear.

A continuing study that has tracked Amerasian refugees along their journey from
Vietnam, through Philippine refugee camps and in the United States, found the
Afro-Amerasians to be slightly more anxious and depressed than their white
counterparts, but the difference was not statistically significant.

View Through Prism

Dr. Robert McKelvey, the study's co-author and the head of the department of
child psychiatry at Baylor College of Medicine in Houston, said his impression
remains that the Afro-Amerasians were having a harder time in the United States.

In terms of their self-image, Dr. McKelvey found that many of these young people
consider themselves more Vietnamese than their appearance would suggest. But
American society, whose own issues of color have never been resolved, views them
through its own racial prism, said Carolyn Tisdale, the director of refugee
resettlement programs for Catholic Charities in Memphis.

"I see them as black," said Ms. Tisdale, who herself is black. "I know that's
what everyone else is going to see. Realistically, that is what they are going
to have to deal with."

Unfortunately, she said, the Afro-Amerasians she has encountered in her work
arrived in this country with negative racial stereotypes about blacks. "You get
a lot of self-hatred," she said.

Some groups have tried to help the Afro-Amerasians better understand their black
heritage by incorporating lessons or literature about black history into the
school curricula. Sister Jean Marshall of St. Rita's Asian Center said her group
hoped to enlist the aid of black military veterans and others to serve as
mentors, to help bolster their fragile self-confidence.

"Their self-esteem is so low," she said. "Getting them to realize they can make
it is very hard."

Ms. Tisdale and several others in refugee work said they thought that not enough
black Americans have reached out to the Afro-Amerasian youths. Part of the
problem, some said, was that the resettlement agencies themselves had not done a
good enough job of reaching out to blacks.

A little more than two years after arriving here, Lee and his sister, Linda, 20,
seem to be adjusting well. He is in 10th grade and talks about going to college.
Linda unschooled in Vietnam, is enrolled in English as a Second Language classes
at St. Rita's. She says she wants to be a model.

Part of the reason for their relatively smooth adjustment lies in the efforts of
their mother, who hired a tutor for her children after Lee was beaten in school
in Saigon.

Also helpful is the warm embrace of their father's family, which also lives in
the Bronx. Their father is remarried and lives in the Virgin Islands, where the
children visit him in the summer. Florence Hendricks, their grandmother, smiles
broadly when she talks about how her grandchildren call her almost every day and
how the family welcomed the children into their fold during a recent reunion.

Mrs. Hendricks recalls with a smile her excitement when she first met her
grandchildren, a few days after they arrived in this country. "I wanted to see
what they looked like,' she said.

And what did she think when she finally saw them?

"I love them."

LOAD-DATE: November 16, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: "I feel ashamed that my mother was with a black man, and now I
have to carry that," said Luong Hung, right, whose mother is Vietnamese and
whose father was a cargo pilot during the Vietnam War. "I wish I were a white
Amerasian." (pg. B1); Many black Amerasians have settled in places like the
Bronx -- one of 55 resettlement communities nationwide -- where they receive
education, jobs and counseling help. Hang Thach, Dat Thatch and and Hong Le
attended English classes at St. Rita's Asian Center last week on Andrews
Avenue.; Linda, right, a black Amerasian, walking with her mother, Thanh, left,
and her paternal grandmother, Florence Hendricks, in Chinatown. Linda's father,
a former serviceman, is remarried and lives in the Virgin Islands, where Linda
and her brother, Lee, visit him in the summer. (pg. B2) (Photographs by Nancy
Siesel/The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              261 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 17, 1992, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Aides Say Appointee Urged Searches of Clinton's File

BYLINE: By ROBERT PEAR,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 16; Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 945 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 16


A top political appointee at the State Department encouraged Congressional
Republicans to request information from Bill Clinton's passport files in an
apparent effort to justify opening them late in the Presidential campaign,
Administration officials said today.

The appointee, Steven K. Berry, the Acting Assistant Secretary of State for
Legislative Affairs, recommended that Representative Gerald B. Solomon,
Republican of upstate New York, and other members of Congress file formal
requests for Mr. Clinton's records before the State Department actually began
the search, Federal investigators and aides to Mr. Berry said.

An aide to Mr. Solomon confirmed today that the Congressman had made such a
request, but said he had done so without any prompting from Mr. Berry. Mr. Berry
did not return phone calls seeking his response.

At the time, several conservative Republicans, speaking on the House floor, were
raising questions about Mr. Clinton's anti-Vietnam War activities overseas and
asking rhetorically if there might be something in Mr. Clinton's passport files
that could answer their questions.

President Bush dismissed another official in the department, Elizabeth M.
Tamposi, last week as the Assistant Secretary of State for Consular Affairs over
her role in the search. Ms. Tamposi has said she was told by Mr. Berry that the
White House wanted information on Mr. Clinton to see if he had ever tried to
renounce his citizenship or become a citizen of another country to avoid
military service in Vietnam. In the 1950's and 1960's, the passport office
collected large amounts of information about the political activities of
Americans.

Question of Motive

The findings of State Department investigators, together with the statements by
Ms. Tamposi, raise new questions about the department's motives in examining the
Democratic candidate's passport files.

President Bush's press secretary, Marlin Fitzwater, and the State Department
spokesman, Richard A. Boucher, refused today to discuss Ms. Tamposi's contention
that the White House had asked her to search the files.

When asked if Mr. Bush was trying to determine who had ordered the search, Mr.
Fitzwater said: "We'll wait for the outcome of the inspector general's
investigation. He's looking into it and we have full confidence in his ability
to look into this matter."

The State Department's inspector general, Sherman M. Funk, plans to report his
findings on Wednesday.

The search of State Department files was conducted on Sept. 30 and Oct. 1 for
reasons that have never been completely clear. The State Department has said it
began the search as a routine response to requests filed by news organizations
under the Freedom of Information Act. Two of the requests were filed Sept. 14
and 25. The State Department has acknowledged that it violated its own
regulations by acting on those requests before hundreds of others filed earlier.

In late September and early October, the Bush campaign was trying to raise
doubts about Mr. Clinton's character and patriotism. Bush aides and eventually
the President himself criticized Mr. Clinton for traveling to Moscow and for
taking part in demonstrations against the Vietnam War while Mr. Clinton was a
Rhodes Scholar in Britain from 1968 to 1970.

At the same time, anonymous callers told news organizations that they had
documents that could politically damage Mr. Clinton. In one such call to The New
York Times on Oct. 8, a man who refused to give his name said the Bush campaign
had Soviet documents giving details of Mr. Clinton's trip to Moscow and British
documents relating to efforts by Mr. Clinton to obtain British citizenship. The
caller never provided the documents.

On Sept. 29, before the search of the Clinton file began, Representative Solomon
sent a letter to Lawrence S. Eagleburger, the Acting Secretary of State, asking
for information about Americans who had evaded their "civic obligations" by
obtaining dual citizenship. Four days later, Mr. Solomon asked Mr. Eagleburger
for documents specifically on Mr. Clinton.

Daniel G. Amon, an aide to Mr. Solomon, said today that the Congressman was in
Belgium on an official trip and unable to answer specific questions.

In a statement issued by his office, Mr. Solomon said: "You'd better believe I
was one of the Congressmen demanding information from the State Department on
the use of dual citizenship to avoid the draft. In fact, a few days after the
election I wrote a follow-up letter to the State Department repeating my
request. Anyone who knows Jerry Solomon knows that I've conducted an almost
single-handed campaign since I entered Congress to enforce compliance with
Selective Service laws."

Mr. Solomon, a former marine, entered Congress in 1979. His district include
parts of Dutchess and Rensselaer Counties.

Tamposi Account

Ms. Tamposi has said that in a telephone conversation on Sept. 28, Mr. Berry
told her that the White House wanted her to look through consular files for
information on Mr. Clinton. Ms. Tamposi says she told Mr. Berry: "Absolutely
not. I am not going to do that."

State Department officials and Federal investigators say Mr. Berry then
recommended that members of Congress request documents on Mr. Clinton.

At a meeting with members of Congress on Oct. 19, Mr. Eagleburger answered
questions about the file search by saying that the inspector general's
investigation had not turned up evidence of discussions between State Department
officials and people outside the department seeking information on Mr. Clinton.
It now appears that Mr. Eagleburger's assurances were based on incomplete
information.


LOAD-DATE: November 17, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              262 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 17, 1992, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

THE TRANSITION;
Excerpts From Clinton News Conference After Meeting With Lawmakerss

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Page 18; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1114 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 16


Following are excerpts from the questioning of President-elect Bill Clinton
today at a news conference with Congressional leaders in Little Rock, Ark., as
recorded by News Transcripts Inc., a private transcription service:

Q.  Governor, you said that you wanted to end the cold war between the two ends
of Pennsylvania Avenue. There are a number of issues, though, on which there are
disagreements. Senator Mitchell expressed some concern about cutting back
Congressional staff. There are disagreements over the line-item veto.

Sam Nunn in particular said that he does not support changing the current policy
on gays in the military and that you should be concerned about those people who
are not gay and who have given up their privacy rights to be in the military.

Will you appoint a commission, as Bob Dole has suggested? Will you wait until
hearings are held, as Sam Nunn suggested? What timetable do you foresee in
letting this go forward? And do you anticipate Congressional approval for
changing the Uniform Code of Military Conduct?

A.  Let me answer all three of those questions you raised. First of all, with
regard to staff, the Congress and Senator Mitchell and the Speaker may want to
comment on this, but the Congress took a cut last year and the White House staff
exploded in the last four years.

So I'm going to get out there and set an example. I'm going to cut 25 percent
from the White House staff, and continue to work with Congress. I hope we can
keep on a downward trend there, so that in the end we'll wind up with more or
less the same pace. But they did take a cut last year, while the White House
continued to expand the White House staff.

With regard to the line-item veto, I thought the Speaker made an intriguing
suggestion for a line-item veto which is functionally almost identical to the
way the line-item veto works in this state. That is, I can line-item veto a bill
here and the Legislature can override it with a majority vote but they have to
do it by a separate vote, so that there is a great deal of focus on the issue at
hand, and you can't just bury something of questionable merit in a big omnibus
bill. And I think that is at least a good place for us to begin discussion.

Now, on the issue of gays in the military, I've made no decision on a timetable
except that I want to firmly proceed, and I want to do it after consulting with
military leaders. I've made no decision about what structure to follow. And I
would like to say that I think that Senator Nunn's point is the most compelling
one, although it affects primarily those who are in situations where they don't
have a lot of personal privacy. Very often people who have been in the military
a long time have living quarters which give them a far higher level of personal
privacy.

My response to that is twofold. One is we know there have always been gays in
the military, and we know, according to the study which was released near the
end of the campaign, that it costs the United States taxpayers about $500
million to get fewer than 17,000 gays out of the military over the last 10
years.

And so the issue therefore is not whether there are gays in the military. It is
whether they can be in the military without lying about it, as long as there is
a very strict code of conduct, which if they violate it would lead to dismissal
from the service or other appropriate sanctions.

There is a great deal of difference between somebody doing something wrong and
their status, condition in life. So I expect there to be a very, very strict
code of conduct here, which would lead to very firm and swift appropriate
action, but I have not decided precisely how the consultative process should
proceed or on what timetable I should proceed.

                                    .  .  .


Bosnia and Vietnam

Q.  President Bush said this morning that he is -- this is a quote -- "shifting
gears to the new Administration, and we're referring all questions to them."
With that in mind, would you tell us if you would intervene militarily to get
relief supplies into the former Yugoslavia, and what you would do to recognize
Vietnam? Would you really withhold recognition until they clear themselves of
any sort of suspicion, which is what you seemed to suggest last week?

A.  Well, let me say first of all, they are trying to shift gears to us, and I
appreciate that. But when it comes to foreign policy, I will remind you that one
of the questions I was asked yesterday by one of you is whether I thought
President Bush should send Mr. Baker back to the Middle East before Jan. 20, and
I said that was entirely his decision and if he decided to do it, I would
support it.

So, I would reiterate that as to both these foreign policy questions.

Now, I think there are many options that we have in dealing with the problem in
Bosnia and the potential problem on Kosovo that are short of sending troops in,
but beyond where we have been now. And I don't want to foreclose any of those
options by anything I say now. I won't become President until January, and I
want to have those options available.

With regard to the recognition of Vietnam, I think that what the American people
clearly would insist upon is that there has been the most extensive and
good-faith possible effort to have the fullest possible accounting on the
P.O.W.-M.I.A. issue before recognition. That has been my position consistently,
and I don't intend to change that.

                                    .  .  .


Mrs. Clinton

Q.  Was Mrs. Clinton at the table with you last night?

A.  She was.

Q.  Stayed the whole time?

A.  Stayed the whole time. Talked a lot.  Knew more than we did about some
things. I think they would agree with that.

                                    .  .  .


Aides Who Disagree

Q.You said that you want to end the ban on gays in the military, and you also
just said that you would not rule out Senator Nunn or somebody else who
disagrees with you on that question. How could you achieve the former goal if
you had a Defense Secretary who disagreed with you, and what do you say to those
who say that calls into question your commitment to lifting the ban?

A.  Well, because I intend to press forward with that in an expeditious way
early in the term, just like I said. I mean, I don't -- I wouldn't preclude -- I
expect I'll have a lot of people in my Administration who will be implementing
policies they may not entirely agree with, but they think -- even those who
disagree have told me there are better ways and worse ways to do this. So you
know, I would have a, I would eliminate a lot of gifted Americans from serving
in my Administration.

LOAD-DATE: November 17, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Text

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              263 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 17, 1992, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Hanoi Backs Study To Trace M.I.A's

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHENON,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 9; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 826 words

DATELINE: HANOI, Vietnam, Nov. 16


Members of a Senate panel investigating the fate of Americans missing from the
Vietnam War hailed what they said today was a new spirit of cooperation from
Vietnam and suggested strongly that President Bush might soon relax an economic
embargo against the Hanoi Government.

The comments by the senators followed a meeting in Hanoi with a senior official
who pledged that Vietnam would provide "the clearest possible answers" to
questions about the 2,265 Americans still unaccounted for.

"We are at a critical juncture," said Senator John F. Kerry, a Massachusetts
Democrat and Vietnam veteran who is chairman of the Senate Select Committee on
P.O.W.-M.I.A. Affairs. "We are definitely on a road leading to normalization.

"It's my sense that the President may be in a position, if we get adequate
cooperation and if we can speed this process up, to make positive moves with
respect to the embargo. I think that the Government of Vietnam has made a
decision to help us get answers."

Letter From Bush

The embargo has barred United States investment in Vietnam, has discouraged
other foreign investment and has prevented the World Bank, the International
Monetary Fund and other large international financial institutions from
assisting Hanoi in rebuilding an economy that is only now beginning to recover
from the war.

Senator Kerry said he was carrying a letter from President Bush to President Le
Duc Anh. The Senator said he believed it was the first direct communication from
a United States President to his Vietnamese counterpart since the fall of South
Vietnam in 1975.

While Senator Kerry did not make the contents public, Congressional officials
said they understood the letter made clear that President Bush, in his final
weeks in office, was willing to move quickly to improve relations in exchange
for further cooperation on the question of missing Americans.

Senator Hank Brown of Colorado, the Republican on the three-member delegation,
said that "if there is a perception that we have had positive meetings this
week, then you'll see the White House act" on the embargo.

The Pain of the Embargo

Vietnam is eager to begin normal diplomatic relations with the United States and
is desperate to see Washington lift the embargo, which was imposed against the
North Vietnamese Government in 1964 and against all of Vietnam in 1975.

The Vietnamese are aware that they are operating against the clock --
specifically, they want Washington to lift the embargo before the transfer of
power in the White House in January.

Vietnamese officials say their best of hope of ending the embargo quickly rests
with President Bush, since President-elect Bill Clinton has already told
veterans' groups that he feels no pressure to improve relations with Vietnam
while there are unanswered questions about the fate of missing Americans.

Last month Hanoi announced that it would provide Defense Department
investigators with full access to military museums and war archives.

Senate Report Due Soon

Defense Department officials have described the announcement as a breakthrough
in their efforts to determine what became of the Americans. The museums and
archives are believed to hold thousands of artifacts collected from Americans --
as well as photographs of some of them -- after they were captured or killed in
territory held by North Vietnamese forces.

Senator Kerry, Senator Brown and Senator Tom Daschle, a South Dakota Democrat,
are representing the committee on a five-day tour of South Vietnam and Laos, the
panel's last scheduled trip to Southeast Asia before it completes its work at
the end of the year and submits a final report.

The Senators are expected to meet Tuesday with Prime Minister Vo Van Kiet and
Foreign Minister Nguyen Manh Cam, and to tour military installations in Hanoi
where Americans were once rumored to have been held.

In a meeting today with the senators, Deputy Foreign Minister Le Mai pledged
that "any request, any question you raise, we will give the clearest possible
answers."

20 Years Is 'Long Enough'

"It has been 20 years now since the end of the war," he said. "That is long
enough. That is why we should accelerate our cooperation."

The Senators also met with the senior officials directly involved in assisting
the Pentagon in searching for information about missing Americans.

Although the meeting did not resolve the fate of any of the Americans
unaccounted for, Senator Kerry said the spirit of conciliation may signal an
important shift in Hanoi's policies. It was the first time the Vietnamese had
opened such a meeting to reporters.

"This is the first time we've ever had a discussion in the open like this --
about substantive cases, about real facts," Senator Kerry said. "It's fair to
say that the policies of Vietnam have changed. It's very, very welcome."

Senator Daschle said, "For the first time, they're as forthcoming as we could
hope them to be."


LOAD-DATE: November 17, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              264 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 18, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1072 words



International    A3-15

WEST TO SEARCH ADRIATIC SHIPS

In response to a United Nations resolution toughening the sanctions on
Yugoslavia, an international fleet authorized to halt and search vessels
carrying suspected cargo is likely to begin operating in the next several days.
A senior Bush Administration official said that United States warships would
participate in a multi national fleet in the Adriatic Sea once NATO endorsed the
plan.  A1

SERB-CROAT PEACE IS THREATENED

A peace plan that ended the civil war between Serbs and Croats late last year is
now in danger of collapsing as Croatia's Serbian minority builds up a military
force and proclaims an independent state in areas it controls.  A14


NATAL VIOLENCE IS ASSESSED

Residents in the Natal province of South Africa feel the spreading violence
there reflects the waning strength of Mangosuthu Gatsha Buthelezi's Inkatha
Freedom Party, the main black group to rival the African National Congress.  A1

CHINESE THREAT ON HONG KONG

China has sharply escalated its dispute with the British and the Hong Kong
authorities by threatening to scrap the 1984 agreement that promised Hong Kong
continued political and economic freedom for 50 years after it returns to
Chinese control in 1997.  A1

SEOUL TO RESUME AID TO RUSSIA

South Korea, which granted and then cut off $3 billion in economic assistance to
the former Soviet Union, is preparing to resume its aid to Russia once again,
Government officials said.  A7

AMERICANS SEE VIETNAM SECRETS

Three Senators and a group of Pentagon officials toured long-secret areas of
Vietnam's military headquarters and rummaged through a room of museum artifacts
that may hold clues to the fate of Americans missing from the Vietnam War.  A3

United Nations chief says Cambodia vote should go on.  A9

U.S. TO MEET ON IRANIAN BAN

The United States will meet with its six closest economic partners on Friday in
an attempt to persuade them to halt the sale of all militarily useful equipment
and technology to Iran, Administration officials said.  A5

Italian police arrest 75 in crackdown on the Mafia.  A3

Cairo Journal: Film makers and fundamentalists square off.  A4

Age and illness is threatening the Honecker manslaughter trial.  A8

Mexican opposition vows civil disobedience in two states.  A12

Two environmental parties join forces to woo French voters.  A15

National    A16-24

'YOU SEE HOW GOOD A MAN HE WAS'

To countless young urban blacks, born long after he died, Malcolm X is a folk
hero, a resurrected spokesman for an angry generation.  A1

THE LONELY UPTURN IN RETAILING

The savings that Americans have realized from lower mortgage rates are helping
to support recent increases in consumer spending. But alone, those savings are
not enough to spur a lackluster economy.  A1

PASSPORT-FILE SEARCHER RESIGNS

An official who carried out the hunt of passport files for information about
Bill Clinton has quit his State Department job. The disclosure of his
resignation comes with the approach of a report by Federal investigators that is
expected to criticize the search.  A19

TIGHT CONTROL BY CLINTON

With his selection of a transition director of personnel, the President-elect
signaled that in order to insure loyalty to his agenda he intended to have a
large say in whom his Cabinet officers choose as deputies.  A22

After seeing Bush today, Clinton will tour a black commercial hub.  A22

Clinton won't save taxpayer money by forgoing Blair House.  A22

News analysis: The power of the purse and an ancient battle.  A23

A testy exchange underscored the G.O.P. split on religion.  A23

HOMELESS GAIN IN MIAMI

A Federal judge ordered the City of Miami to create "safe zones" where homeless
people can sleep, bathe, cook and eat without fear of being arrested. The order
is believed to be a first for the nation.  A16

CAPITAL PUNISHMENT'S RISING TIDE

A nun's murderer will become the 28th prisoner put to death in the United States
this year when Alabama executes him on Friday. Executions are now more
commonplace than at any other time since 1976, when the Supreme Court allowed
them to resume, and one knowledgeable chronicler of the practice says the
numbers will almost certainly soar further.  A16

BISHOPS CLASH ON WOMEN'S ROLE

Roman Catholicism's opposition to the ordination of women, which the Vatican has
insisted is not open to further debate, nonetheless became the central subject
of discussion at the semiannual meeting of the nation's bishops.  A20

NIXON WINS RULING ON TAPES

A Federal appeals court held that former President Nixon must be compensated for
the Government's seizure of his White House papers and tapes, including the
Watergate recordings.  A16

A survey found a rise in journalists who say they're Democrats.  A20

Education Page    B7

Texas takes up the 'Robin Hood' school financing battle again.

Metro Digest    B1

DINKINS ASSAILS HIS CRITICS

Mayor Dinkins accused some of his critics of distorting the facts on how he
handled the Crown Heights disturbances, saying they were trying to get his
"political scalp."A1

SOCIAL WORKERS AS TARGETS

Across the New York region and around the nation, experts say that social
service workers are increasingly at risk of violent assault. At least eight
workers -- five of them in New York State -- have been slain by clients in five
years.  A1

Business Digest    D1

Living Section    C1-16

On the run with Jeremy Irons.  C1

Health Page    C18

Some experts advise screening pregnant women for type B strep.

Arts/Entertainment    C19-28

Warhol's "Marilyn X 100" is auctioned at Sotheby's.  C19

Film: "Malcolm X." C19

Obituaries    A25

Sports    B8-13

Baseball: Rockies and Marlins stock rosters.  B9

Football: Taylor eyes playoffs.  B9

Tennis: McNeil upsets Graf. B9

Editorials/Op-Ed    A26-27

Editorials

Line-item veto: no help, or hope.
Honest food labels? Fat chance.
No ifs, ands or butts.
Topics: Let the gag rule die.

Letters

Anna Quindlen: Set her free.

Joseph Brodsky: Bosnia tune.

Ann Crittenden: Bad breaks.

Alan M. Dershowitz: Justice on trial.

LOAD-DATE: November 18, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              265 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 18, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Vietnam Offers War Artifacts to U.S. Senators

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 3; Foreign Desk

LOAD-DATE: November 18, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: In Hanoi to investigate the fate of missing Americans, Senator
John F. Kerry was given the helmet of Senator John McCain, a former prisoner in
Vietnam, by Col. Nguyen Trong Dai. Page A3. (Agence France-Presse)

TYPE: Caption

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              266 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 18, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Khmer Rouge Should Not Delay Cambodia Vote, U.N. Says

BYLINE: By FRANK J. PRIAL,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 9; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 355 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, Nov. 17


Cambodia's national elections, scheduled to be held in May, should proceed
whether the Khmer Rouge take part or not, Secretary General Boutros
Boutros-Ghali said today in a report to the Security Council.

Under terms of a peace accord signed in Paris last year, the Khmer Rouge and the
three other warring factions in Cambodia would turn over most of their arms to
United Nations peacekeepers and retreat to guarded cantonments or camps while
the United Nations prepared the country for elections.

The other factions, the Cambodian Army and two non-Communist guerrilla groups,
have mostly complied with the accord but the Khmer Rouge have refused. Its
leaders accuse the Goverment, which is backed by Vietnam, of permitting
Vietnamese troops to remain in the country, and of refusing to hand power over
to the Supreme National Council, which is made up of all four factions. The
well-trained Khmer Rouge troops have refused to disarm, and they will not permit
the Cambodians who live in the areas they control to register to vote in May.

The United Nations Transitional Authority in Cambodia, which includes some
15,000 peacekeepers and 5,000 United Nations technicians, has found "no
evidence" of any foreign troops in Cambodia, the Secretary General's report
says. The United Nations has not been able to search the 15 percent of the
country held by the Khmer Rouge.

Lucrative Border Smuggling

The Khmer Rouge controlled Cambodia from 1975 until 1978, when Vietnamese troops
defeated them and installed a pro-Hanoi Government. The Khmer Rouge were
responsible for the deaths of at least several hundred thousand and possibly
more than a million Cambodians during their three-year reign under Pol Pot.

The Khmer Rouge then joined with the two guerrilla groups and fought to unseat
the puppet Phnom Penh Government until the peace treaty was signed in Paris last
year.

Cambodia specialists here suggest that the real reason the Khmer Rouge have
refused to cooperate with the United Nations is the possibility that they would
lose their immensely lucrative smuggling operation along the border with
Thailand.


LOAD-DATE: November 18, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              267 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 18, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

State Dept. Official Who Searched Clinton's Passport Files Resigns

BYLINE: By ROBERT PEAR,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 19; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1058 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 17


A State Department official who carried out the two-day search of passport files
for information about Gov. Bill Clinton said today that he had resigned, just 48
hours before Federal investigators are expected to issue a report criticizing
the search.

The official, Steven M. Moheban, was a top aide to Elizabeth M. Tamposi, the
Assistant Secretary of State for Consular Affairs who was dismissed last week by
President Bush for her role in the search of files on Mr. Clinton, his mother,
Virginia Kelley, and Ross Perot, the independent Presidential candidate.

"I resigned Monday," said Mr. Moheban, a 30-year-old native of Nashua, N.H., Ms.
Tamposi's hometown. "I no longer work for the State Department."

Mr. Moheban said he had not been asked to resign but had stepped down
voluntarily to "pursue business opportunities in the private sector."

Report Is Awaited

He was reluctant to give details about his role in the file search, saying he
wanted to wait for a report from the inspector general of the State Department.
But the timing of his resignation suggested that he was accepting some
responsibility for the search and the way it was conducted.

The inspector general, Sherman M. Funk, and the Acting Secretary of State,
Lawrence S. Eagleburger, plan to issue the report on the investigation on
Wednesday. Among those it is expected to criticize are Ms. Tamposi and Mr.
Moheban, a political appointee who had served as her special assistant since
July 1990.

Ms. Tamposi has said that White House officials encouraged the search of Mr.
Clinton's records and that her superiors approved it. The inspector general has
interviewed White House officials. But it is not clear whether he will assign
any responsibility for the search to senior officials at the White House and the
State Department, or will merely focus on Ms. Tamposi and lower-ranking
employees.

Officials following the investigation said Mr. Funk's report would probably not
accuse or absolve anyone outside the State Department. In addition, they
predicted, Mr. Funk will probably conclude that officials made contradictory
statements to him and that he has no way to resolve some of them.

Ms. Tamposi, a 37-year-old former State Representative in New Hampshire, got her
job at the State Department on the recommendation of John H. Sununu, a former
Governor of New Hampshire who was President Bush's first chief of staff and was
often blamed for many of Mr. Bush's political troubles.

State Department officials say they searched Mr. Clinton's passport file in
response to requests filed by several news organizations under the Freedom of
Information Act. The department acknowledges that it violated its own
regulations by accelerating the search so it would be completed before Election
Day.

Mr. Moheban confirmed that he went to a National Archives warehouse in suburban
Maryland on Sept. 30 and on Oct. 1 to look for Mr. Clinton's records. Mr.
Moheban carried out the search with two career employees of the State
Department.

"I went out to the records center to respond to the F.O.I.A. requests," Mr.
Moheban said. "I personally was asked by Ms. Tamposi to get involved." Mr.
Moheban said his responsibility was to make sure the two Civil Service employees
followed proper procedure in performing the search.

Ms. Tamposi says she was told by another State Department official on Sept. 28
that the White House wanted the files checked for negative information on Mr.
Clinton. Ms. Tamposi has told associates that she believes the Administration is
trying to make her a scapegoat in the incident.

Links in Business Deals

Mr. Moheban's family has been involved in many real estate deals with the
Tamposi family in New Hampshire. Maurice L. Arel, a former Mayor of Nashua, said
Mr. Moheban had worked for the Tamposi family's real estate business. Ms.
Tamposi and her family have raised large amounts of money for President Bush,
Mr. Sununu and other Republicans.

In a financial disclosure statement filed with the Federal Government in 1989,
Ms. Tamposi reported that she had an investment in a business called Moheban
Enterprises. She estimated the value of her interest in the underlying assets at
$215,000 to $550,000.

Ms. Tamposi's 1990 disclosure form shows that her family investment company, of
which she is a partial owner, wrote off a debt that it was owed by Moheban
Enterprises. There is no indication of the amount of the loan, which was deemed
uncollectible because of the real estate slump in New England.

On Oct. 1, Ms. Tamposi concluded that someone had apparently tampered with Mr.
Clinton's passport file, and she referred the matter to Mr. Funk, who called in
the Federal Bureau of Investigation. The bureau concluded on Oct. 9 that there
had been no tampering.

Mr. Funk is in the awkward position of having to investigate his own role in the
State Department's handling of Mr. Clinton's passport records. Some Democrats in
Congress have asserted that the suggestion of tampering was trumped up to create
an impression that there was politically damaging information about Mr. Clinton
in his file and that someone had removed it.

State Department officials said Ms. Tamposi and Mr. Moheban were looking for
documents that would show whether Mr. Clinton had ever considered renouncing
United States citizenship or becoming a citizen of another country to avoid
military service in Vietnam. No such information on Mr. Clinton was found.

In this year's Presidential election, the Bush-Quayle campaign portrayed Mr.
Clinton as a draft dodger, criticized him for taking part in demonstrations
against the Vietnam War and suggested that a 1969 trip to Moscow by Mr. Clinton
raised doubts about his patriotism and his character.

In the 1950's and 1960's, the State Department's passport office kept a
computerized file on more than 243,000 Americans who were suspected of being
"subversives" or who might fail to "reflect credit" on the nation abroad.

The existence of the file was not disclosed until 1971, after Mr. Clinton
returned to the United States.

Ms. Tamposi told Federal investigators that the search for Mr. Clinton's file
had been cleared in advance by a State Department lawyer, William B. Wharton.
But in an interview this week, Mr. Wharton said that no one asked for his advice
before the search.

LOAD-DATE: November 18, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              268 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 18, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Senators Tour Hanoi's P.O.W. Closet

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHENON,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 3; Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 842 words

DATELINE: HANOI, Vietnam, Nov. 17


Three Senators and a group of Pentagon officials were allowed today to tour
long-secret areas of Vietnam's military headquarters and to rummage through a
storeroom of museum artifacts that could hold clues to the fate of Americans
missing from the Vietnam War.

The visits were evidence of what Prime Minister Vo Van Kiet of Vietnam described
today as his nation's determination to "resolve all aspects of the issue of
missing Americans" and to establish full diplomatic and economic ties with the
United States.

In the dank storeroom in Hanoi's central war museum, Senator John F. Kerry, a
Massachusetts Democrat who is chairman of the Senate Select Committee on
M.I.A.-P.O.W. affairs, opened a dust-covered wooden closet and found stacks of
neatly folded olive green flight suits that, according to the Vietnamese, had
been worn by American airmen shot down over North Vietnamese territory.

Defense Department investigators had not been granted access to the storeroom
until today, and they appeared startled by Senator Kerry's discovery.

Hanoi's 'Enormous Effort'

At least some of the flight suits bore name tags and, according to
investigators, could provide the United States with important evidence in trying
to determine the fate of pilots and other airmen who are among the 2,265
Americans still listed as unaccounted for from the Vietnam War.

After touring the museum, Maj. Gen. Thomas G. Needham, who oversees Pentagon
teams investigating the fate of missing Americans throughout Indochina, said
that Vietnamese cooperation "has markedly increased almost every day." "We've no
reason to believe that we're not getting the information we want," he said.

Senator Hank Brown, a Colorado Republican who is a member of the select
committee, said today in Hanoi that he detected an "enormous effort by Vietnam
to change -- to work toward friendship, to work toward cooperation."

The three Senators -- Mr. Brown, Mr. Kerry and Tom Daschle, a South Dakota
Democrat who is also a member of the committee -- are making the panel's last
scheduled visit to Vietnam before the committee is to complete a final report
and go out of business in January after a 17-month investigation.

Tour of the Citadel

The report is expected to judge the quality of Vietnamese cooperation in
resolving the question of Americans missing from the war. The Senators hinted
this week that President Bush, as one of his final acts in the White House, will
relax a 17-year American trade embargo that has discouraged foreign investments
in Vietnam.

Calls by Americans to relax the embargo have accelerated since Vietnam's
announcement last month that it would allow American investigators full access
to military museums and archives holding information about Americans.

Today's visit to the Hanoi war museum, the Museum of the People's Army, came
after the three Senators and a team of Pentagon officials toured the Citadel, a
complex of buildings that serves as Vietnam's military headquarters.

Over the years, American intelligence reports gathered from Vietnamese refugees
have suggested that American prisoners might have been held in the Citadel long
after the end of the Vietnam War. But Senator Kerry said after touring the
building that "we found significant information" discounting at least one such
report, asserting that a group of about 30 Caucasian men was seen there in 1986.


Senator Is Impressed

Vietnamese officials, hopeful that President Bush will relax and perhaps even
lift the economic embargo before he leaves office in January, appeared anxious
today to convince the Senators and Pentagon officials that Hanoi was cooperating
fully in the search for missing Americans.

Senator Kerry, a decorated Vietnam veteran, said he was very impressed with the
Vietnamese efforts.

"I think the cooperation, at least in the couple of of days we've been here, has
been as much as we can ask for," he said. "Everything we've asked for has been
done."

The Senators also met today with Prime Minister Kiet, who later told reporters
that American and Vietnamese officials "understand each other very clearly and
well."

Senator Kerry was presented by the museum's director, Col. Pham Duc Dai, with
several wartime artifacts and documents, including a handful of Social Security
cards and one identification card that had been collected from captured or
killed American soldiers.

The Senators were given a blue and gold airman's helmet that, the Vietnamese
said, had been worn by Senator John McCain, an Arizona Republican who is a
member of the select committee and who was a prisoner of war in North Vietnam
for more than five years. Inside the helmet were the initials "J. M."

"I would think there must be piles of this stuff elsewhere," Senator Kerry said,
pointing to the other wartime relics that were turned over to the American
delegation today: items of military clothing, what appeared to be an American
pilot's charred log book, a handbook titled "Survival" on American military
search and rescue techniques.


LOAD-DATE: November 18, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              269 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 18, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Topics of The Times;
Malcolm and the Mias

SECTION: Section A; Page 26; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 221 words


Current events in two hemispheres are offering young Americans lessons in
history, and usage.

Vietnam's new willingness to provide information about Americans missing in
action (M.I.A.'s) is likely to help young adults avoid howlers like the one some
years ago when a young newscaster on National Public Radio described
Congressional hearings concerning "the Mia families."

Likewise, the opening today of the long-anticipated movie about Malcolm X
recalls the creative usage once offered by a student announcer on the M.I.T.
college radio station. The guest speaker on campus that day, he said, inferring
a Roman numeral, would be Malcolm the 10th.

These are not spoonerisms, silly mispronunciations like "well-boiled icicle"
instead of well-oiled bicycle. Neither are they malapropisms, clumsily misspoken
words like the ones made famous on "Saturday Night Live" by the late Gilda
Radner. "National racehorses" and "endangered feces," said her character Emily
Litella, only to back off when told the subject was natural resources and
endangered species.

No, Malcolm and the Mias are only mistakes, made by people whose only flaw is
that they lack familiarity with not-so-distant events. Young people, for the
most part, and the decent response to their innocence is the one Emily Litella
gave: Ne-ver mind.

LOAD-DATE: November 18, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              270 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 19, 1992, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

POLITICAL MOTIVE CITED IN SCRUTINY OF PASSPORT FILES

BYLINE: By ROBERT PEAR,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 1909 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 18


The State Department's internal investigator said today that he suspected that
the White House was aware of what he called a "politically motivated" search
through Bill Clinton's passport records while it was under way. But he said
there was no evidence that the White House had instigated the search.

After a seven-week investigation into a scandal that jolted President Bush's
re-election campaign and deeply embarrassed the State Department, the agency's
inspector general, Sherman M. Funk, said it was clear that White House officials
had hoped the State Department could get "information detrimental to Clinton" in
an effort "to influence the outcome of a Presidential election."

The search, Mr. Funk said, was conducted in an atmosphere in which "there were
people in Washington who were salivating" for information that could erase Mr.
Clinton's lead over President Bush in opinion polls.

Lower-Level Officials Blamed

In his report, Mr. Funk wrote, "We found no evidence that the White House -- or
any other external source -- orchestrated an 'attack' on the Clinton files." He
laid blame for the affair on relatively junior State Department political
appointees, who were punished by being dismissed or demoted, and he exonerated
all of the department's top-level officials.

If Mr. Funk's account is correct, the White House knew of the search but took no
action to stop it.

The inspector general said he had found no evidence implicating James A. Baker
3d, the White House chief of staff, in the search for Mr. Clinton's passport
files. But he said Mr. Baker learned of the search on Sept. 30 or Oct. 1, soon
after it began.

Actions of Baker Aide

Margaret D. Tutwiler, a top aide to Mr. Baker, deliberately avoided involvement
in the search but may have had some information about it at the time it was
carried out, Mr. Funk said.

The investigation was ordered by Acting Secretary of State Lawrence S.
Eagleburger, who said today that the search had thrust the State Department into
politics, "where it does not belong" and had damaged its reputation.

Under Federal law, the inspector general is supposed to conduct independent,
impartial investigations without interference by Federal employees or outsiders.
Mr. Funk was appointed by President Ronald Reagan in 1987 and was inspector
general of the Commerce Department from 1981 to 1987.

Before and after the search, Mr. Funk said, there was "a continuing dialogue"
between Janet G. Mullins, the White House director of political affairs, and
Steven K. Berry, the Acting Assistant Secretary of State for Legislative
Affairs. Mr. Funk said they had frequently talked to each other about requests
filed by news organizations, under the Freedom of Information Act, for data from
Mr. Clinton's files.

At a news conference today, Mr. Funk said he believed that Ms. Mullins and
possibly other White House officials knew of the search at the time it was
conducted, on the evening of Sept. 30 and on Oct. 1.

In his report, Mr. Funk gave a detailed account of what happened when the State
Department official who supervised the search, Elizabeth M. Tamposi, called Miss
Tutwiler on the night of Sept. 30. He said that Ms. Mullins "happened to be in
Miss Tutwiler's office" when Miss Tutwiler's secretary announced the call.

"Ms. Tutwiler raised her eyebrows, stated that she did not want to talk to Ms.
Tamposi and that she was not going to return the call," the inspector general
said. "Ms. Tutwiler told Ms. Mullins that she did not think it would be
appropriate for her to become involved in the Clinton files matter."

Call to White House

Ms. Tamposi tried to call Miss Tutwiler, the White House director of
communications, at 6:23 P.M. on Sept. 30 while the search was going on, Mr. Funk
said. Miss Tutwiler is the aide closest to Mr. Baker, the former Secretary of
State. She did not take or return Ms. Tamposi's call.

Mr. Funk said he suspected that Ms. Mullins and possibly other White House
officials knew of the search at that time and wanted to avoid any discussion
with Ms. Tamposi.

Asked if the White House knew of the search while it was being conducted, Mr.
Funk said, "I suspect it, yes."

"My supposition," he said, "is that there was knowledge at that time" by at
least one person in the White House, Ms. Mullins. Ms. Tamposi had discussed the
search with Mr. Berry, and the inspector general said he believed Ms. Mullins
had learned of it from Mr. Berry.

Refusal to Comment

Ms. Mullins, Miss Tutwiler and the White House refused tonight to comment on the
inspector general's report.

Ms. Tamposi issued a statement saying she regretted that "my actions may have
been misperceived." She added, "I will not speculate as to the actions of others
who may have been involved directly or indirectly in this matter."

The report was based on 107 interviews with officials at the State Department,
the White House and other agencies. Among those interviewed were Ms. Mullins,
Miss Tutwiler and Mr. Baker. Ms. Mullins and Miss Tutwiler worked for Mr. Baker
when he was Secretary of State and went with him to the White House in August.
Ms. Mullins was particularly friendly with Mr. Berry because they used to work
in the same office, when Ms. Mullins was Assistant Secretary of State for
Legislative Affairs.

"There is no sign of a conspiracy, no sign of a cabal, no sign of some kind of
orchestrated attempt to get at the Clinton files," Mr. Funk said. "There was
abuse of authority. There was political motivation."

The Bush campaign was looking for evidence to substantiate rumors that Mr.
Clinton had considered renouncing United States citizenship as a college student
to avoid military service in Vietnam. No such evidence was found.

Mr. Eagleburger said the search for passport records of Mr. Clinton, his mother,
Virginia Kelley, and Ross Perot, the independent Presidential candidate, had
severely damaged the image of the State Department.

"Our reputation has been tarnished," said Mr. Eagleburger, who was a Foreign
Service officer for 27 years. "This building has no business being engaged in
partisan political efforts of this sort." Mr. Eagleburger said that he had
offered to resign because of the searches but that President Bush had rejected
the offer.

Disappointment in Congress

On Capitol Hill, the initial reaction to Mr. Funk's report was dismay,
disappointment and dissatisfaction. Members of Congress said they would pursue
their own investigations to address questions left unanswered by Mr. Funk.

Representative Howard L. Berman, the California Democrat who heads a House
subcommittee responsible for State Department operations, said Mr. Funk's report
was "a beginning, not an end to the investigation." He said the report showed
that the Bush Administration had turned the department into "an opposition
research arm of the Republican National Committee."

The General Accounting Office, an arm of Congress, has been investigating the
search of the Clinton and Perot files since late October. Representative William
L. Clay, chairman of the House Committee on Post Office and Civil Service, said
today he would open a separate investigation to "find out what role the White
House played."

Mr. Clay, Democrat of Missouri, expressed concern about possible violations of
the Hatch Act, a 1939 law that limits the political activities of Federal
employees.

Mr. Funk said that the search for negative information on Mr. Clinton was
conducted with extraordinary zeal, in "a kind of a desperate fashion," by
political appointees and career employees at the State Department but that there
was no evidence of criminal wrongdoing.

He said the search of Mr. Clinton's files was prompted by requests from
journalists under the Freedom of Information Act, by Congressional inquiries and
"by partisan hopes to derail the Clinton campaign." The State Department has
already said that the officials who carried out the search violated regulations
by doing so with unusual swiftness to complete it before Election Day.

"Never, in our opinion, in the annals of the Freedom of Information Act has
there ever been a search conducted with such urgency, scope, thoroughness, and
grade levels of participants," Mr. Funk said.

Summarizing his conclusions in a memorandum to Mr. Eagleburger, the inspector
general said: "We found no major fraud, no massive corruption, no rogue
operations subverting American foreign policy. In a broader sense, however, what
we did find was more disturbing than any of these. What we found was an attempt
to use the records and employees of a Government agency, the U.S. Department of
State, to influence the outcome of a Presidential election."

At the news conference, Mr. Funk said: "We found no evidence that anybody above
the level of Assistant Secretary had been involved in any way or had given
directions in any way. We concluded that there had been a series of blunders in
some cases, a series of incredibly poor lapses in judgment in other cases, some
politically motivated, some not."

Dismissal of Official

President Bush dismissed Ms. Tamposi, the Assistant Secretary of State for
Consular Affairs, on Nov. 10. Mr. Eagleburger said that Mr. Berry could stay at
the State Department, at least for the remainder of the Bush Administration, but
would no longer serve as an Assistant Secretary.

Mr. Eagleburger and Mr. Funk refused to answer directly when asked today if Mr.
Baker's role in the Bush campaign had contributed to a climate in which the
State Department was manipulated for political purposes.

"The environment that existed here existed throughout Washington in an election
year," Mr. Funk said. "It's not unique to the State Department.

Mr. Funk said State Department officials were, in effect, trying to confirm
rumors that Mr. Clinton had once considered surrendering his citizenship to
avoid the draft.

Presidency at Stake

"At the time these rumors were floating around, the Clinton campaign was way
ahead in the polls," Mr. Funk said. "Given the nature of normal political
activity, it could be expected that anybody would relish the thought of coming
up with data which would put the opposing candidate in an extraordinarily
tenuous position. In fact, it's not too much to think that if this information
had come out, if it had been confirmed, it might have had a decisive impact upon
the election."

Mr. Funk recommended unspecified disciplinary action against Carmen A.
DiPlacido, a longtime State Department employee who helped carry out the search
of Mr. Clinton's files.

Under pressure from Ms. Tamposi, Mr. DiPlacido, the acting director of the
passport office, "crossed the line from appropriate conduct of duties into
carrying out a politically motivated search," Mr. Funk said.

The inspector general said Ms. Tamposi "has consistently attempted to shift the
blame to others" but was herself primarily responsible for the search of
passport files. Mr. Funk said Ms. Tamposi had "a serious lapse in judgment" when
she decided to keep Mr. Clinton's passport files at her home on the night of
Sept. 30.

Mr. Funk said Ms. Tamposi talked to John F. W. Rogers, the Under Secretary of
State for Management, at about 6:45 P.M. on Sept. 30, while her staff was
searching for Mr. Clinton's files. But the inspector general said he found no
evidence to confirm Ms. Tamposi's assertion that Mr. Rogers had authorized or
approved the search.

LOAD-DATE: November 19, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Elizabeth M. Tamposi, the State Department official who was
dismissed over her role in the search of President-elect Bill Clinton's passport
files, leaving her home yesterday in Nashua, N.H. (Associated Press) (pg. A24)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              271 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 19, 1992, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

THE TRANSITION;
Washington Greets Clinton With Open Arms

BYLINE: By FELICITY BARRINGER,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1047 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 18


President-elect Bill Clinton walked into Washington's open arms today, gliding
from the campaign he just won into the campaign he has just begun. In a sneak
preview of the style and symbolism likely to mark the Clinton Presidency, he
moved quickly from the august confines of the White House to the storefronts of
Georgia Avenue, seeking wisdom from the President and from the people.

The Presidential wisdom was offered in private. But Mr. Clinton later described
his meeting with Mr. Bush, which covered topics from foreign policy to health
care, as "terrific." [Page A22.]

The popular wisdom emerged willy-nilly from a happy, boisterous crowd of 500
people who made it through two metal detectors to touch Mr. Clinton, to pose for
pictures with him and to talk about their children, their businesses, how much
they liked the movie "Malcolm X," how much they feared the guns that kill the
young men in their alleys and how much they wanted him to succeed.

"I'm glad you're with the common folk -- you're keeping your promise," said one
man.

"My son is here," said another. "He wants to become President of the United
States. God bless you."

Along the one-and-one-half-block walk, Mr. Clinton talked to a hairdresser about
health insurance reform, chatted with a liquor store owner about the job
creation potential of small business and promised a 9-year-old girl an
invitation to his inaugural.

Mr. Clinton has declared that his Presidency will itself be a campaign, an
appeal to the people to crash through the Washington logjam. As he moved from
the capital's ceremonial venues to its streets -- trailing a cumbersome army of
television cameras, photographers, and reporters on three flatbed trucks -- he
seemed to be following that blueprint.

"The campaign has just begun," said Kenneth M. Duberstein, who, as President
Reagan's chief of staff, has seen Presidential transitions from both ends. "I
mean his campaign to change America, his campaign to get the economy moving in
the direction he promised and to convince the American people to rally around
him and his program -- a program which has not yet been written and a program on
which the American people should be focused."

After a virtually wordless, two-minute public welcome of Mr. Clinton at the
White House, marked by President Bush's open-armed greeting of the rival he once
belittled as a "bozo," the President-elect seemed firmly in control of the day's
symbolism.

Indeed, as the ponderous mediaapparatus detached itself from the President and
lumbered off after Mr. Clinton, it underlined the swiftness with which public
attention has turned to the newcomer and away from the lame-duck President.

"All the attention, all the media focus, all the political focus all flows to
the incoming guy," said Mr. Duberstein. "And you're kind of left there taking
care of business. It's as if you knew it was time to move off center stage, but
you were still on stage when all of a sudden the new soprano was front and
center. Even if the soprano's act didn't begin till tomorrow."

Past and Future

There was, in fact, a poignant contrast between the two most recent public
appearances of these former rivals. One week ago, President Bush drove to the
Vietnam Veterans Memorial at midnight to participate in a public reading of the
names of America's dead, a somber moment honoring the past. Today,
President-elect Clinton went to the streets of Washington in mid-afternoon, to
talk about the future.

In recent public statements, President Bush has made it clear that he dislikes
the 11-week Presidential fadeout prescribed by the Constitution. At an awards
dinner Monday night, according to a report by United Press International, Mr.
Bush said, "I've concluded that the interregnum is too long, too ungenerous and
too long. But we're determined to finish this in style."

Attention Blossoms

But if Mr. Bush was uncomfortable with the sudden shrinking sensation
confronting a lame-duck President, Mr. Clinton seemed immune to vertigo as his
own stature -- if stature can be measured in attention of reporters and cameras
-- grew by the second. As Mr. Clinton's motorcade pulled into the White House
driveway, some 250 or more reporters tripped over each other to get a good view,
or gave up and glumly regarded their colleagues' backs.

Perhaps 10 public words were spoken between the two men. Each made perhaps five
gestures -- awkward waves, firm handshakes and the like -- which worked out to
25 reporters per gesture. Seldom since Mr. Bush first took office has a
two-minute "photo opportunity" received such coverage.

There was other, more disconcerting evidence that, for better and for worse, the
nation is turning its attention to the newcomers. One young man strode back and
forth with a handwritten sign saying, "Welcome to Washington, Gov. Clinton. I
need a job in your Administration!" As this sign carrier walked to and fro, he
crossed paths with an older, angrier man whose sign read, "Clinton Cut My
Sister's Throat."

The young man who wanted a job later turned up at the intersection of Ingraham
Street and Georgia Avenue, but did not appear to make it through the metal
detectors set up to screen the reporters and the crowds. But, with people like
the other, angrier sign-carrier in mind, hundreds of police and security agents
wandered the byways and rooftops near the one-and-one-half-block stretch of
Georgia Avenue before Mr. Clinton got there.

But on the ground, the crowd's anticipation seemed free of any anxiety. They
clapped when the District's Mayor, Sharon Pratt Kelly, climbed out of her car.
They smiled when Mayor Kelly, along with City Councilwoman Charlene Drew Jarvis
and Eleanor Holmes Norton, the District's nonvoting Congressional delegate,
greeted the crowds. But they roared and hollered when, at 3:20, Mr. Clinton got
out of his limousine and started to talk to them.

"I thought if I came here the very first thing in Washington it would make a
statement that I wanted to support small business," Mr. Clinton told Yong Mo
Chong, the Korean-born owner of Hamilton Beverage.

"This is the first time ever a President of the U.S.A. went to a small business
like this," a beaming Mr. Chong responded. "You're going to make a great
President."

LOAD-DATE: November 19, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Pennsylvania Avenue: President-elect Bill Clinton and President
Bush at the White House. (Agence France-Presse); Georgia Avenue: Mr. Clinton
with Washingtonians on a neighborhood walk. Among them were Eleanor Holmes
Norton, delegate to Congress, fourth from right, and Mayor Sharon Pratt Kelly,
sixth from right. (Michael Geissinger for The New York Times) (pg. A1);
President Bush greeting President-elect Bill Clinton yesterday as Mr. Clinton
arrived at the White House.; As Mr. Clinton and Mr. Bush met in the White House,
Andrew Gerst of Tenafly, N.J., did a little job hunting outside. Mr. Gerst's
mother said that later, when Mr. Clinton greeted people on Georgia Avenue, her
son, who had worked for the Clinton campaign in New Jersey, asked the
President-elect for a job in his Administration. She said Mr. Clinton told him
to submit a resume.; A reluctant Jordan Reid, 7 years old, took his place last
night for a photo opportunity with President-elect Bill Clinton and his wife,
Hillary, at a reception for the Children's Defense Fund. (Stephen Crowley/The
New York Times) (pg. A22)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              272 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 19, 1992, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1151 words



International A3-13

NATO BACKS YUGOSLAV BLOCKADE
NATO agreed to enforce a United Nations-backed naval blockade to tighten the
trade embargo against Yugoslavia and ordered its military experts to work out
operational details by Friday.  A1

U.S. PRESSES FOR SERB'S OUSTER
Having failed to budge President Slobodan Milosevic from his position as
Serbia's strongman with economic and political sanctions, the United States is
now trying to increase pressure for his ouster by supporting Serbian opposition
to him, especially on Yugoslav television.  A11



A BLEAK MOOD IN SARAJEVO
As winter nears, there is a bleakness of mood that pervades homes and apartments
in Sarajevo, the besieged capital of Bosnia and Herzegovina, something that
transcends the need to burn old furniture for heating and the dwindling food
reserves that have cut the diet for many.  A12

ISRAEL, IMMIGRANTS AND H.I.V.
The Government has announced that Israel is barring immigrants carrying the
virus that causes AIDS, setting off an outcry from critics who say the ban is
discriminatory and contradicts a law that gives all Jews the right to settle in
Israel.  A3

GERMANS REASSURE ISRAEL
In Israel, a country that was born in the pain of Nazi Germany's horrors,
leaders of the new Germany have arrived this week, reassuring their sensitive
hosts that there will not be another fire this time.  A3

IDENTIFYING VIETNAM DEAD
Documents and wartime artifacts released by the Vietnamese Government have
allowed American investigators to determine that four soldiers listed as missing
did in fact die, the chairman of a Senate investigating panel said today.  A8

PSYCHIATRIC VICTIMS IN CANADA
The Canadian Government, in a reversal of position caused by public pressure,
has finally agreed to compensate victims of bizarre psychiatric experiments
carried out in the 1950's and funded covertly by the Central Intelligence
Agency.  A9

Britain reaffirms plans for more democracy in Hong Kong.  A5

Striking tobacco workers are the last straw in Italy.  A6

Job action causes India travelers to use smaller airlines.  A10

Pakistan arrests former leader and her party aides.  A8

Tallaght Journal: Candidate reflects new style of Irish politics.  A4


National A16-28, B9

REPORT ON CLINTON-FILE SEARCH
The State Department's inspector general said he suspected that the White House
was aware of what he called a "politically motivated" search through passport
records on Bill Clinton while the search was under way. But he said there was no
evidence that the White House had instigated it.  A1

At Foggy Bottom, resentment and relief.  A24

MR. CLINTON GOES TO WASHINGTON
From the White House to the capital's storefronts, the day belonged to the
President-elect, who met with President Bush, toured among pleased everyday
people and seemed fully in control of the imagery that he sought to project for
the new Administration.  A1

Clinton said his meeting with Bush had been "terrific." A22

News analysis: For Clinton, a perilous journey has begun.  A23

The Clinton economic chief made a flurry of appointments.  A22

BISHOPS REJECT PAPER ON WOMEN
The nation's Roman Catholic bishops declined to adopt a pastoral letter on the
role of women, a document nine years in the making that had ended up reflecting
long-held views of the Vatican.  A1

RARE STEP BY GRAND JURORS
Twelve members of a grand jury that had spent two and a half years hearing
evidence of environmental crimes at the Rocky Flats nuclear weapons plant in
Colorado asked that the Government appoint a special prosecutor to investigate
the Justice Department's handling of the case.  A16

The military reportedly considered radiation as a terror weapon.  A17

NEW PERIL TO ALASKA GRAY WOLVES
Trying to tip the balance of nature in favor of moose and caribous, and thus in
favor of hunters and tourism, wildlife officials in Alaska have decided to start
shooting wolves from airplanes over a huge part of the state's wilderness.  A16

NAVY ACTS ON HOMOSEXUALS
The Navy will require all R.O.T.C. cadets to sign an affidavit saying they
understand that they can be discharged and forced to pay back their scholarships
if they are found to be homosexual.  A18

FROM THE SPOTLIGHT TO OBSCURITY
The second trial of Clair E. George, the former C.I.A. official charged with
lying to Congress and a grand jury about the Iran-contra affair, is lurching
toward an end, drained of most of its drama.  A28

Vitamin E cuts the risk of heart disease, two studies found.  A19

Researchers said a big California quake now loomed nearer.  A20

An autopsy found drugs in the victim of the Detroit police beating.  A25


Metro Digest B1

SHOT BY FELLOW OFFICERS
A team of three transit officers, mistakenly convinced that they were
confronting a pair of armed robbers holding up a woman, opened fire on their
colleagues outside a Brooklyn subway stop. A1

RIGHTS TO A POP HIT
In a bit of revisionist music history, a Federal jury in Manhattan ruled that
two members of the group Frankie Lymon and the Teen-Agers had actually first
asked the apocalyptic questions posed by the song, "Why Do Fools Fall in Love."
A1

LAWMAKERS UNDER INQUIRY
Federal investigators have questioned at least 18 present and former Connecticut
lawmakers and searched the home and office of the state's Republican Party
chairman as part of an inquiry into 1989 votes about allowing out-of-state banks
to operate in Connecticut.  A1

Business Digest D1

The Home Section C1-16

Common folk, too, can have mattress trouble.  C1

On the book-signing circuit with Magic Johnson.  C1

So the dog ate your invitation.  C1

The challenge of fish-keeping.  C2

Arts/Entertainment C17-28

Gay autobiography wins a National Book Award.C19

Prices lower than expected at Christie's.  C19

New-York Historical Society may receive fiscal help.  C19

Dance: New faces, more 'Nutcrackers.' C19

Music: "Corkscrews," a revue.  C23

Word and Image:
"Looking Around," by Witold Rybczynski.  C25

Sports B10-17

Baseball: Bonds is m.v.p. B11

Yanks still smarting after losses. B13

Basketball: Knicks need realigning. B14

Indiana wins N.I.T. opener.  B14

Without Taylor, Giants turn cautious. B13

Hockey: Rangers welcome a timeout. B17

Devils top Sabres.  B17

Tennis: Capriati advances. B11

Obituaries D20-21

Dorothy Kirsten, lyric soprano

Editorials/Op-Ed A26-27

Editorials

Richard Nixon's unjust reward.

New York's finest, embarrassed.

Needed: ambassador in Moscow.

Topics: A star is born.

Letters

William Safire: Eight rounds to go.

Leslie H. Gelb: Shoot to feed Somalia.

Richard Nixon: Save the peace dividend.

LOAD-DATE: November 19, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              273 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 19, 1992, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Growing Up Under the Eyes of a Probation Officer

BYLINE: By FELICIA R. LEE

SECTION: Section B; Page 1; Column 2; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1729 words


It only took 15 minutes for Jacqueline McDonald, a probation officer, to decide
that things were going badly for Montel B., the 15-year-old under her
supervision.

She saw two big bottles of wine cooler on his bedroom table. She heard his
grandmother explain his absence from school that day by saying that she lacked
carfare for him -- although she admitted that she had lent the same amount that
day to a woman who was known to stash guns for teen-agers in the housing
project. And as Ms. McDonald left, she spied Montel in a new coat that she knew
he could not afford except for the help of gang members who protected him in
return for allegiance.

Ms. McDonald decided that she would recommend that Montel, who had already
violated his probation by being caught with a loaded gun, be sent to a juvenile
detention center.

Near Doubling of Numbers

"Of course now I'm angry and upset," Ms. McDonald said. "I guess I'm most upset
about the guardian -- she should know better."

The gloomy trip to a Queens housing project offered a glimpse into the world of
the thousands of children on probation in New York City. Their lives of
fractured families, gangs, and drugs offer sad evidence of the factors that
conspire to create more and more Montels: children under 18 who are so angry and
alienated that they are dangerous to society and themselves.

The numbers have been rising steadily for five years. The Family Court Division
of the city's Law Department, which prosecutes juvenile offenders in Family
Court, received 12,700 referrals in 1991, up from about 6,700 in 1986.

Many of those prosecuted are like Montel, children who have been caught with
weapons, stolen property, sold drugs or hurt people. Almost one-fourth of the
reported robberies in the nation committed by children age 15 and younger take
place in New York City, according to Law Department statistics. In the last four
years, juvenile robberies in the city have jumped by 54 percent, assaults by 18
percent, and drug charges by 44 percent. Those who commit serious crimes usually
end up in detention, but the majority who commit lesser crimes are placed on
probation.

Each day in Queens, some of the children who commit such crimes can be found on
the second floor of Family Court in Jamaica meeting with their probation
officers.

In a grimy waiting room with plastic chairs, they wait once a week or biweekly
to be ushered into the small offices of their probation officers. Their
probation lasts anywhere from six months to two years.

The children, whose full names are being withheld because of their ages, told of
roaming the streets as early as age 9 because their parents did not insist on
curfews or school attendance. They told tales of mothers and fathers felled by
gunshots and AIDS. They joked about grown-ups who opened nightclubs during the
day for "cut parties" where school truants drink liquor and dance.

Montel B. is the child of drug-addict parents who are both completing a
residential rehabilitation program. His uncle, with whom he was close, had been
shot to death.

Some, like Takeesha C., a 15-year-old nicknamed "Lady T," emulate their own
troubled family. In her case, all her siblings, except for her older sister,
have been on probation. Although she comes from a two-parent home, Takeesha said
she talks to her father "only for money." She landed on probation after beating
up another girl with a brick "because we didn't like each other."

"My family is a fighting family, we don't discuss things," she said. "Nowadays
fighting is the answer. Talking won't solve anything."

Hoping Despite Despair

The children and their probation officers describe a "gangster mentality" on the
streets. It means expensive clothes, making money any way possible, using
violence to solve disputes, and living as if there is no future. Yet most of the
children interviewed said they felt trapped and wanted to find a better way of
life.

"I don't hang out," said Christian M., a 14-year-old arrested for gun
possession. His mother was shot to death three years ago, and he believes his
stepfather did it. "People in my neighborhood, they have beef with other people,
you can get shot just standing there. I know that's trouble but I got nowhere
else to live."

During a trip last month to Howard University in Washington, many of the
youngsters on probation said they had never been on a college campus, and many
did not even know that historically black schools like Howard even existed.
Their views of adult life tend to be shaped by people overwhelmed by negative
forces like violent neighborhoods, bad relationships and financial debt.

"We are seeing kids with the same affect as kids in Vietnam or Northern
Ireland," said Elayne Dix, who supervises probation officers in Queens. "The
kids are younger; the crimes are more serious. The kids are coming from
increasingly complicated family situations. The father, the older brother or the
stepfather increasingly has served hard time."

She said the department is placing more emphasis on programs to teach life and
parenting skills. But Peter Reinharz, the chief prosecutor for the city's Family
Court Division, said he would rather see tougher sentences and more children
taken off the streets.

"You're creating social experiments with the public as a control group," he
said. "The consequences if you get caught are so minimal, why not do it?

Roger P., a 16-year-old who said he found Christ after being arrested and placed
on probation for beating up another boy, admitted he once enjoyed intimidating
people. Roger said he and his friends delighted in descending on a small store
in a large group and stealing. He said it was the only time he felt happy and
stimulated.

He said his divorced parents, who constantly fight, were teen-agers when he was
born. He described his father as an unstable man who flitted from job to job and
woman to woman, and who failed to support his children.

No Parents, No Morals

"Everybody wants to be down," Roger said. "You know, the baggy pants, the gold.
They dis me at school because I don't dress that way and I study and carry the
Bible.

"Most of the youth have family problems," Roger said. "There's only their
mothers. There are no morals. You can go out late and stay out late. We have to
raise ourselves these days. I did. I wasn't doing a good job."

Although many of the children share Roger's background, few obtain his level of
insight. More are like Crystal B. She used to get into fights almost every day
and still does not know why. She is seeing a counselor and declares that she has
changed her life because she now attends school and thinks before she acts.

Crystal, who is 14 years old, said she hates school so much that she used to go
only twice a week. She was placed on probation for spraying another girl with
Mace. She said conversations with her probation officer, Charles Maddox, have
convinced her that school has some value. Before, she saw it only as punishment.

"I want to be a businesswoman," she said. "Wear skirts. All of that stuff. I
want to meet people, drive in cars, have a nice family and everything."

No one likes being on probation, but some of the children said they welcome the
concern shown by their probation officers. Many are like Ms. McDonald: young,
college-educated, street-smart black women.

Heather Lewter, a probation officer from Queens who died of cancer on Thursday,
worked until last week even though she was in pain. She said she was concerned
about the children with whom she had established a relationship.

Although the officers receive a few weeks of formal training, most of the skills
are acquired on the job. The turnover rate for the job, which pays $27,524 to
start, is as high as one in four each year. The caseloads can soar to over 100
at a time, meaning a steady parade of troubled adolescents and distraught
parents.

The probation officer often represents the first encounter the children have
with an adult who establishes guidelines and expectations. One probation
officer, Michelle Burroughs, said her questions about chores and curfews often
make parents realize that they are not doing their job. The legal requirements
for youngsters on probation are as basic as not committing any new crime,
showing up for probation visits, and staying in school.

A Surrogate Parent

However, the moral task that Ms. McDonald and her colleagues assume is nothing
less than to teach the children a new way of looking at the world.

"My duty is to make them realize they can't continue to live their lives this
way," said Ms. McDonald, who sits at a desk with posters of the Rev. Martin
Luther King Jr. on her right and Malcolm X on her left.

One recent day, Rashann H. and his mother sat in Ms. McDonald's office. Rashann,
16 years old and in the 11th grade, wore a diamond stud in one ear and huge
white sneakers. His mother described Ms. McDonald as a lifesaver. She said her
son, who was arrested for selling crack cocaine, would listen to the probation
officer sometimes when he would not listen to her.

Mrs. H. said that Rashann had been shaken up and mellowed by his arrest and a
subsequent experience of seeing two suspected drug dealers shot to death by a
rival dealer. She nudged her son to talk about why he sold drugs, but he merely
hung his head.

"He told me he did it to help me get money to pay bills," said Mrs. H., who
describes herself an an independent businesswoman. "I think he did it because he
asked me for pump sneakers and I didn't have the resources.

Hopes for the Future

"I grew up as a foster child and I felt neglected and abused," she said. "I
didn't have a childhood per se. I wanted them to enjoy childhood without having
a lot of responsibilities. Christmas would come around and I would pay for
Christmas for a whole year.

"Maybe I made the mistake of being too giving," Mrs. H said. "Maybe I should
have made them earn more."

Rashann shifted uncomfortably in his chair. Ms. McDonald smiled her trademark
smile.

"You know you're not a bad person for what you have done," she said to Rashann.
"What you did was wrong. But you are not a bad person."

She handed Rashann an application for Howard University.

The motto on the second floor, in that graffiti-scared building full of sad
children and their parents, is to look to the future.

LOAD-DATE: November 19, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Jacqueline McDonald, a probation officer, met with a teen-ager
last week at Queens Family Court in Jamaica. Ms. McDonald works with the
thousands of youths on probation in neighborhoods riddled by drugs, guns and
gangs. (Monica Almeida/The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              274 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 19, 1992, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Colonel in Hanoi Tells Senators How 4 M.I.A.'s Died in a Battle

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHENON,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 8; Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 661 words

DATELINE: HANOI, Vietnam, Nov. 18


Documents and wartime artifacts released this week by the Vietnamese Government
have allowed American investigators to determine that four soldiers listed as
missing from the Vietnam War did in fact die, the chairman of a Senate
investigating panel said today.

The soldiers were apparently killed in an ambush by North Vietnamese forces in
July 1967 in the central province of Quang Ngai.

Their fate was unclear until this week, when an aging Vietnamese colonel
provided the panel with his 1967 war diary, which described the ambush and the
effort by local villagers to hide the bodies of the four soldiers from American
search-and-rescue teams.

'We Know What Happened'

"At least in our judgment, we believe we can say we know what happened," said
Senator John F. Kerry, a Massachusetts Democrat who is chairman of the Senate
Select Committee on P.O.W.-M.I.A. Affairs. "We believe they died, although we
don't have their remains yet." The names of the four soldiers were not released.

"In addition to those four people, I've been informed that there are answers as
to other people," he added.

At a news conference here, Senator Kerry, a decorated Vietnam veteran, said
extensive new cooperation from the Vietnamese Government in resolving the fate
of missing Americans must be met with a gesture by the United States, which has
maintained a crippling trade embargo on Hanoi since the end of the war.

Vietnamese cooperation has been "significant," the Senator said, "and I think
the United States needs to recognize that significance."

"Those of us who are on this trip are strongly inclined to urge the President to
take certain actions," he said. "This cannot be a one-way street. I think it
would be inappropriate of the United States not to act."

Senator Kerry has suggested strongly that President Bush is on the verge of
relaxing the embargo.

He said today that the cooperation provided by Vietnam in recent days led him to
think that President Bush need not wait to act until after the committee has
released its report. "It's my sense that if the President believes cooperation
has been forthcoming," he said, "I don't think he would necessarily wait."

Senator Kerry, whose committee is supposed to complete its work before early
January and then file a report, said he would encourage the Defense Department
to revise its standards for resolving the status of the 2,265 Americans who are
still officially listed as missing.

He and the two Senators traveling with him, Hank Brown, a Colorado Republican,
and Tom Daschle, a South Dakota Democrat, have suggested that the standards are
unrealistic because they allow resolution of a case only if the body of a
missing American is found or if the missing person is found alive. In many
cases, investigators say, remains will never be recovered.

"We are going to have to talk to the Secretary of Defense about this whole
category of standards," he said. "There are 2,265 cases, but in point of fact we
know that about 450 of the losses were over water. We know that another
significant number are incidents in which there was such an explosion that there
was nothing left."

The Colonel's Diary

On Tuesday the senators were presented with war artifacts that appeared to hold
clues to the fate of missing Americans.

The diary was presented to Senator Kerry by Col. Pham Duc Dai, director of all
Vietnamese military museums, who said he saw the 1967 ambush in which the four
soldiers were killed.

"I saw the ambush and all four soldiers were killed right then," the colonel
said. "Fifteen minutes after, American helicopters were flying very near, trying
to find them. So the children came out and they laid on the bodies of the dead
soldiers -- covered the bodies of the soldiers with their own bodies -- so that
the helicopter pilots could not find them."

Colonel Dai said the bodies were never found because they were placed in a
nearby river and weighted down with rocks.


LOAD-DATE: November 19, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              275 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 22, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

BEST SELLERS: November 22, 1992

SECTION: Section 7; Page 38; Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1353 words



          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Fiction

 1          1   MIXED BLESSINGS, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $23.50.) Three
                couples' lives are strained by the problems of having children.

 2      1   5   THE TALE OF THE BODY THIEF, by Anne Rice. (Knopf, $24.) Lestat
                embarks on a dangerous enterprise; "The Vampire Chronicles,"
                continued.

 3      4   4   DRIVING FORCE, by Dick Francis. (Putnam, $21.95.) An
                ex-jockey's horse-transport business is besieged by a series of
                mysterious deaths.

 4      3   4   MOSTLY HARMLESS, by Douglas Adams. (Harmony, $20.) In the fifth
                volume of the "Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy" series, a
                survivor tries to cope with new predicaments.

 5      2   6   THE STARS SHINE DOWN, by Sidney Sheldon. (Morrow, $23.) The
                fortunes of a businesswoman are imperiled by secrets from her
                past. (LP)

 6      7   3   MEXICO, by James A. Michener. (Random House, $25.) While
                researching the lives of his ancestors, an American journalist
                learns about the history of the land south of the border. (LP)

 7          1   THE GENERAL'S DAUGHTER, by Nelson DeMille. (Warner, $21.95.)
                The investigation of the murder of a woman officer, a general's
                daughter, unearths scandals in the military.

 8      5   6   SABINE'S NOTEBOOK, by Nick Bantock. (Chronicle Books, $17.95.)
                Continuing the epistolary romance between two talented people
                begun in "Griffin & Sabine."

 9      8  37   THE PELICAN BRIEF, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $22.50.) A
                woman law student probes the murder of two Supreme Court
                justices.

10 *    6  12   GRIFFIN & SABINE, by Nick Bantock. (Chronicle Books, $17.95.)
                The romance of an artist and a secret admirer, told through
                cards and letters.

11          1   RED SQUARE, by Martin Cruz Smith. (Random House, $23.)
                Investigator Arkady Renko, returning to Moscow and Berlin after
                the collapse of Communism, still faces a perdurable mafia.

12     11  15   THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner,
                $14.95.) A photographer and a lonely farmer's wife in Iowa.

13      9  13   WHERE IS JOE MERCHANT? by Jimmy Buffett. (Harcourt Brace
                Jovanovich, $19.95.) A couple on a wild chase through the
                Caribbean on the trail of a deceased rock star who has been
                sighted there.

14     13  26   WAITING TO EXHALE, by Terry McMillan. (Viking, $22.) The
                friendships and romances of four black women in Phoenix.

15     14  19   GERALD'S GAME, by Stephen King. (Viking, $23.50.) Twenty-eight
                hours of horror suffered by a woman handcuffed to a bedpost.



          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Nonfiction



 1      1   3   SEX, by Madonna. (Warner, $49.95.) Erotic photographs of the
                pop star by Steven Meisel, and her reflections on them.

 2      2  10   THE WAY THINGS OUGHT TO BE, by Rush H. Limbaugh 3d. (Pocket,
                $22.) Anecdotes and opinions offered by the talk show host.

 3      3   7   IT DOESN'T TAKE A HERO, by H. Norman Schwarzkopf with Peter
                Petre. (Linda Grey/ Bantam, $25.) The autobiography of the
                general.

 4      4   5   I CAN'T BELIEVE I SAID THAT! by Kathie Lee Gifford with Jim
                Jerome. (Pocket, $22.) The autobiography of the television-show
                co-host.

 5      6  12   EVERY LIVING THING, by James Herriot. (St. Martin's, $22.95.)
                Continuing the memoirs of the Yorkshire veterinarian.

 6      7   4   BANKRUPTCY 1995, by Harry E. Figgie Jr. with Gerald J. Swanson.
                (Little, Brown, $19.95.) The authors predict the collapse of
                America under Government debt and suggest ways to cope with it.

 7      8  24   EARTH IN THE BALANCE, by Al Gore. (Houghton Mifflin, $22.95.)
                The Vice President-elect discusses factors affecting the
                environment.

 8      5  26   THE SILENT PASSAGE, by Gail Sheehy. (Random House, $16.) The
                psychological and social significance of menopause for today's
                women.

 9     10  15   WOMEN WHO RUN WITH THE WOLVES, by Clarissa Pinkola Estes.
                (Ballantine, $20.) A Jungian analyst reinterprets myths and
                folk tales to enable women to understand their psyches.

10      9   9   THE TE OF PIGLET, by Benjamin Hoff. (Dutton, $16.) Aspects of
                Taoist philosophy explained through the actions of an A. A.
                Milne character.

11     11  23   TRUMAN, by David McCullough. (Simon & Schuster, $30.) A
                biography of the 33d President.

12     12   3   GENIUS, by James Gleick. (Pantheon, $27.50.) The life and
                achievements of Richard Feynman, the Nobel Prize-winning
                physicist.

13     13  12   YOUNG MEN & FIRE, by Norman Maclean. (University of Chicago,
                $19.95.) An account of a disastrous fire in a Montana forest in
                1949.

14          1   MY LIFE, by Earvin (Magic) Johnson with William Novak. (Random
                House, $22.) The autobiography of the retired Los Angeles
                Lakers basketball player.

15     14   4   THE CHANGE, by Germaine Greer. (Knopf, $24.) An extensive
                survey of the physical, psychological and social effects of
                menopause.



          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous

 1      1  19   HARVEY PENICK'S LITTLE RED BOOK, by Harvey Penick with Bud
                Shrake. (Simon & Schuster, $19.) Anecdotes and tips about golf.

 2      2   8   ARE YOU THE ONE FOR ME? by Barbara De Angelis. (Delacorte,
                $21.) How to choose and keep the right partner in love and
                marriage.

 3      5   8   THE AMERICAN HERITAGE DICTIONARY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE.
                (Houghton Mifflin, $39.95.) The third edition.

 4          9   LIFE'S LITTLE INSTRUCTION BOOK, by H. Jackson Brown Jr.
                (Rutledge Hill, $12.95.) Some 500 tips for achieving a
                self-fulfilling life.

 5      4  38   A RETURN TO LOVE, by Marianne Williamson. (HarperCollins, $25.)
                Inspirational advice.

 6 *        9   THE MEASURE OF OUR SUCCESS, by Marian Wright Edelman. (Beacon,
                $15.) Rules to live by for children.


These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,050
bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 28,000 other
retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets. The figures are
statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United
States.

*An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect
the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of
the book above.

LP indicates that a book is available in large print.


And Bear in Mind

(Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)

YOU SEE, I HAVEN'T FORGOTTEN, by Yves Montand with Herve Hamon and Patrick
Rotman. (Knopf, $25.) Montand, who died last year, collaborated at great length
with the writers of this informative and balanced account of a fine singer and
actor.

SHOWMAN: The Life of David O. Selznick, by David Thomson. (Knopf, $35.) A
massive and masterly biography of the great independent Hollywood producer who
feared, correctly, that he would be remembered primarily for "Gone With the
Wind."

PILGRIM IN THE RUINS: A Life of Walker Percy, by Jay Tolson. (Simon & Schuster,
$27.50.) Mr. Tolson presents Percy as the hero of his own life, which contained
few outward events but produced a series of revelatory novels and philosophical
essays.

PERSONAL WITNESS: Israel Through My Eyes, by Abba Eban. (Putnam, $29.95.) Life
as it's not lived any more, full of the learning, literature, high sociability
and cosmopolitan patriotism that characterizes Israel's former Foreign Minister.

WE WERE SOLDIERS ONCE . . . AND YOUNG. Ia Drang: The Battle That Changed the War
in Vietnam, by Harold G. Moore and Joseph L. Galloway. (Random House, $25.) A
general and a journalist, both of whom were there, narrate and analyze this
agonizing 1965 encounter as a prototype for the developing war.

BLACK DOGS, by Ian McEwan. (Nan A. Talese/Doubleday, $19.50.) A short, shocking
novel that explores what happens between a husband who thinks a rational society
can solve its problems and a wife who believes, through revelation, that evil is
alive and busy.

CITY OF LIGHT, by Michael Doane. (Knopf, $22.) Mr. Doane's ambitious, topical
novel takes the international political thriller into a whole new landscape --
the innards of a computer network.

LOAD-DATE: November 22, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              276 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 22, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Most Likely to Succeed

BYLINE: By Alessandra Stanley;  Alessandra Stanley is a metro reporter for The
Times.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 26; Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 5333 words


It was obvious in 1969 that Bill Clinton would someday run for President. It was
just as clear that his roommate at Oxford, Frank Aller, would become a big-time
journalist, another Edward R. Murrow. The two Rhodes scholars were good-looking,
gifted, well liked -- close friends who had everything in common, particularly a
hatred of the Vietnam War. After Aller decided to resist the draft, Clinton
called him "one of the bravest, best men I know," in his now famous letter to an
R.O.T.C. director in Arkansas explaining why he had given up his own thoughts of
resistance to safeguard his "political viability."

Bill Clinton will become the next President of the United States on Jan. 20.
Frank Aller committed suicide in 1971 -- in despair, his friends say, over a
decision that had ruined his life.

"I hoped that the spectacle of young men refusing to fight would somehow 'move
the conscience of America' " is how Aller explained himself in a Nov. 5, 1970,
letter to a friend in New York City. Clinton had left Oxford for Yale Law
School. Aller had stayed in England, a fugitive from justice. "The problem is
that," he wrote, "while the exile goes on and on and on, the effect does not."

In the same letter, Aller mocked his predicament, inventing a future
conversation between strangers straining to remember the Rhodes scholar who, as
he put it, "refused induction and went to Canada or something way back in 1971."
And he was prescient about his best friend's destiny, having an imaginary
respondent reply: "I'm not sure, you mean the guy who was at Oxford when
Governor Clinton was. . . ."

Aller had brains, humor, talent and as much drive and ambition as any of his
friends. Something Clinton describes as "a very finely developed ethical
sensibility" made him give up the pursuit of glittering prizes to protest the
Vietnam War. On Sept. 12, 1971, Aller, who had returned to his hometown,
Spokane, Wash., borrowed the keys to the apartment of a childhood friend and
shot himself through the head with a .22-caliber Smith & Wesson. He died
instantly.

The next morning, Bill Clinton was having breakfast with his girlfriend, Hillary
Rodham, at the Blue Bell Cafe in New Haven when a friend, Doug Yeats, rushed in
to tell him there was an urgent phone call. "Instinctively, I knew it had
something to do with Frank," Clinton recalled in an interview before the
election. "I just felt this incredible premonition. It was awesome."

THE DISPARATE FATES OF THOSE TWO FRIENDS serve as a reminder of how tumultuous
and wrenching the late 1960's really were. Many men served in Vietnam, and
58,000 died. Many others found ways not to go, and some who refused to go also
paid dearly for it. Frank Aller was not typical, but he was emblematic of an era
when millions of young men believed they were living on the razor's edge.

It is almost too fitting that the first baby boomer President would have a "Big
Chill" experience in the midst of his first run for the White House. Yet, just
as one character's suicide in that movie prompted a soul-searching reunion of
his peers, Bill Clinton's campaign and election have resurrected Frank Aller --
and the mysterious tragedy of his death -- among his circle of friends.

In 1969, there were a few Rhodes scholars who were headed for military service
in Vietnam. But almost all of Clinton and Aller's friends had placed themselves
beyond the reach of combat -- some with deferments from obliging draft boards;
others with trick knees, bad eyesight, allergies and even self-induced maladies.
Clinton and Aller, however, were both classified 1-A (available to be drafted)
and both had exhausted their student deferments.

Clinton says he and his friend "agonized" over what to do. Aller was
particularly anguished over how his strait-laced parents would feel if he
became, in their eyes, a draft dodger. Herbert Aller wept when his son told him
he was considering resisting the draft. Others urged Aller to apply for
conscientious objector status. But Aller felt he could not honestly claim to
oppose all wars. Finally, he concluded he could not maneuver for an easier way
out.

Frank Aller's decision to resist was the road not taken, and he remains a
haunting figure to those who chose a less difficult route. Clinton's friends
have become legendary, so numerous and, like the President-elect, so
accomplished that they are known collectively by a nickname, F.O.B.'s (Friends
of Bill). None of them were willing to risk their futures by resisting.

Instead, they have swathed Frank Aller's death in myth, erecting a collective
memory of him as a 60's martyr. "Frank was a casualty of the war just like any
dead U.S. soldier or dead Vietcong," says Derek Shearer, an urban planner who
knew Aller well at Oxford. That image helps soothe uneasy consciences. Or, as
Richard Stearns, another Rhodes scholar from that time who is now a Superior
Court judge in Massachusetts, puts it, "It confers dignity on an otherwise
unexplainable event." To this day, his male friends describe Aller as a victim
of the Vietnam War, the unknown soldier of the antiwar movement, and even, as
David Edwards, an investment banker in Little Rock who befriended Clinton and
Aller in England, says, "someone who died for what he believed in."

But suicide is never that simple.

WHAT BILL CLINTON DID during the Vietnam War has turned out to be the most
controversial issue of his political career, and the actions he has the most
difficulty explaining. But his experiences then were also among the most
formative of his entire life. Clinton describes the bond he forged with Aller
more than 20 years ago by saying slowly, "It is just almost impossible to
recreate the personal agony we felt then." Edwards puts it this way: "At the end
of the day, this was our first real struggle over right and wrong."

Right and wrong were clearly delineated in Aller's hometown of Spokane in the
60's. Aller grew up in an insular, middle-class community in a modest,
ranch-style house. His father, Herbert, was a World War II veteran who worked
for the Internal Revenue Service; his mother, Anita, did volunteer church work.
Both his parents were conservative Presbyterians whose lives revolved around
their church -- and their son.

Frank Aller was always exceptionally smart. He skipped the fourth grade, and by
the time he left University High School, where he was the valedictorian and the
only alumnus ever to become a Rhodes scholar, he was routinely described as
"brilliant." Tall, with strawberry-blond hair and a sweetly goofy grin, Aller
was friendly, confident and popular -- a class officer with a mischievous
streak. He once sneaked through a trapdoor leading out of a crawl space and
popped up in the middle of English class, brandishing a Soviet flag. It was a
prank, not a statement. Aller's liberal views didn't fully develop until
college, and even there he was a buttoned-down Kennedy Democrat.

No one was surprised when he won a Rhodes scholarship after graduating Phi Beta
Kappa in Far Eastern and Slavic studies from the University of Washington in
1968. But many were shocked when he became a draft resister one year later. His
closest friends knew how strongly he felt about the war, however, and how
compelled he felt to act upon his convictions. "It was really the old Martin
Luther King thing," Clinton says. " 'I'm doing this because I can't do anything
else.' "

But after a miserable year in exile, Aller went home to try and piece his life
together. To his own surprise, he succeeded. In the end, he couldn't forgive
himself for that -- anymore than he could shake the black bouts of depression
that had begun clouding his perspective in England.

His suicide came as a shock to everyone. Clinton says he understood firsthand
how painful it was for Aller to rebel against his upbringing and parents.
Clinton's father, like Aller's, had been a World War II veteran. Clinton, like
Aller, had hero-worshiped John F. Kennedy -- not just the President but the
dashing war hero, the commander of PT-109. Until Vietnam, all boys dreamed of
being warriors. As Clinton put it, "We both grew up on John Wayne movies."

Clinton says Aller never told him how much his decision to resist was costing
him. "What struck me about Frank," he says, "was that no matter how much he was
hurting, he never showed it. In the end, it was part of his undoing."

ON A WALL OF HIS study in Little Rock, Bill Clinton keeps a blown-up poster-size
picture of himself, Frank Aller and a third roommate from Oxford in 1969, Strobe
Talbott. "I really loved him," he says of Aller.

Robert Reich, the well-known Harvard political economist who was also a Rhodes
scholar in 1969 and is now a key policy adviser to Clinton, says there has been
"a great deal of reaching out" -- by telephone, letter and in person since the
famous letter to the R.O.T.C. first aired in its entirety on ABC's "Nightline"
in February. "Frank's death threw us for a loop," Reich says. "Even 20 years
later, it's still unresolved."

Clinton recalls being close to all his Oxford friends -- the war had created an
unusually tight bond among the Americans studying there. Yet Aller and he were,
in many ways, the closest. "I remember him coming to talk to me when he made his
decision," Clinton says of the day Aller made up his mind to resist the draft.
"He told me: 'I know you couldn't make this decision, and I don't think you
should. I want you to know that I respect what you are doing.' "

Clinton speaks elliptically of the guilt he and other friends felt about not
taking so principled a stand. "Frank was the most unsanctimonious person,"
Clinton says. "He never felt superior."

Frank Aller is still a kind of obsession among Clinton and his circle. "Bill and
I talk about Frank all the time," David Edwards says. "We feel Frank paid the
price for all of us."

Aller's defiance made him a legend at Oxford. The night he wrote his draft board
and officially became a resister, Clinton and Reich, who both belonged to
University College, threw a party for Aller in Reich's rooms, a raucous
gathering that was partly a mock wake.

"Frank sort of became everyone's alter ego," says Robin Raphel, a college
girlfriend of Aller's who was at Cambridge while he was at Oxford. "It was like
a mantle on his shoulders, put there by people who didn't really understand
where he came from."

Raphel, now the political counselor at the United States Embassy in New Delhi,
says that Aller was ill suited to the role of anti-establishment martyr and that
it pained him more than anyone knew. "Others were able to live their own need to
resist through Frank," she says, "but even thinking about rebelling didn't come
naturally to Frank."

Unlike some of the other Rhodes scholars, Raphel says, Clinton never prodded
Aller to refuse induction. "Bill had to weigh what it really meant to resist,"
she says. "He understood the consequences more than the others."

But when Aller changed his mind and decided to give up his resistance and submit
to the draft, many of his friends in the antiwar movement did not understand.
"He did not get the support he needed," says Sara Maitland, an English feminist
writer who attended Oxford with Aller and Clinton. "He had this hero status and
his decision to go home was dreadful for everyone."

THE MOST PUZZLING aspect of the Aller story is that at the time he died, his
life -- on the surface, at least -- seemed on the mend at last. In July 1971, he
finally submitted to an Army physical and flunked it, after which the Government
dropped its charges against him. In addition, after six months of searching for
work, Aller had received a good offer. Lloyd Shearer, a columnist with Parade
magazine (and the father of Derek), arranged for an interview with Robert
Gibson, the foreign editor of The Los Angeles Times. So taken with Aller was
Gibson that when there was a sudden opening in the paper's Saigon bureau, he
bestowed upon him one of the most coveted posts in journalism.

Aller was all too conscious of the irony of going to Saigon, but he seemed to
welcome his fate. "Vietnam -- there could be no more appropriate place for me to
go," he wrote his former girlfriend, Jan Brenning, on May 30, 1971. "It seemed
like the third bridge to myself."

The letter contains no hint that only a few months later Aller would take his
own life. He had never revealed the full extent of his inner struggle with
despair to anyone -- not even to Bill Clinton. With friends, he kept up the
illusion that he was his same old self.

Which may be one reason why, after 20 years, memories of what drove him to
suicide have grown selective. Edwards still blames the Nixon Administration for
Aller's death, insisting that the Justice Department repeatedly changed its
position about prosecuting the Rhodes scholar. "They played him like a yo-yo,"
he says. "Frank was torn up, not knowing if he could have a life or be sent to
prison." Frank Fischer, Aller's roommate at the University of Washington, even
suspected murder. "Spokane was such a conservative place," he says. "For years,
I was half-convinced someone killed him and made it look like suicide."

While Aller's male friends point to outside forces, the women who knew him best
tend to reproach themselves. Jan Brenning (who now goes by the name of Jana
Brenning McNamara) says she still regrets speaking harshly to Aller in their
last phone conversation a few days before he died; she was angry at him for not
letting her know he had finally escaped the draft. Brenning McNamara admits she
never understood the real reason Aller killed himself, only that "he was caught
in a skin that had gotten too tight."

IT IS PERHAPS TO BE expected that by dying young, Aller remains frozen in the
collective consciousness of his closest friends as a graduate school version of
Phineas in "A Separate Peace" -- a young man who seemed effortlessly better than
those around him. But, in that sense, he was not unlike Bill Clinton. He was a
bright, charming kid from a modest background, a little quieter than his
extroverted, glad-handing roommate from Arkansas but just as intelligent, just
as promising.

A gifted classical pianist, Aller picked up polish at Oxford, discovering pubs,
wine shops, rowing, esoteric bookstores and jazz. Clinton recollects most
vividly their mornings together, when he would cook breakfast for Aller and
their third roommate, Strobe Talbott, a Soviet scholar who is now a Time
magazine columnist. "My two erudite roommates," Clinton says. "I felt like I was
running a country kitchen."

Aller had a playful sense of humor and delighted in teasing Sara Maitland about
her upper-class background, dubbing her "Lady Sara." But she remembers him best
for his kindnesses after she was hospitalized for a nervous breakdown. Aller
visited her every day. "He was a very, very gentle man," she recalls, "but he
wasn't weak or soppy." Maitland says she first saw her friend's mettle after her
doctors recommended electroshock therapy. Appalled, Aller began a one-man
campaign to dissuade her from this course of treatment, eventually convincing
her and her physicians that there was too much risk of a dangerous side effect
-- memory loss.

Scholarly, but also sweet-natured and funny, Aller stood out even at Oxford.
"Frank was the one you wanted to have dinner with -- he was everybody's
favorite," Edwards recalls. Yet Aller was privately a little awed by the Ivy
League savoir-faire of many of the other Rhodes scholars. This may be one reason
he gravitated to Clinton. "Bill was the most comforting figure among that crowd
of confident blue bloods," Robin Raphel says.

Pink Floyd played at Oxford their first year there in 1969. Vietnam overwhelmed
everything else. Aller and Clinton burned candles and grew beards, but neither
was a bomb-thrower or a flag-burner; theirs was a temperate revolt against the
establishment.

Aller debated the Vietnam War at the Oxford Union. Clinton helped organize
antiwar demonstrations and spoke at a special protest rally for Americans in
England outside the American Embassy in Grosvenor Square.  The day before,
British antiwar marchers and several British left-wing organizations had
gathered in the same spot to demand that American troops be withdrawn from
Southeast Asia. Clinton and others refused to blend their demonstration with the
British one, deeming it too radical.

"Frank and Bill politicized me," Maitland says. "I remember Bill telling people
what to think and Frank making jokes about it." Aller wore his convictions
lightly. Clinton, always given to pontification, took himself far more
seriously.

The Rhodes scholar from Arkansas also kept an index card file, where he
meticulously recorded the name of every new person he met. "Bill was unusual in
that he was very much oriented to a political career," says David Satter, a
Soviet expert now living in Moscow. "Very few of us could imagine a place for
ourselves in regular politics in 1969."

Brenning McNamara, who was with Aller for much of that year, recalls with a
smile: "Bill would join us at the pubs at night -- but not until after he had
jotted down the day's names. I liked Bill -- you couldn't not like him -- but he
never freaked out on the emotions of the times." Aller, on the other hand, she
remembers, "threw himself into his convictions."

Strobe Talbott, who wrote about his two roommates in a Time essay defending
Clinton's explanations of his draft avoidance, described their flat at 46
Leckford Road as a "permanent, floating, teacherless seminar on Vietnam." Aller,
who was writing his thesis on Mao Zedong's Long March, would argue that to the
Vietnamese, Communism was merely a vehicle to overthrow centuries of imperial
rule, be it Chinese, French or American. Clinton, who had worked for Arkansas
Senator J. W. Fulbright's Foreign Relations Committee, brought his insights on
America's Southeast Asia policy into the mix. Talbott wrote that during one
Thanksgiving dinner, his two roommates became so engrossed in a discussion of
the war that they stayed talking in the kitchen for four hours while basting the
turkey.

It wasn't all war and no play. There were big, noisy parties, with wine,
marijuana and casual sex. It was a time of revolving-door relationships, and
Clinton pursued a lot of women, his friends remember, including the girlfriends
of his friends. He even once tried to seduce a girlfriend of Aller's, according
to a Clinton friend, but this seems to have had no effect on their friendship.

There was one other emotion that went unspoken: fear. About 200 American
soldiers were dying a week, and the recurring television news images of body
bags stacked up in helicopters had a particular hold over draft-age men.
Brenning McNamara remembers Aller discussing his dread of having to kill, but
never his fear of being killed.

On Jan. 20, 1969, Aller sent a three-page letter to the Spokane draft board that
began, ". . . I cannot in good conscience accept induction into the Armed Forces
of the United States." Ardent yet formal, somewhere between a legal brief and
the Declaration of Independence, Aller's letter is less personal and less
ingratiating than Clinton's to Col. Eugene Holmes of the Arkansas R.O.T.C. "I
believe there are times when concerned men can no longer remain obedient," Aller
wrote in one passage.

Aller charged that the Government's power to deny deferments to critics of the
Vietnam War was forcing young Americans to act against their principles. He
lamented "the fact that many of us who have come to disagree with American
military involvement in Vietnam have refrained from actions which would imperil
our deferred status and have continued to comply with Selective Service
regulations despite moral or political objections to the war." He was, of
course, inadvertently summing up Clinton's circumstances.

Clinton drew the high lottery number of 311 on Dec. 1, 1969, and was therefore
out of reach of the draft. On Dec. 3, he wrote to the R.O.T.C. to say that he
would not be enlisting after all -- and letting Colonel Holmes know at last how
he truly felt about the war.

The next day, Aller was indicted, in absentia, by a Federal grand jury in
Spokane for failure to submit to induction. "Frank was the only guy among the
Rhodes scholars who actually did something about the war -- who risked himself,"
says David Satter. "Frank stood out not just because he made a choice the rest
of us were spared, but because he did it with such grace."

Clinton, freed from the draft, enrolled at Yale Law School -- and fell out of
touch with Aller. While other close friends also went home to continue on with
their brilliant careers, Aller remained behind, dividing his time between
working on his thesis at Oxford and protesting the war in London. "He thought if
he, a Rhodes scholar, did it, others would pay attention," David Edwards says
bitterly. "Guess what -- he did it and nobody cared."

In addition, Aller was finding himself to be temperamentally unfit for
rebellion. A straight arrow who always wore a tie to news conferences, he was
pushed forward by his shaggier, counterculture compatriots as a front man. He
was beginning to fear that he would be an outlaw forever, and the thought
tortured him. "At times like this I am literally fighting for my life," he wrote
to Jan Brenning.

He was anxious, homesick and turning inward, smoking a lot of marijuana. But he
kept up a sunny facade, encouraging friends to talk about their problems, while
making light of his own. Visiting Aller in the summer of 1970, his college
roommate, Frank Fischer, remembers a long talk they had in Hyde Park. "It was
the only time he admitted to me he was hurting," he says. Aller thought Fischer
would understand because they both came from the same kind of strict Calvinist
background. "Our sense of conscience was hyperacute," Fischer says. "We thought
it immoral not to do a lot of soul-searching."

SUICIDE AMONG DRAFT evaders was not uncommon. Harry Pincus, another expatriate
resister who, unlike Aller, became involved in the wilder London scene of drugs,
sex and rock 'n' roll, hanging out with the likes of Vanessa Redgrave and R. D.
Laing, killed himself not long after Aller. "Harry was the first person you
would think would commit suicide," says Clancy Sigal, a writer who was an
antiwar agitator in London at the time. "Frank was the last. Frank had to have
been harboring a lot of rage, but you never saw it."

Aller went to Spain in the summer of 1970 to write and look for work. There, cut
off from the support of other American draft resisters and adrift in an alien
culture, loneliness seemed to engulf him. Feeling abandoned, Aller was also
growing "paranoid," his father says, about being hunted down by American
authorities. He poured some of his darker feelings into an autobiographical
novel, which he never finished. Beneath the novel's Hemingwayesque characters
and dialogue about draft resistance, the book amounted, as his father put it, to
a "long letter to himself."

Aller wrote scores of letters and began dreaming of going home. In one letter
dated Oct. 3, 1970, he wrote, "I don't want to become a broken old man nursing a
faded ideal which no one else remembers."

Two months later, he returned to the United States through Canada, and was met
at the Spokane airport on Dec. 9 by his parents, his younger sister Margaret and
George A. Locke, a U.S. marshal. Aller, his mother remembers, walked off the
plane with his hands up, expecting to be handcuffed. The marshal waited until he
got in the car to serve his warrant.

His mother saw the change right away. "He had always had a sunny personality,
but now he seemed to be wearing the weight of the world on his shoulders," Anita
Aller says.

Aller flew to Boston soon after his arraignment, telling his parents he wanted
to see old friends. He also saw a lawyer, Edward Rudnitsky, who in the 60's and
70's handled more than a thousand deserter and draft-resister cases. Rudnitsky
sent Aller to Robert Cserr, a Boston psychiatrist who diagnosed many draft-age
men. As Rudnitsky puts it, "In almost every case, he found them not fit for the
military."

After one appointment, Cserr concluded that Aller was psychologically
unqualified for military service. Cserr says that while he vaguely recalls
examining a Rhodes scholar who was under emotional strain, he has long since
misplaced the records. Rudnitsky, who destroyed his records years ago, remembers
Aller well -- because of what later became of him. When he first read Cserr's
report on Aller's psychological state, Rudnitsky says: "I was surprised at how
strong the language was. I remember thinking: Boy, Bob is really laying it on
thick this time."

But Aller himself was shocked and very upset by what the doctor had written. He
had not yet begun to think of himself as clinically depressed. "It was not part
of his self-image," recalls Jeff Stamps, whom Aller was staying with while in
Boston.

Armed with the letter, Aller returned to Spokane and reported for his physical.
His Selective Service records show that he was found 1-Y (not qualified for
service -- but still on the hook to be called in case of a national emergency).
But supplementary documents revealing the exact reason he failed his physical
were destroyed after his death, following then commmon practice. The same day he
flunked his physical, the United States Attorney's office dropped the charges
against him.

Aller told almost no one among his friends why he was found unfit. To this day,
most of them think he was saved by a bad ear.

ALLER SPENT MUCH OF the spring and early summer of 1971 in Southern California,
hunting for work, anguishing over what he called his "legal hassles" and staying
in the West Los Angeles guest house of Lloyd Shearer, whose daughter Brooke was
engaged to his old roommate, Talbott. (Unlike many of her children's friends,
Lloyd Shearer's wife Marva says Aller was a tidy and considerate house guest,
keeping his room "really neat -- as if he were in the Navy.")

The Shearers introduced Aller to Robert Gibson of The Los Angeles Times, who was
so impressed with the young man's quiet intelligence -- and mastery of Chinese
-- that he decided to groom him as an eventual Beijing bureau chief. "There was
just something special about Frank," Gibson says. "I can't describe it. It's
almost like he had this aura about him -- people were immediately drawn to him."

Once he was offered the Saigon job, Aller began studying Vietnamese. He wrote to
Jan about his Vietnam assignment and the irony of his ending up there. After
detailing in the letter Gibson's warnings about the dangers of working in a war
zone, Aller wrote, "I had no apprehensions, and accepted immediately. Isn't that
a [expletive] hoot?

Three weeks after writing that letter, he had eased his legal predicament, but
not his conscience. His mother remembers the moment her son told her about his
new job overseas and confided timorously, "I'm not an Asia expert." The
admission shocked her. He had never expressed a lack of confidence before.

Meanwhile, his love life had grown complicated, adding pressure. He was still
involved with Jan, in a 60's-style open relationship, but that winter he also
began dating Barbara Kiem, a Spokane native who was going for a master's degree
in English at Washington State. Kiem remembers the two of them spending a
carefree, happy week with Talbott and his girlfriend in Palo Alto, Calif.,
particularly after Bill Clinton showed up. Clinton remembers one highlight, the
five of them going to see the Jack Nicholson movie "Five Easy Pieces." It was
the last time Aller and Clinton would see each other.

Kiem does recall one particular detail about Clinton: he was carrying a volume
of William Blake's poetry in his back pocket. But the future President didn't
fool anyone. "It was clear to me he was very political," Kiem says.

Frank Aller fooled almost everyone. Kiem went to England in late July to do
research, certain she would be seeing him again. "I knew there were problems,
but 95 percent of the time Frank's letters were extremely upbeat, witty and
happy," she says. At the same time, Brenning McNamara thought she and Aller
would patch things up and was contemplating a move to the Far East to be closer
to him.

After signing his contract with The Los Angeles Times, Aller flew back to
Spokane for what was thought to be a long-weekend visit to say goodbye before
heading out for Vietnam. But instead, on Friday night, he made a halfhearted
suicide attempt, swallowing a handful of sleeping pills and drinking a bottle of
wine. He went for a walk, then returned to his parents' house, his face ashen.
Alarmed, his mother attempted to reach a psychologist Aller had been seeing off
and on for several months, but he was out of town for the weekend. Aller slept
it off and later admitted to his mother he had tried to take his life.

On Saturday, he seemed his old self. He spent the day with his best friend from
high school, Bernie Johnson, who had returned the previous year from working
alongside South Vietnamese soldiers as a member of a mobile advisory team. Aller
peppered the Vietnam veteran with questions about his tour, and that night he
insisted they go to a Vietnamese restaurant for dinner so Aller could try out
his language skills. "I was amazed by how much Vietnamese he already knew,"
Johnson says.

Johnson also recalls that Aller asked him some very specific questions about the
workings of guns and armaments. "He told me he didn't want to look foolish over
there," he says. Johnson didn't suspect what was really on his friend's mind.
"He seemed happier than I'd ever seen him," Johnson says. "I thought it was
because he was happy with the direction his life was taking. Later, I realized
it was because he had made up his mind to kill himself."

On Sunday morning, Aller asked his friend for the use of his apartment, saying
he needed a quiet place to calculate some travel expenses. Johnson went off to
teach a civil-defense class at a local school. There were two guns in the
apartment. Aller drank some wine and wrote a note.

When Johnson returned to his apartment early that afternoon, he opened the front
door to find Aller sprawled out on the living-room floor, lying in a pool of
"red stuff." "For a second, I thought he had drunk the whole bottle and passed
out," Johnson says. In the next second, he saw the gun and realized what had
really happened.

It took Johnson a long time to get over the sight of his friend. "I sometimes
think he did it at my place because he knew I'd seen bad things in Vietnam and
could take it better," Johnson says.

Unlike the students at Oxford, Johnson never believed that the war alone had
driven Aller, at the age of 24, to suicide. "That couldn't have been the only
thing," he says. "There had to be the personal crises of trying to grow up and
reach the age of 25."

Johnson read Aller's suicide note in a state of shock and can't remember a word
of it. Aller's mother says she could never bring herself to read it. She was
told that it said something about her son's desire to be "at peace."

Some friends firmly believe that Aller's decision to resist -- and his change of
heart -- devastated his self-esteem. Others point to the emotional trauma he
suffered as a fugitive from justice and the guilt he felt for having hurt his
family.

If there is one thing that almost everybody agrees on, it is that Frank Aller
was a sensitive young man who was torn apart in the tempest of the times. "I'll
never forget," David Satter says, "how he once told me he took his decision with
him to bed every night -- and woke up with it each morning."

Robin Raphel says she cannot explain Aller's suicide any better than anyone
else. "At the end of the day, he took it all too seriously," she says wearily.
"Most people checked out of the intensity of those times -- and Frank never
did."

NAME: Frank Aller; Bill Clinton

LOAD-DATE: November 22, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Aller in a passport photo taken three weeks before he died.
Aller's high-school classmates had great expectations for him, as conveyed in
their 1964 yearbook. Aller and his girlfriend, Jan Brenning, in Oxford in 1969.
A letter from Aller to Brenning, written from Oxford in 1970. (Jana Brenning
McNamara)(pg. 26-27); Jana Brenning McNamara is now an editorial illustrator
Rhinebeck, N.Y. (Photograph by Susan Harris for The New YOrk Times)(pg. 40)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              277 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 22, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

PHOTOGRAPHY VIEW;
Fixated on Famous People

BYLINE: By Vicki Goldberg

SECTION: Section 2; Page 31; Column 3; Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1604 words


Celebrity is the jewel in the tin crown of pop culture. It may be paste, but who
could tell in the dazzle of its glow? Talent is less important than renown in a
society as fixated on famous people as on what they do or make. In the 1954 film
"It Should Happen to You," Judy Holliday starred as a nobody who rents a
billboard to advertise her name and instantly becomes rich and famous. At length
she learns that "it isn't just making a name. . . . The thing is making a name
stand for something" -- but that was only a movie.

You're nobody till somebody knows you, which is where photography comes in. A
star needs a face, not to launch a thousand ships but to throng a million
magazines. One of the most visible facemakers of the day is Herb Ritts, whose
portraits are on view at Staley-Wise in SoHo, in a show called "Herb Ritts:
Notorious" (and in a book of the same name from Bulfinch Press; he is donating
his royalties to the American Foundation for AIDS Research).

Ritts has made his name by giving fame an identity card, which he does with
admirable technique; strong, rather old-fashioned design; sly and occasionally
brazen borrowing from earlier photographers, and just enough naughtiness to make
him seem up to date. He recently signed a contract with Vogue, which immediately
reconfigured itself to look like People magazine.

The word notorious is supposed to whet the jaded appetite. It connotes a modern
kind of fame, as when Macaulay, in the 19th century, spoke of a man raised to
"notoriety, such as has for low and bad minds all the attractions of glory." For
Ritts's camera Kim Basinger and Naomi Campbell strip, Axl Rose shows off his
tattoos, and Vladimir, a circus performer, poses in a fancy leather jockstrap.
If you want people to recognize your face (or your pecs and your abs), it helps
to misbehave.

It was not always like this. In the 30's, stars behaved so steadily for the
camera you could navigate by them. George Hurrell, Clarence Sinclair Bull and
the other mainstays of Hollywood portrait studios knew how much glamour meant to
people with shabby lives. Dwelling in the realm of the ideal, those
photographers did not indulge in flattery so much as in a kind of loving
embalmment, manufacturing idols out of alabaster and cream. The graven images of
Dietrich and Lombard and Gable were made up, dressed up, lit up, touched up far
beyond the means of people who had not perfected the smolder or the come hither.

The 35-millimeter camera had already introduced an element of apparent candor
and the potential for awkwardness, even scandal, into portraits of the famous,
but rules were rules back then, and the press believed in them. Hollywood
studios made sure the glamour of their properties was not tarnished, much as
Franklin Roosevelt's aides protected him from photographs that would have shown
just how badly crippled he was.

But in the 50's that began to change. Irving Penn and Richard Avedon were
already making portraits that were not exactly kind to their famous subjects.
Their sitters were so celebrated that any old image made by so famous a
photographer would bolster their status, so long as their names were spelled
right.

Elsewhere during that decade, glamour began a long, slow decline, eventually to
be moved out of the spotlight by ripe sex. There were some feints toward
naturalness, which replaced the myth of unattainable perfection with the myth of
a girl like I, only more so. Philippe Halsman made people jump in hopes of
surprising them into letting down their guard. It did not always work. The
Duchess of Windsor jumped without letting down anything.

As the Hollywood studios died off, paparazzi found a new market for pictures of
people caught perilously off guard. Biography, public confession, and
photography all began to notice that clay feet stuck out from beneath the silken
skirts and creased trousers of the famous. Then in the 60's glamour failed to
survive the frug, and rock stars drastically changed the terms of celebrity.

The Doors, the Stones and the rest of the gang were counterculture heroes, and
their images were meant also meant to be counter. Rock musicians had a stake in
looking scandalous, bizarre, deadbeat; they gave others license to do the same.
The great perk of fame (or the one that could momentarily make people forget how
rich it was making you) was the freedom to look as undignified as any member of
the great untalented masses.

In the 70's, Helmut Newton introduced a dash of Weimar decadence to celebrity
portraiture, photographing Grace Jones in chains and Paloma Picasso with one
bare breast peeping through a cocktail glass. When the decade ended, John and
Yoko posed buck naked for national consumption, and John Irving soon showed up
in his little red wrestling suit to be immortalized by Annie Leibovitz.

Celebrity portraiture had been tilting ever more steeply toward entertainers as
the 70's moved in. Heroes were in short supply. In Vietnam, the generals
distinguished themselves by cooking the figures of enemy casualties. One
President who specialized in erasing tapes was pardoned by another who was said
to have trouble chewing gum while he walked. People needed someone to look up
to; they settled for celebrities.

Television hastened this development. The little screen does not make heroes
handily but it does crank out celebrity status, even for those who merely read
cue cards. The thing about television images is that they do not keep well
unless refrigerated, so photographers were called on to preserve the fame of
those who made it on the tube. People magazine moved into this territory in
1974.

Recent big-time celebrity photographers, including Ritts, Newton, Leibovitz, the
late Robert Mapplethorpe, Matthew Rolston and Bruce Weber, have no illusions
that photography can picture the soul. (And celebrities who step into a
photographer's studio don't have much incentive to nurture their souls, which
don't go into reruns in America anyway.) The images, Ritts's as much as
anyone's, are about surfaces, and the surfaces are described with enormous
clarity, for basically the subjects are objects -- sex objects, decorative
objects, but mainly symbolic objects.

Fantasies of success, power, naughtiness, rebellion, irresistible sexuality get
projected onto such objects. Richly printed photographs, borrowing the cool
elegance of 1930's design and the authority of Art to lionize what passes for
outrageousness, make the fantasies instantly available. The status of Ritts's
subjects as objects is underscored at Staley-Wise by the large, heavy, elegant
frames that turn his black-and-white photographs of Madonna grabbing her crotch
and Stephen Hawking's sadly distorted face into precious and decorative items.

The mischief often suggested in such photographs adds to their value, letting
you kid yourself into thinking you are like the stars, or better, and feeding a
flattering sense of intimacy with the great. There is also the fantasy of
identification: if someone that silly (naughty, neurotic, etc.) could make it,
maybe you too could have been a contender.

Ritts has a peculiar specialty: obscuring the identity of his subjects. Here is
a fairly new phenomenon -- the celebrity so well known he or she can withstand
temporary obliteration. Slash's face is totally covered by his hair, Prince's
almost entirely by the chains hanging from his hat. Batman, already in deep
disguise, is seen from the back and could just as easily be a dummy. Objects
indeed. Stars and star photographers, spurred by repeated evidence of the finite
and melancholy limits of human appearance, will go to great lengths for
originality.

Even more peculiar is Ritts's penchant for the single feature as a portrait. He
photographs Cher from the back in a violently abbreviated leather thong, mesh
panty hose and high boots, so that the only possible area of interest is her
derriere. Most people just do not know Cher's gluteus maximus well enough to
identify it without other clues. Hardest of all to name is the picture on the
cover of his new book: the voraciously wide open mouth of Sandra Bernhard, a
picture that only an otorhinolaryngologist could love.

Ritts is not the only photographer to use this gambit. A new book on
Mapplethorpe has his portrait of his own eyes on the cover -- one eye on the
front cover, the other on the back, as if he were an owl. The few earlier
photographers who used the single-feature ploy at least picked an unmistakable
feature, like Joan Crawford's eyes or Dietrich's legs.

Has the camera at last worn out the human face, forcing photographers to try to
reinvent the portrait? Has mega-fame so fetishized a few people that the
audience will be content with a mere pound of flesh? Exaggerating a single
feature is a technique of caricature or cartoon, and when celebrity becomes
uncontrollably inflated, it does tend to distort the image of anyone wearing its
mantle. Many current stars, needing attention, needing to pop off the page,
needing to keep their fickle fans riveted, have willingly collaborated in
caricaturing themselves through the lenses of Leibovitz, Avedon and others.

Celebrity portraiture is basically advertisement, and the selling of a star in a
form unrecognizable without a caption is the equivalent of those life-style ads
that obscure the clothes but hype the designer label. Alas, it will probably
increase life's little humiliations. It was bad enough not to know who the
legend was in the what-becomes-a-legend-most ads. How is it going to be when the
realization strikes that we did not even know Cher's behind?

NAME: Herb Ritts

LOAD-DATE: November 22, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Herb Ritts, celebrity photographer -- You're nobody till
somebody knows you. (Fred R. Conrad/The New York Times)(pg. 31); The model Naomi
Campbell by Herb Ritts -- It helps to misbehave. (Herb Ritts/Staley Wise
Gallery)(pg. 33)

TYPE: Biography; Review

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              278 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 22, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

IN SHORT: NONFICTION

BYLINE: By Kathleen Quinn

SECTION: Section 7; Page 22; Column 3; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 274 words



THE LAST GREAT RIDE
By Brandon Tartikoff
and Charles Leerhsen.
Turtle Bay/Random House, $21.

In 1980, at the age of 31, Brandon Tartikoff became head of programming at NBC;
he was the youngest person ever to hold such a position. When he left in 1991,
he had held the job longer than anyone in history and, arguably, had done it
better, too. In "The Last Great Ride," Mr. Tartikoff, with the help of Charles
Leerhsen, a senior editor at People magazine, provides a sometimes hilarious,
sometimes dull account of what it's like to give the public what it wants, 24
hours a day. While the book is short on practical advice for impresario wannabes
("Ideas are the key to everything") and fails to explain fully how pure drivel
gets on the air ("A bad television show, I've always contended, is like
America's involvement in Vietnam"), it's the way Mr. Tartikoff spins his yarn --
he's like a star-struck ex-vaudevillian -- that shines a light on network
television. Obviously a nice guy, Mr. Tartikoff refuses to wallow in self-pity
over his bout with cancer or the car accident that severely injured his daughter
(whom he gave as his main reason for resigning last month from the chairmanship
of Paramount Pictures), nor does he dish the dirt. Instead, he shares happy
memories of starting "The Cosby Show," "Hill Street Blues" and "Miami Vice," and
of saving NBC from a proposal for a nuclear holocaust comedy movie called
"Gilligan's Island: The Day After." Unfailingly boyish, Mr. Tartikoff almost
makes you believe that the average American's habit of watching a prodigious
amount of television is just a lot of harmless fun.

LOAD-DATE: November 22, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              279 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 22, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

ABOUT-FACE

SECTION: Section 6; Page 12; Column 4; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 151 words


The letter from Jean Orben regarding Vietnam and the various actions of those
subject to the draft at that time rekindled a 20-year-dormant emotion of outrage
(Letters, Nov. 1, in response to Michael Norman's About Men column "About-Face,"
Oct. 11).

I am outraged that she feels so morally righteous about the actions of men
subject to being drafted into a questionable conflict while she, herself, faced
no such peril or moral conflict.

She is entitled to her opinion regarding the politics of the nation and its
actions, but until she is subject to the effects of a military draft (which
almost certainly would imperil her life), she should refrain from judging the
actions of those whose lives were at risk.

Similarly, I'd ask that men not make judgments about things in which they cannot
participate fully, like a woman's reproductive activity.

HOWARD M. MENZE
Gloversville, N.Y.

LOAD-DATE: November 22, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              280 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 22, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THE WORLD;
For Vietnam, Settling the Past Could Be Good Business

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHENON

SECTION: Section 4; Page 5; Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 987 words

DATELINE: HO CHI MINH CITY, Vietnam


A generation ago, the Vietnamese learned how American public opinion could help
end a war that bullets and bombs and the sacrifice of hundreds of thousands of
lives seemed incapable of drawing to a close.

Now they are trying to apply that lesson in reviving a peacetime economy that
remains among the most backward in Asia -- backward in no small part because of
a 17-year-old trade embargo that is one of the last vestiges of the Vietnam war.

The Vietnamese want the embargo lifted. And this time, on the battlefield of
public relations, Hanoi enjoys the support of former adversaries in the American
Government and business establishment; many there think it is time to normalize
relations. This time, Hanoi's leaders know, it is elements of the American
public who must be persuaded.

The Vietnamese say their decision last month to open up war museums and military
archives to inspection by the United States Government was entirely a
humanitarian gesture intended to help the Defense Department determine what
happened to 2,265 Americans still unaccounted for in Indochina.

But as they met with a delegation of senators and Pentagon officials who
traveled to Vietnam last week to discuss the search for the missing, Vietnamese
leaders pressed hard for the Americans to urge President Bush to lift the trade
embargo before he leaves the White House in January.

Vietnamese officials don't deny that they sometimes choreograph events with an
American audience in mind.

The most poignant moment for the Senate delegation came at Hanoi's central
military museum, as an aging Vietnamese army colonel, surrounded by American
television cameras, turned over memorabilia taken from American soldiers during
the war: prayer booklets, high school identification cards, family photographs,
as well as the airman's helmet worn by Senator John McCain, an Arizona
Republican who spent five years as a prisoner of war in North Vietnam.

The colonel also gave the senators his wartime diary, which appeared to hold
answers to the disappearance of four American soldiers in a central Vietnamese
province in 1967. The diary says the soldiers were ambushed, their bodies hidden
from rescue teams.

What has gone largely unmentioned in the excitement over the archival treasure
trove is that the Vietnamese, after years of saying they were cooperating fully
in the search for missing Americans, are making this material public only now.

Adventurer in the Archives

Diplomats in Hanoi and American officials offer no single theory about why Hanoi
took so long to open the archives and why the first of the artifacts were given
months ago to an American adventurer, Ted Schweitzer, instead of to Defense
Department investigators.

According to accounts from American officials, Mr. Schweitzer received
permission from Hanoi's central war museum to go through its archives for
material on a book on the war. Mr. Schweitzer came across thousands of black and
white photographs of Americans captured or killed during the war. He turned the
photos over to the Pentagon, apparently with the knowledge of at least some
elements of the Vietnamese Army.

"Vietnam has a factionalized, bureaucratic Government," said an Asian diplomat,
"I think one faction within the military wanted to hold on to this material
while another faction wanted to get the photos out in time for President Bush to
lift the embargo. They saw Schweitzer as a means of getting around official
channels." Another theory says the Vietnamese just didn't realize the value of
the photos until Mr. Schweitzer saw them.

Whatever the explanation, the Bush Administration, Congress and American
business leaders seem eager to use Vietnam's full-access pledge to ease the
American economic embargo imposed after South Vietnam fell in 1975. In a letter
last week to President Le Duc Anh, President Bush hinted strongly that he would
relax the embargo in exchange for continued cooperation.

Senator John F. Kerry, a Massachusetts Democrat and Vietnam veteran who is the
chairman of the Senate Select Committee on P.O.W.-M.I.A. Affairs, said it would
be counterproductive now to protest over Vietnam's long delay. "If we shut down
our investigation because we get angry about what we didn't get in the past, we
deny our families the answers they want," he said.

American investigators say they, too, have no desire to feud with the
Vietnamese. "We're delighted with this new cooperation," said Lieut. Col. Jack
Donovan, the senior Defense Department investigator now in Vietnam. "I'm too
busy to be angry about the past."

The Vietnamese want to talk and, more important in Hanoi, they want to trade --
a desire shared by scores of American corporations that see Vietnam as the last
great untapped business opportunity in Asia, a nation of 70 million people known
for their industriousness and high educational standards, and whose labor is as
cheap as any on the continent. The average household income in Vietnam is still
less than $300 a year.

Boeing wants to sell jets to Vietnam. Citibank wants to do banking. Mobil Oil
wants a chance to bid on tracts for offshore oil drilling. All have sent
representatives to scout out future business. An end to the embargo would also
permit the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund to pour billions of
dollars into basic service projects in a nation still largely without telephone
service, reliable electricity and paved roads.

This month Japan said it would resume development aid to Vietnam. Business
people from Taiwan, Hong Kong, South Korea, Malaysia, Thailand, Australia and
France have been investing in Vietnam for years. If the United States does not
move quickly to establish diplomatic ties, American business leaders fear, they
will lose the Vietnamese market forever, surrendering a country once thought so
important to American interests that the United States went to war over it.

LOAD-DATE: November 22, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Senator John F. Kerry, second from left, at Hanoi's army museum
last week inspecting piles of captured weapons. (Reuters)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              281 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 22, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

TRANSITION;
Hi. Goodbye. This Takes 11 Weeks and $3.5 Million?

BYLINE: By MICHAEL WINES

SECTION: Section 4; Page 1; Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1483 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


AFTER four years in the splendid isolation of the Presidency, George Bush is
finding the 11-week hiatus between his defeat and Bill Clinton's inauguration
stripped of splendor, but still plenty isolated. Moody, fidgety, maybe a little
bitter, he has fallen out of the hyperactive, quirky character that even critics
found endearing. Instead, he steals unannounced from the White House for
midnight visits to the Vietnam Veterans Memorial; spends long stretches out of
public view; proclaims that he is putting the Government on ice, in effect,
until Bill Clinton takes over.

The President's moodiness is certainly understandable: just after losing a race
he expected to win, he also saw his mother die of a stroke. But well before her
illness, at a meeting on Tuesday that he had thought was private, he hinted at
one source of his discontent. "I've concluded that the interregnum is too long,
too ungenerous and too long," he said. "The gears are already beginning to
shift, as they should," he added, and he is determined to transfer his power
with grace. But he had a word for long goodbyes: "laborious."

More visibly than many of his predecessors, the President suffers from what he
characteristically described to Larry King early this month as "lame duckness."
A uniquely American anemia, it afflicts every President who lives to see his
authority and celebrity siphoned off by some smooth-cheeked naif who doesn't
even own the nuclear-strike codes yet, for Pete's sake.

Still, Mr. Bush's perception that his case is worse than most is not so
far-fetched. What he calls the interregnum, and everyone else has bureaucratized
into the toneless noun "transition," is indeed laborious, and becoming more so.
A mere post-election breather a generation ago, it now is vast, costly,
labyrinthine, self-important, and rife with opportunities for back-stabbing.

It has become a sort of Presidency in utero, a cute little swelling in the belly
of the system that now exceeds in size the Presidency itself.

This is a recent development. To prepare to succeed Harry S. Truman, Dwight D.
Eisenhower simply dispatched the management consultant McKinsey & Company into
the Government to find out for him what it did. John F. Kennedy essentially drew
his transition advice from two men, Richard Neustadt and Clark Clifford, both of
whom drew paychecks from the outside. By comparison, the last
vanquished-to-victor handoff of the White House -- Ronald Reagan's takeover from
Jimmy Carter 12 years ago -- had a Federally approved budget of $2 million, ran
$1 million over that, and filled a Federal office building for two months with
better than 1,000 Republican advisers, job-seekers and political groupies.

Mr. Clinton campaigned hard on a pledge to pare billions in wasteful spending
and featherbed jobs from the Federal bureaucracy. His Congressionally authorized
budget for the transition totals $3.5 million, but now his staff is saying they
will, like Mr. Reagan, accept private donations to supplement that sum.

"It's grown along with the Presidency itself," said Theodore Lowi, a professor
of government at Cornell University. "Once you get an institutional Presidency,
which we've had since Truman, everything about it gets institutionalized,
including the transition."

Is this really necessary? It depends. On one hand, most great democracies plug
along famously without three-month hiatuses between leaders; two years ago,
Britain's Margaret Thatcher was voted out of office and vacated 10 Downing
Street in only four days. Helmut Kohl needed no more time to oust Helmut Schmidt
and replace his Cabinet in Germany in 1983.

Transition Was Once in March

Even American interregnums are briefer than they used to be. The Constitution,
drafted when trips to Washington took weeks instead of hours, delayed
Presidential swearings-in until March 4 and kept Congress out of session even
longer, until December. The 20th Amendment changed that in 1933, after the
endless wait for Franklin D. Roosevelt to succeed Herbert C. Hoover contributed
to fiscal uncertainty and a bank panic.

On the other hand, Britain and Germany are parliamentary democracies, in which
opposition lawmakers stand as shadow leaderships trained to step in quickly.
Policies and personnel are ready, more or less, to be plugged in as required.
Alone among major nations, the United States regenerates its leadership root and
branch with every transfer of power, drawing largely from outside the Congress.
As power has accreted to the Presidency, that has become an increasingly
lengthy, messy and combative process, like it or not.

"Bush may think it's too long, but from Clinton's standpoint, it may not be long
enough," said Carl M. Brauer, who has studied modern interregnums.

But many do not like it one bit. Mr. Neustadt, an adviser to Truman and Kennedy
who is an emeritus professor of government at Harvard University, argued that an
incoming President faces three signal challenges: to sketch the outlines of his
programs and budget; to hire and indoctrinate the 50 to 100 people at the core
of his Government, and to make the symbolic journey from campaigner to leader.
None of them demands a huge, clanking transition apparatus, he said.

"Transition teams are nothing but large groups of ex-campaigners on the Federal
payroll for a temporary period, wandering around Washington terrorizing civil
servants," Mr. Neustadt said this week. "They all turn in reports to the people
you've ultimately appointed to lead the departments, and those reports usually
get filed in a wastebasket. And that's the end of that."

Mr. Neustadt feels a special responsibility for the process. Moved by the plight
of a Kennedy aide who worked without pay and at substantial personal cost, he
asked House Speaker Sam Rayburn to support legislation providing Federal funding
for transitions. Unfortunately, he said, the bill passed.

"If there were no money, it wouldn't happen," he said. "And I'm sorry, but I'm
responsible for it."

All but lost in the parade, meanwhile, is the inconvenient fact that someone
else is still President, and will be until the succeeding Jan. 20. Every so
often, an outgoing administration tries to make a little mischief: Mr. Carter,
for example, used his waning hours to issue sheaves of "midnight regulations"
for Democratic programs that Mr. Reagan promptly nullified. Some Presidents hide
pet projects in their final budgets and defy newcomers to root them out. Mr.
Truman, the father of smoothly integrated transitions, so opposed such
skulduggery that he invited Eisenhower's fiscal experts to witness the
preparation of his last budget.

As for Mr. Bush, he may be of two minds. He has publicly dedicated himself to
relinquishing power "with style," using his remaining days in a non-partisan
fashion to tie up loose ends. On Friday, he did that and capped his own tenure
with a flourish, sealing a European trade agreement that may well hasten the
realization of the only real vision of his re-election campaign: a new global
economic order. On the other hand, Mr. Bush nearly saddled the Clinton
Administration with a trade war over wine.

But Mr. Bush cannot dodge some highly partisan decisions, and indeed, he may
relish making them. Atop that list is the question of whether to pardon major
figures in the Iran-contra affair, a scandal with which Mr. Clinton bludgeoned
the President in the campaign's last hours. Staff work on the pardons has
reached high levels within the White House.

The President also is scheduled to decide within weeks whether to allow British
Airways to buy a 44 per cent stake in a major American air carrier, USAir. He
has taken no official position, but British Air's offer dovetails with his view
of a global economic village, while it has aroused Mr. Clinton's more
protectionist instincts.

Meanwhile, some of Mr. Bush's own aides are quietly discussing whether the White
House should use other issues to rub a thumb in Mr. Clinton's eye, if only as a
statement of principle. Especially tempting is a pending decision by the
Environmental Protection Agency on the definition of protected wetlands.

Vice President Quayle wants one that eases development on millions of acres, and
some Bush aides think this would be a fitting parting shot at Mr. Clinton and
especially at his Vice President, Al Gore, an environmentalist. Their problem,
and their boss's, is the anemic nature of interregnums: an outgoing President
may still lead the world and control vast armies and billions of dollars, but
the power has largely shifted to the new man.

"It's a question of whether to put our view down on paper so people will see the
differences between us, or whether that would be viewed as grandstanding," one
aide said. But the President, he said, "is not fighting to the last moment." Of
Mr. Clinton, he added wearily: "He'll change it anyway."

LOAD-DATE: November 22, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              282 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 22, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Term Limit for the Man of Steel: Yes, It's Time for Him to Go

BYLINE: By FRANK RICH

SECTION: Section 4; Page 1; Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 940 words


IF the American public was beside itself with grief over the demise of Superman
last week, the sorrow was not conspicuous. In death, the Man of Steel was
reduced to the same clammy, mercantile status as such other extinct American
icons as Moxie, the Packard and the 45 R.P.M. record: he became a collectible.
The teen-agers who lined up at the nation's newsstands and comic book stores on
Wednesday had dollar signs, not tears, in their eyes. The issue of Superman in
which the superhero from Krypton is killed by Doomsday, a villainous escapee
from a cosmic insane asylum, was bound to be worth more than its face value of
$1.25 someday. Or so its publishers would have young consumers believe.

Superman may come back to life in some form or other in any event. The DC Comics
people are only guaranteeing that he will stay dead until March 1993. But will
anyone care about a resurrection, should there be one? Superman was a goner long
before Doomsday arrived, as was the heroic ideal ("very phallic, glossy,
gleamingly hard-edged, hyper-masculine" in the words of the writer Camille
Paglia) he symbolized in American culture.

Who killed him? Some might blame Alexander and Ilya Salkind, the movie producers
who would not quit while they were ahead: their first Christopher Reeve
"Superman" movie, a charming entertainment of 1978, was followed by sequels
whose narratives did not advance as fast as a speeding bullet but lumbered
incoherently at a pace that tried and finally exhausted the patience of the MTV
generation. Next to Indiana Jones, Luke Skywalker and Captain Kirk, ironic
semi-superheroes of a New Age, Superman was a world-class bore.

But Superman was also the victim of a larger phenomenon: the death of the
all-American hero as he has been defined for much of the 20th century. In the
post-cold war world where America's role as superpower is certainly shifting in
substance and tone, what need is there for the old macho derring-do of Superman?
Even the phone booth in which Clark Kent did his quick change is an anachronism,
an archaic symbol of a vanished all-mighty America in which the all-powerful Ma
Bell seemed as unlikely to splinter as the Soviet Union.

History will record that 1992 was not only the year of Superman's demise, but
also a bad year for George Bush, World War II hero; for the once-invincible
Batman, who lost his public by the second weekend of "Batman Returns," and for
Gerald McRaney, a.k.a. Major Dad, whose appearance at the Republican national
convention sealed the doom of a "family values" program pitted against the new
American heroes, the Murphy Browns and Mr. Moms.

'I Won't Be Back'

It was a good year for Bill Clinton, who has never been to war and was not
entirely forthright in explaining how he beat the Vietnam draft; for women, who
used the ballot box to further the right to choose and the right to family
leave, concepts beyond the imagination of Lois Lane, and for gay men and women,
who are now on the verge, with a new President's help, of redefining the
military's sexually rigid notions of who can and cannot be a hero in peace and
war.

In a campaign that was almost perverse in its inability to gauge the popular
mood, President Bush did himself exceptional damage by refusing to acknowledge,
or even comprehend, that the old superheroes were on the way out. His favorite
celebrity surrogates on the stump were Arnold Schwarzenegger and Bruce Willis,
whose "Terminator" and "Die Hard" theatrics are carbons of Superman's, and his
most excessive language ("bozos" most notoriously) belonged in the corniest of
cartoon bubbles. The President seemed as oblivious to the culture's portents as
he was to the pollsters': even as the Bush-Quayle campaign charged full-speed
ahead with the old heroics, Clint Eastwood was smartly dumping his own diehard,
Reagan-era image of omnipotence for the anti-heroics of "Unforgiven," which
became a hit while the Houston convention flopped.

But Mr. Bush never recognized that his attacks on Governor Clinton's patriotism
and, by extension, his masculinity were failing to arouse the electorate. He
never understood that while truth and justice remain moral absolutes to voters,
"the American way" is being redefined in a society where people are more
concerned about their families' futures than about whether its young men can
leap over buildings or fly into battle.

Superman was born in 1938, at a time when Americans knew that superpowers would
be needed should the United States have to vanquish Hitler and his gang.
Superman served the country just as well when the Iron Curtain fell into place
and a young, seemingly fit President ("Superman Comes to the Supermarket," as
Norman Mailer described John Kennedy in 1960), with George Bush-like World War
II experience, was the country's choice to face down the new enemy.

But who needs Superman to fight on the domestic front?

The new American hero, who paid his first post-election visit to the nation's
capital on the same day that Superman died, has no super powers. He jogs very
slowly and looks anything but hard-bodied in his sagging jogging shorts. He has
a bright wife who is invited into his inner council rather than left in the dark
like Lois, pining for her man to get home from clandestine adventures.

There is no way of knowing if this new American hero will remotely achieve the
longevity of Superman. But it is precisely his vulnerability, as opposed to the
superheroes' invulnerability, that makes him so appealing to many. If he fails
to do the job, it will only take an election -- not Kryptonite or Doomsday -- to
bring him down.

LOAD-DATE: November 22, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawings

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              283 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 22, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Kaysone Phomvihan, Communist Who Ruled Laos, Is Dead at 71

BYLINE: By BRUCE LAMBERT

SECTION: Section 1; Page 54; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 987 words


President Kaysone Phomvihan of Laos, the longtime guerrilla who led the
Communist takeover of his nation in 1975 and ruled as its dictator ever since,
died yesterday, the Laotian state radio announced. He was 71 years old.

He died of an unspecified illness, said the broadcasts from Vientiane, the
Laotian capital. The announcement was monitored in London and Bangkok.

The reports gave no indication about a successor to Mr. Kaysone Phomvihan, who
led both the Government and the Communist Party. He had been reported ill for
some time.

Mr. Kaysone Phomvihan's death could mean a period of uncertainty for Laos, one
of the world's most isolated and secretive countries, especially considering his
long domination of the country and his role as its nationalist hero.

Gave Up Post of Premier

Last year, under a new Constitution, he gave up the Prime Minister's post to
assume the new post of President and remained the party's Secretary General.
Gen. Khamtay Siphandon became the Prime Minister, but it is uncertain whether he
will succeed Mr. Kaysone Phomvihan.

A spokesman at the Laotian mission to the United Nations said it had just
received word of the announcement and therefore had no immediate comment. The
State Department said it would have no comment until Monday.

The death of Mr. Kaysone Phomvihan -- a man with Vietnamese links by birth,
marriage, language, education and politics -- also raises the issue of what
direction Laos will move in its politics, economy and foreign relations.

It shares a long eastern border with Communist Vietnam, which until 1987
stationed tens of thousands of troops in Laos. But Laos also has growing
commerce along its equally lengthy western border with Thailand, which has
thriving capitalism, a more open society and ties to the West.

To the north sits China. Historically wary of its giant neighbor, Laos relied on
the Soviet Union as its prime benefactor until it collapsed. Since then, Laos
has been friendlier to China, the world's last major Communist nation. But Laos
is also reaching out to Japan, Asia's democratic and capitalist power, and has
even courted its old Western foes, France and the United States.

The short, stocky Mr. Kaysone Phomvihan was one of the last of Indochina's
old-guard revolutionary leaders from the generation of his Vietnamese comrade,
the late Ho Chi Minh.

Credited as both a brilliant political theoretician and a crafty military chief,
Mr. Kaysone Phomvihan for years led the rebel struggle from secret mountain
caves.

Royal Dynasty Falls

His Pathet Lao forces survived formidable opposition, including carpet bombing
by the United States, before eventually toppling the 600-year-old Laotian
dynasty in 1975.

Under his leadership, however, Laos remained among the poorest and least
developed of countries. The small landlocked nation and its four million people
were largely isolated from the outside world. Once known as the the Land of a
Million Elephants, Laos had few exports other than timber, hydroelectric power
and illicit opium and heroin.

But in the late 1980's, Mr. Kaysone Phomvihan's Government sharply altered the
country's ideology. Its controlled economy finally resorted to privatized
farming and commerce. Looking abroad, Mr. Kaysone Phomvihan actively sought
foreign aid and trade.

Reconciling with old foes, he traveled to France and Japan in 1989, his first
trip to non-Communist counties other than Thailand. He also won an $8.7 million
grant from the United States for roads, dams, communications, farming, health
care and education.

The changes were forced by a combination of continuing stagnation in the local
economy, the collapse of international Marxism and the disintegration of the
Soviet Union, the longtime backer of Laotian Communism.

Laos's official slogan changed from "socialism" to "prosperity" and the
hammer-and-sickle disappeared from the national emblem, replaced by a Buddhist
shrine.

Mr. Kaysone Phomvihan's explanation was that Laos was too undeveloped to begin
socialism.

One-Party Rule Persists

Despite those changes, political authoritarianism remained. "Our Laotian party
does not yet see any need for establishing other political parties," Mr. Kaysone
Phomvihan said in 1990.

Born in the southern panhandle province of Savanakhet, Mr. Phomvihan was the son
of a Lao peasant mother and a father who was a Vietnamese civil servant for
French colonialists.

Mr. Kaysone Phomvihan ( pronounced guy-sohn POHM-vee-hahn) said he became
radicalized at the age of 16. Explaining his credo of liberation from outside
forces, he once said Laotians "prefer to live a miserable life as masters of
their own country than to live a happy life enslaved by foreigners."

While studying law in Hanoi, Vietnam, he was recruited by Ho Chi Minh.

The young student demonstrated against both Japanese World War II occupation and
French colonial domination of Southeast Asia. In later years, he jousted
politically with China and fought against United States forces, accusing them of
imperialist intentions. When France's control of Indochina ended at Dien Bien
Phu in 1954, an internal and international struggle for control of Laos ensued.

Always the Top Leader

With Vietnamese training and support, he began organizing rebels in Laos in the
1940's. By the mid-1950's, when he was in his 30's, he became the Defense
Minister and Commander in Chief of the Pathet Lao forces and chief of the
Laotian Communist Party. As alliances and names of organizations constantly
shifted, he held a variety of titles but was always considered the movement's
top leader.

Although he was fluent in Thai, Shan, French, English and Vietnamese as well as
his native Lao, he was reticent, even secretive. He was not seen in public from
1958 until he took power in 1975. Even then, when a reporter asked if he had a
wife, the evasive answer was "Do you?" After that introductory appearance, he
disappeared from view again for more than a year.

Mr. Kaysone Phomvihan was married, according to the International Who's Who,
which identifies his wife as Thongvin, a Vietnamese. But little else is known
about his private life. His secrecy and tight security were not merely personal
idiosyncracies. He survived at least three assassination attempts.

NAME: Kaysone Phomvihan

LOAD-DATE: November 22, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: President Kaysone Phomvihan (Reuters, 1989)

TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              284 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 22, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Inefficient Soviet Economy Halted Cold War;
The Costs at Home

SECTION: Section 4; Page 16; Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 358 words


To the Editor:

George F. Kennan (Op-Ed., Oct. 28), one of the major architects of containment,
writes with insight of the cold war: "Nobody -- no country, no party, no person
-- 'won' the cold war. It was a long and costly political rivalry, fueled on
both sides by unreal and exaggerated estimates of the intentions and strength of
the other party. It greatly overstrained the economic resources of both
countries, leaving both, by the end of the 1980's, confronted with heavy
financial, social and, in the case of the Russians, political problems."

We are left with "sober re-examination," a doleful price to pay. It seems now
one innocent casualty of that war was Alger Hiss. Gen. Dmitri Volkogonov,
chairman of the Russian military intelligence archives, declared the allegations
against Mr. Hiss "completely groundless."

Unreconstructed cold warriors in this country are unconvinced. According to Mr.
Hiss, Whittaker Chambers, his accuser, was a "psychopath" and Richard Nixon, his
political prosecutor, an "opportunistic politician." Their careers catapulted,
while his plummeted. Chambers, who died in 1961, was awarded the Medal of
Freedom by President Ronald Reagan, and Mr. Nixon was President between 1969 and
1974.

Hundreds, perhaps thousands, of American lives and reputations were ruined as a
result of the cold war. Everybody else lost in the witchhunt hearings of the
House Un-American Activities Committee.

More important, the whole rancid affair caused an American generation to develop
grotesque, indelible images of a twisted drama based on a hysteria about some
alien ideology called Communism invading their country. Such cold war hysteria
only fueled a "mistake" later in Vietnam.

Most of us are puzzled by the rapid demise of the Eastern European bloc. We are
left unprepared for the unanswerable questions about the future. A generation in
limbo and fear, many of us lost trust in our politicians. Some even felt robbed
of their innocent youth to judge for themselves the meanings of hostile beliefs
such as socialism.

ANATOLI ILYASHOV
Los Angeles, Nov. 4, 1992

The writer is a historian.

LOAD-DATE: November 22, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              285 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 22, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Once a Black Panther, Always a Cause

BYLINE: By ANDI RIERDEN

SECTION: Section 13CN; Page 1; Column 1; Connecticut Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 2016 words


ON a recent day at Thomas Sweet Coffee Shop in New Haven, George Edwards sat
with his back to a brick wall and talked about, among other things, the American
electoral process. "It's like the whole carrot and the stick scenario," the
former Black Panther said while Ella Fitzgerald scat songs warbled through the
speakers. "It's like everyone gets together and says, 'Let's get this bad actor
off the stage, then bring in someone new who smiles a little and makes us all
feel a little entertained.' Problem is, Clinton, Bush and Perot are all part of
the same beast with a different face. So once again the American people are
duped."

Every few minutes someone tapped on the window and waved or nodded to Mr.
Edwards, a man well known for his work in the community as well as for his frank
political parlance. Mr. Edwards -- who as the result of a back injury is on
medical leave from his job as an outreach worker for the city's AIDS
needle-exchange program -- has continued to defend the legacy of the Black
Panther Party, which had its roots in the teachings of Malcolm X.

Mr. Edwards, a lithe, intense man with a sharp sense of irony, has a goatee and
black beret that reflect the style of another era. He often uses the stern,
multisyllabic expressions of the late 1960's and he wears a button that shows a
black cat behind bars along with the words "Free all political prisoners."
Though the party died out during the 1970's, a group of former members in
California revived the Black Panther newspaper last year. Mr. Edwards now
carries extra copies in his black leather satchel -- just as he did 27 years ago
-- to sell on the street or give away to youngsters.

"Some people may call me an extremist," he said. "But I will never stop waging
the struggle."

A Lone Voice

Now 55 years old, he has remained a constant force on the city's political scene
and has often acted as a lone voice on a litany of issues yet to surface in the
mainstream.  He has run a neighborhood health clinic, helped to build shanties
on the Yale campus to protest the university's investment practices in South
Africa, and has organized and participated in numerous demonstrations against
wars ranging from Vietnam to the Persian Gulf. Those who know Mr. Edwards as an
AIDS outreach worker described him as a tireless and resourceful advocate who
finds housing for his clients and tries to garner support from their families.

"He's like the last of the freedom fighters," said Theodore Hogan, the executive
assistant to Mayor John C. Daniels and a former director of the State Commission
on Human Rights, who has known Mr. Edwards since the late 60's.

Last spring Mr. Edwards organized a committee of residents to fight for the
release of Melvin Jones, a New Haven man who is serving a prison term for the
drug-related murder of Wayne Curtis, of Middletown. Mr. Jones, who has been in
prison since 1990, did not use or sell drugs, Mr. Edwards asserted. There was no
physical evidence linking the young man to the crime, he said, and the star
witness for the prosecution was an admitted drug addict and police informant.

In 1974 Mr. Jones was convicted, along with several other young people, in the
shooting death of a Yale University student. He subsequently served 15 years in
prison for the murder.

Mr. Edwards said his interest in the more recent case grew not only from his
personal dealings with Mr. Jones, but also from his own ordeal with the criminal
justice system. "Melvin had the reputation of someone who wanted to better his
community and for that I knew he'd be victimized," he said. "I could offer him
advice on how to watch his back and protect himself because I am a person who
has been historically victimized."

Mr. Edwards was raised in Goldsboro, N.C., and moved to New Haven in 1963 after
serving six years in the military, where he had been trained as an electronics
technician. Shortly before that, he had been in Ohio and visited a mosque of the
Nation of Islam. The experience changed his life. "They were denouncing white
America," he said. "They were pro-black people, anti-racist, anti-establishment.
Once I walked out of there I decided I was going to give my life to liberating
my people out from under these racist conditions."

He got a job as a repairman for Southern New England Telephone Company and later
became an outreach worker for the Hill Parents Association, one of the first
community advocacy organizations in the city that addressed issues like housing,
welfare and police brutality. He gave public poetry readings and helped to
create the Black Arts Theater where he built a local following for his portrayal
of George in "Who's Afraid of Virginia Woolf."

Ahead of His Time

In the mid-1960's, he became close friends with John Huggins, a community
organizer from a prominent New Haven family, who, according to Mr. Edwards, was
way ahead of his time. "In the fall of 1967, John made it clear to me that he
was going to Los Angeles to attend U.C.L.A. and become actively involved in the
revolution of the Black Panther Party," he said. "And that was the last time I
saw him."

The Black Panther Party, founded in 1966 by Huey Newton and Bobby Seale, became
the vanguard of the black liberation movement. Its charter called for full
employment, decent housing, the end of police brutality and the integration of
black history into the school curriculum. They began a free busing program to
prisons for those with family members behind bars, a breakfast program for
schoolchildren, and clothing and food drives.

At the same time, the party's tactics, which included arming members for
self-defense, prompted J. Edgar Hoover, the director of the Federal Bureau of
Investigation, to start an investigation into the organization, calling it "the
greatest threat to the international security of the country."

In January 1969, Mr. Huggins, who had become one of the leaders of the party's
Southern California chapter, was shot and killed by members of a rival black
organization while leaving a student meeting on the U.C.L.A. campus. His wife,
Ericka, returned to New Haven soon after, to set up a chapter of the party.

By then, Mr. Edwards was selling newspapers and raising money for the party
through the Black Arts Theater. He had also been arrested for carrying a loaded
rifle down a busy city street. The incident made local headlines and cost Mr.
Edwards his job at the telephone company.

"I couldn't imagine what this guy was into," said Mr. Hogan, who was then the
director of the urban affairs program at the telephone company. Nevertheless, he
said, he felt drawn to Mr. Edwards, whom he described as highly intellectual.

'Books Upon Books'

"You'd go to his apartment and there would be books upon books," he said. "He
really helped me crystallize my thinking on a lot of issues." At the same time,
Mr. Hogan said, "Nobody wanted to mess with George. If he didn't like something
you did, he'd stare through you." Yet, beyond the facade, Mr. Hogan said, "There
was this warm, kind, compassionate gentleman."

On the weekend of May 17-18, 1969, the Panthers were preparing to welcome Bobby
Seale to New Haven, who was arriving from Oakland and scheduled to speak at
Yale. By then, the organization had become a focus of newspapers and television
nationally as well as a target of the F.B.I., which had begun raiding the
party's offices throughout the country. Suspicions about government spies
infiltrating the party heightened. The list of possible informants included
George Edwards.

On May 17, national officials of the party including George Sams arrived at the
home of Warren Kimbro, a community organizer and aspiring Panther. They brought
with them Alex Rackley, a member of the New York chapter and suspected
informant. In the next 24 hours the young man was held captive in Mr. Kimbro's
apartment and beaten and scalded with hot water said Mr. Edwards, who had been
called to participate in Mr. Rackley's interrogation.

"There was a meeting going on in the basement and I was commanded downstairs
where Rackley was," Mr. Edwards continued. "I saw what they did to him. They
tied me up and held a gun to my head and wanted to know what my intent was. I
was under so much duress and started talking about how I was going to undermine
the communications system on Wall Street and a bunch of military installations."


Into Hiding

He was later ordered to hit Mr. Rackley, which he said he did. After that he
left the house and went into hiding. "I knew they were out to execute me," he
said.

The night of May 20, George Sams, Warren Kimbro and a Panther from Bridgeport,
Lonnie McLucas, drove Mr. Rackley to a marsh in Middlefield where, under the
orders of Mr. Sams, Mr. Kimbro and Mr. McLucas shot and killed the man. The body
was found the next day by two fishermen. The police arrested and charged 14
Black Panthers with murder, kidnapping and conspiracy in connection with the
crime. Those arrested included Mr. Edwards and Mr. Seale, who a witness said
ordered the shooting. According to testimony later given by Mr. McLucas, Mr.
Edwards was to have been killed with Mr. Rackley but could not be found that
night in May.

On May 1, 1970, a rally held on the New Haven green to support Mr. Seale and
other imprisoned Panthers drew 15,000 people. In October, after spending 18
months in prison, two of which he spent sharing a cell with Mr. Seale at the
Montville Correctional Institution, Mr. Edwards was given two suspended
sentences after pleading guilty to two counts of aggravated assault. One dealt
with the beating of Mr. Rackley and the second involved an earlier event in
which Mr. Edwards used a length of chain to assault a police officer. Mr. Seale
was acquitted of the murder charges in 1972. Warren Kimbro was released from
prison in 1972 and now runs a program in New Haven to aid ex-offenders.

Mr. Edwards said recently that he was targeted as an informant because he did
not get along with several top members of the party. He added, "The biggest
tragedy of the Rackley murder is that the government used it to launch an
all-out war on the Panther Party."

Glamour and Attention

Too many people were drawn to the party for the glamour and attention, he said,
not because they held strong political beliefs. Mr. Edwards said he rarely sees
any of the former Panthers who were involved in the case, but when he has, "They
have a hard time looking me in the eye." His involvement in the Black Panther
Party and the judicial maelstrom that followed is a story that Mr. Edwards has
told to film makers, students and reporters on several occasions.

He has worked hard to clear his reputation in the community since those times,
he said, but until recently the past seemed to follow him everywhere. Because of
his militant background, he said that law enforcement agents had wiretapped his
telephone, followed him and attempted to create schemes to discredit him.

Nevertheless, he said, the struggle continues. He attempts to raise the
consciousness of drug addicts he encounters by quoting Malcolm X and reading
passages from the book, "Pipe Dream Blues" by Clarence Lusane, which explores
the racism and government complicity in the drug crisis.

At the Columbus Day parade last month, he stood on the sidelines with a large
colored sign that read, "Free Melvin Jones," as the Mayor and the Police Chief
passed by. He is boycotting a popular coffee shop and adjoining book store
downtown, he says, because of their prejudice against black customers. "I don't
need their kind of petty bourgeois pseudo-intellectual elitist garbage," he
said.

Mr. Edwards, who is divorced, carries a photograph of himself and his
21-year-old son, Che Lumumba, taken shortly before the boy died, apparently a
suicide in 1990. "We'd gotten very close before then," he said pensively. It was
a brief glimpse into the personal side of Mr. Edwards. Later he said he realized
that he had an automatic tendency to be on guard. "I've always had to be very
vigilant," he said.

LOAD-DATE: November 22, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: George Edwards, a former Black Panther, on the steps of the
Superior Court in New Haven. (Janet Durrans for The New York Times)
(pg. 1); People attending rally on the New Haven Green in 1970 to support Black
Panther defendants accused of a murder. (Barton Silverman/The New York Times)
(pg. 12)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              286 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 22, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

IN SHORT: FICTION

BYLINE: By Bill Sharp

SECTION: Section 7; Page 22; Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 193 words



I MARRIED VIETNAM
By Sandie Frazier.
Braziller, $19.95.

Sandie Frazier's gripping first novel, "I Married Vietnam," looks at the war
from the vantage point of a woman who lives with another kind of M.I.A. -- a
soldier who came back from the fighting but is still lost in the jungles of his
own mind. Ms. Frazier's narrator, Samantha Freeman, tells the story of her
husband's life from his hopeful youth in Mississippi to his hellish yet
distinguished service in Vietnam to his frustrating postwar limbo in Chicago.
Her fast-paced and at times brutal story clearly portrays the callous treatment
of men like Jeremy Freeman, who came home only to be deprived of jobs, good
medical care and emotional support. Jeremy's pain runs so deep that even when
society is finally able to applaud Vietnam veterans marching in a parade, he
cannot bring himself to take part. Ms. Frazier uses her novel to depict some of
the anger of Vietnam vets and also some of the frustration felt by blacks
excluded from the system, despite their labors to protect it. She forces us to
confront our guilt over the treatment of soldiers whose war is still far from
over.

LOAD-DATE: November 22, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              287 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 23, 1992, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Rift Over Black Studies Head Leaves Program Riven, Too

BYLINE: By MARIA NEWMAN

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1652 words


When Dr. Leonard Jeffries Jr. was removed last spring as head of City College's
black studies department for his racially charged remarks about blacks and Jews,
trustees of the City University of New York thought they had bought peace for
the department by replacing him with Dr. Edmund W. Gordon, a mild-mannered
scholar at the twilight of a distinguished career.

But after four months on the job, Dr. Gordon is struggling to steer a department
that appears paralyzed by the controversy over Dr. Jeffries's statements, in
which he characterized whites as greedy, materialistic "ice people" and blacks
as humanistic, communal "sun people."

A display board outside the department still lists Dr. Jeffries as chairman,
even though that title was taken from him in March. He has filed a lawsuit
challenging the demotion. And though he is only a professor, he still occupies
the chairman's roomy quarters in the department's office suite, surrounding
himself with bodyguards, secretaries and aides, while Dr. Gordon uses a small
office down the hall, or one in a nearby building.

Dr. Gordon says he sees no need for anyone to change offices, and City College
administrators maintain that unless Dr. Gordon wants Dr. Jeffries to move, there
is no need for him to do so. They say Dr. Jeffries's suit does not figure in
their decision to allow him to keep using the chairman's office.

When Dr. Gordon walks into the department suite, he is met with an icy silence
that is broken only when he utters a greeting. Posters throughout the campus
proclaim "Gordon must go," and at a college-sponsored welcoming reception for
the new chairman a month ago, several students appeared with protest signs. They
voiced dismay that in spite of support among many faculty members and students,
the fiery and outspoken Dr. Jeffries had been removed from the chairmanship
after 20 years.

Since the official change in leadership, faculty members, students and others
describe the black studies department as one marred by tension, hostility and
profound uncertainty.

A professor, John Moyibi Amoda, likened the atmosphere to his days as a doctoral
student at the University of California at Berkeley during the Vietnam War.

"You know you have to cross the picket lines to get to your classes and you will
be called names and put up with other things," Professor Amoda said. "What we
are going through here is a quiet form of crossing some kind of picket line.

"I find it extremely trying. It's abnormal for people to operate under these
conditions. It's not fair to Len, it's not fair to Dr. Gordon and it's not fair
to us. The system is playing politics with people who just want to do their
jobs."

At the core of the tension between Dr. Gordon and the faculty, including Dr.
Jeffries, are fundamental philosophical differences about what ought to be
taught in black studies courses, debates that are taking place in many black
studies departments at colleges across the country.

Under Dr. Jeffries, the department emphasized what is called Afrocentric
scholarship, which, the department's student handbook states, reflects "global
Africana peoples' participation and contribution in the evolution, development
and civilizations of mankind."

Dr. Gordon says he thinks the department should broaden its concentration to
include the experiences of Africans, African-Americans and African-Caribbeans.
He also quarrels with the kind of scholarly work done in the black studies
department. He said that its past preference for conferences and seminars over
research served to further political goals more than academic enlightenment.

Needing the -American Part

"This is one of the sources of disagreements," Dr. Gordon said. "I'm taking the
position that the celebration of our African history has to be honored, but that
a great concentration of our effort ought to be on its expression and
manifestations in the Western Hemisphere, which cannot be adequately understood
independently of attention to Africa."

Complicating matters, the decision by the trustees of the City University of New
York to dismiss Dr. Jeffries as department chairman at City College did not
affect his status as a tenured professor. His lawsuit against the university
contends that the trustees did not have the right to overrule the faculty's vote
to reappoint him as chairman. The university argues it does have the right.

"I have legally questioned the legitimacy of the political interference with the
department and I'm willing to spend a great deal of my own money to defend
that," said Dr. Jeffries, who insists he has done nothing to worsen the
department's tensions. "I get along with everyone."

The university chancellor, Dr. W. Ann Reynolds, acknowledged the tensions.
"Anytime you've got a lawsuit in a department, especially having to do with the
status of a chairman, it does inhibit play and movement," she said. "But Dr.
Gordon has coped with this admirably."

Morale Called Lowest

While he may have the support of the university's top administrators, Dr. Gordon
expresses frustration at the daily reality of dealing with a department whose
direction he is trying to radically alter but where, he concedes, he has the
support of very few of the six tenured and 10 nontenured professors. He says
that morale and cooperation are at a low point.

"I took the job recognizing that it was a difficult one," he said during an
interview in his sparsely furnished office in the administration building. "But
I also recognize that it was probably only a person in my position who could do
it because anybody else would have to worry about: 'How would I look? How is it
going to affect my future, etc. etc.'

"I'm retired here after a distinguished career. It doesn't really make much
difference. What does make a difference is the freedom with which I can continue
to try to move that faculty."

So far that movement appears almost nonexistent.

"From what I see, I'm getting the feeling that nothing is getting accomplished,"
said L. Anthony Nieves, who as editor of the school newspaper, The Campus, spent
a good deal of the last year writing about the controversy. "I think it's in
chaos. You have Dr. Jeffries challenging the university and the way they took
away his job. It seems like the whole department is on freeze until this whole
legal thing is resolved."

Most Politically Charged

Few in the department will speak publicly about the matter, although others who
spoke privately, and teachers and administrators throughout the university, say
it is the most politically charged situation anywhere in the City University
system.

The department, which has an annual budget of $560,624, has only about a dozen
students majoring in black studies, college officials said. But about 1,000
students are enrolled in the 25 courses taught by its professors, they said.

The traditional African garb favored by Dr. Jeffries, 55 years old, make him a
familiar figure on campus, where he has long made searing statements on race. In
classes, he has distributed booklets arguing that the skin pigment melanin gives
blacks intellectual superiority. He has also taught that people of European
descent are "ice people" while people of African descent are "sun people." But
his words received wider attention last year, when at a black cultural festival
in Albany, he blamed some Jews for financing the African slave trade and
asserted that Jews and Italians had conspired to denigrate blacks in movies.

Administrators say that the furor over Dr. Jeffries's dismissal has died down
considerably, and that the college and the department are trying to focus on
moving forward, to build a black studies department worthy of its site in
Harlem.

Even those who say they do not oppose Dr. Gordon say they resent the
university's imposing a new chairman on a department that has been long
neglected.

"I feel that we're being treated unfairly because people out there don't like
Professor Jeffries and they don't like what Professor Jeffries is saying," said
Prof. Kamuti Kiteme. "He is a sacrificial lamb."

Dr. Jeffries says he has remained in the chairman's office because no one has
asked him to move. In a telephone interview recently, he said he was accompanied
by young men who served as his bodyguards because he had received "hundreds of
threats," and had been pursued "by men with AK-47's." He declined, however, to
provide details of the threats or the gunmen.

Dr. Gordon, a 71-year-old psychologist and Presbyterian minister, was appointed
chairman after serving as a longtime adviser to City College's president. A
former chairman of the department of African-American studies at Yale, he is
respected for his scholarship in psychology and the issues of multiculturalism
and the African-American experience. He is also known for his quiet style and
skill in finding consensus.

"I happen to be a rather soft-spoken person, civilized," Dr. Gordon said. "I
think the faculty members thought that meant there would be no changes."

Rather than dwell on the rifts with his colleagues, he prefers to discuss his
plans for the department, including offering graduate courses by next September.
A task force is examining the possibility of a creating a doctoral program in
black studies, he said.

Dr. Gordon is also working on creating an institute for research on the African
diaspora, which he hopes would attract well-known, respected scholars to City
College.

While he struggles to shift the focus of the department, he says his goal is to
strengthen City College's black studies offerings, not diminish them, as some
faculty members fear.

"I think all of this ought to be directed in helping youngsters learn how to
access information and to use their knowledge to solve problems," Dr. Gordon
said, "rather than primarily to celebrate a particular culture or to justify
one's political position."


NAME: Leonard Jeffries Jr; Edmund W. Gordon

LOAD-DATE: November 23, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Dr. Leonard Jeffries Jr., who was removed last spring as head
of the black studies department at City College. (Ruby Washington/The New York
Times); Dr. Edmund W. Gordon is struggling to steer the black studies department
at City College after controversy over his predecessor's racially charged
remarks. (Associated Press) (pg. B4)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              288 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 23, 1992, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Useful Junkets A Timely Briefing on Vietnam

SECTION: Section A; Page 16; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 375 words


Frivolous "fact-finding" trips to jet-set spas have given Congressional junkets
a bad name. But more serious missions can make constructive contributions to
policy. Last week, two groups of Congressional fact-finders offered useful prods
to a Presidency in transition -- one on Vietnam, the other on the Balkans.

Members of the Senate Select Committee on P.O.W.-M.I.A. Affairs will report to
President Bush this week on their trip to Vietnam. Part of their mission was to
deliver a letter from the President to Vietnamese leaders. Reportedly, the
letter indicated that continued Vietnamese cooperation on M.I.A. issues could
bring an end to the long U.S. economic embargo as soon as next month.

That's good news, but the President could do his successor and his country a
favor by moving to full diplomatic relations before he leaves office.

The Senate committee deserves great credit for breakthroughs on the M.I.A.
issue. Despite partisan acrimony over alleged "live sightings" of Americans in
Indochina, the senators have done responsible work. Most important, they spurred
Washington and Hanoi to intensify the search for information, remains and
personal effects, helping to ease the anguish of the families of Americans
missing in action since the Vietnam War.

Ending decades of bureaucratic obfuscation, the Bush Administration opened
Pentagon records to committee investigators. More recently, Vietnam suddenly
agreed to admit U.S. researchers into its own secret military archives.

The Bush Administration's stated conditions for normalized relations with
Vietnam -- full Vietnamese cooperation on M.I.A.'s and on a political settlement
in Cambodia -- have essentially been met. Waiting for formal completion of the
archival research and the U.N.-sponsored Cambodian election now scheduled for
next May would leave it to the Clinton Administration to take the emotional step
of normalization.

Given Mr. Bush's long personal identification with the American war effort in
Vietnam, normalization would go down easier with many Americans if it came from
him. Provided he is satisfied with what the committee members report, Mr. Bush
would do well to take this final step in ending the Vietnam War before
Inauguration Day.


LOAD-DATE: November 23, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              289 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 23, 1992, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Abroad at Home;
When Truth Is Buried

BYLINE: By ANTHONY LEWIS

SECTION: Section A; Page 17; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 699 words

DATELINE: BOSTON


The civil war in El Salvador is over now, a political settlement taking hold.
Americans hardly remember when the Reagan Administration called the leftist
rebels a critical threat to our national security.

But the American role in El Salvador did damage to our institutions and our
honor that remains unrepaired. So we are reminded by a recent turn in an
appalling piece of history.

On Jan. 27, 1982, correspondents of The New York Times and The Washington Post
reported from the remote Salvadoran village of El Mozote that hundreds of
civilians had been massacred there. Most were women, children and old men.

Raymond Bonner of The Times wrote that he had seen the skulls and bones of
dozens of people buried under burned-out peasant houses. Alma Guillermopietro
wrote a similar account for The Post.

A reporter just arrived on the scene could not know who killed them, Mr. Bonner
said. But villagers nearby said an elite battalion of government forces had
carried out the massacre the previous month. The villagers had a list of 733
victims. The Salvadoran Human Rights Commission put the number of dead at 926.

One woman in El Mozote, Rufina Amaya, said she had survived by hiding in some
trees when the soldiers came. They killed her husband, who was blind, and her
four children, aged 9, 5, 3 and 8 months.

Those newspaper reports evoked angry denials and denunciations. A Salvadoran
military spokesman said the account of a massacre had been fabricated by
"subversives."

The Reagan Administration, already embarrassed by Salvadoran death squads, was
just as bristling. A week later Thomas Enders, Assistant Secretary of State for
Inter-American Affairs, told Congress:

"There is no evidence to confirm that [Salvadoran] Government forces
systematically massacred civilians . . . or that the number of civilians killed
even remotely approached the 733 or 926 victims cited in the press."

Mr. Enders supposedly based his statement on an investigation by two U.S.
Embassy officials in El Salvador. But he did not make their report public, and
he misrepresented what they said. They had never reached El Mozote, and they did
not reject the report of a massacre.

The Reagan Administration did not rest with disingenuous denials. It did its
best to smear the reporters.

Sad to say, this effort at smearing found a voice in the press itself. The
editorial page of The Wall Street Journal, ideologically committed to the Reagan
Administration and its view of what to do in El Salvador, ran an editorial 36
inches long headed "The Media's War."

The correspondents who reported the El Mozote massacre had been "overly
credulous," the editorial suggested, and were taken in by a rebel "propaganda
exercise."

"Much of the American media [in El Salvador], it would seem," The Journal said,
"was dominated by a style of reporting that grew out of Vietnam -- in which
Communist sources were given greater credence than either the U.S. Government or
the government it was supporting."

The Journal editorial had a significant effect. Other newspapers worried about
looking soft on Communism and toned down their reporting from El Salvador.

The new turn in this story came last month, when a team of forensic
archeologists digging in the ruins of El Mozote found dozens of skeletons. Most
of them were of children. The archeologists said shell casings and other
evidence supported the charge of a massacre by government troops.

The archeologists had to overcome strenuous resistance from the Salvadoran
Government to do their investigation. It was only insistence by a three-member
Truth Commission set up under the peace agreement that opened the way.

The Truth Commission has also had an extremely hard time getting cooperation
from the United States Government. Many U.S. documents on the El Mozote massacre
are still being withheld from the commission -- and from us.

Surely the time has come for Americans, like Salvadorans, to know the truth of
what was done in our name. Perhaps even Tom Enders and the other officials who
covered up horrors could face the truth. And the press could learn again how
essential it is to be skeptical of convenient official denials.

LOAD-DATE: November 23, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              290 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 24, 1992, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 930 words



International A3-9

FRANCE LACKS VETO ON FARM PACT
France acknowledged that it had no legal authority to veto a farm trade
agreement between the European Community and the United States, but insisted it
had the right to block community acceptance of a broader global trade agreement.
A1

Germany's strategy on global trade now: Silence.  A6

MORE FOREIGNERS' BLOOD IS SHED
A woman and two girls of Turkish nationality were killed by a firebomb in
Germany's deadliest violence against foreigners in three years. Neo-Nazis were
blamed.  A1

ALLIANCE SUBDUES TURKISH KURDS
Turkey's Army, in an unlikely alliance with Kurds in northern Iraq, has won a
series of important battles against a group of Turkish Kurds who are fighting to
establish an independent nation.  A1

YELSTIN REASSURES MILITARY
In an apparent attempt to reassure troops, Russia's President vowed to raise
spending on military arms and equipment while keeping defense spending at
current levels.  A3

BOSNIAN TIDE TURNS
Attacks on Travnik and the surrounding area have U.N. officials worried that
Serbian forces have new battle plans that go beyond the earlier territorial
objectives.  A3

PERU'S AID STILL IN QUESTION
Peru's elections, which apparently gave President Fujimori's candidates an
majority, were certified free of fraud by observers, but that was no assurance
that aid cut off earlier this year would resume.  A5

NO PEACE IN ISRAEL DURING RECESS
Peace talks are not synonymous with peace in the case of the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict. Violence continues to hit Israel while the talks are in a holding
pattern.  A9

Beijing Journal: "Yellow cows" grow fat on capitalist pastures.  A4

Veterans' and M.I.A. groups seek to delay relations with Vietnam.  A5

The Security Council said it would not ease sanctions on Iraq.  A8

King Hussein issues a warning to Islamic fundamentalists.  A9

National A10-13

AUDITOR SETTLES CHARGES
The accounting firm Ernst & Young agreed to pay a record $400 million to settle
Government claims that it improperly audited banks and savings and loans that
failed. The settlement avoided years of litigation and could serve as a model.
A1

G.E. QUITS AEROSPACE SECTOR
General Electric said it would sell its aerospace division to Martin Marietta
for $3 billion, in a deal underscoring the new era for the military-industrial
complex.  A1

THE WORTH OF JOB PROGRAMS
Like every President in the last half-century, President-elect Bill Clinton is
promising new programs to create jobs. History shows that such efforts can
create jobs -- but they can also lead to fraud and inefficiency.  A1

DROP US OFF IN TOWN
A freighter carrying 62 Haitian refugees sailed into downtown Miami, bringing a
test of American immigration policy even as Washington is sending mixed signals
about its intentions toward boat people.  A10

PACKWOOD INQUIRY URGED
National women's groups and legislators urged the Senate to investigate
accusations that Senator Bob Packwood of Oregon made unwanted advances to 10
women.  A11

A FIZZLING CHALLENGE?
Many members of Congress won election this year with promises to challenge the
system in Washington. But if the turnout at a meeting for new lawmakers is any
indication, few have the will to follow through on those pledges.  A11

ON THE TRAIL, AGAIN
Clinton was back on the campaign trail -- this time for a Georgia Senator
struggling to win a runoff race. After three weeks of transition business,
Clinton appeared to enjoy reprising his familiar role as campaigner.  A13

A Republican challenger has a surprising chance in Georgia.  A13

Former Senator Paul Tsongas undergoes a biopsy.  A13

GUIDELINES ON ELDERLY
The American Medical Association suggested that doctors routinely ask older
patients about abusive or neglectful behavior. The group cited estimates that
two million older Americans a year are mistreated.  A10

HOSTAGE INQUIRY ENDS
A Senate panel says it cannot substantiate an accusation that Ronald Reagan's
campaign in 1980 tried to delay the release of American hostages in Iran until
after the Presidential election, but it added that some aides operated "on the
outer limits of propriety." A11

A second man is rescued from a volcano crater in Hawaii.  A10

Dr. Jack Kevorkian is present at a sixth suicide in Michigan.  A10

Metro Digest B1

Business Digest D1

Science Times C1-12

DATA LACKING ON DIET PROGRAMS
The jury is still out on whether commercial diet programs can scientifically
prove long term success in keeping weight off.  A1

Cheapest protection of nature may lie in taxes, not laws.  C1

After kinship and marriage, anthropology discovers love.  C1

Fashion Page B6

Words for spring: soft, gentle, transparent, light.

Obituaries D19-20

Roy Acuff, country musician.  D20

Arts/Entertainment C13-18

Joseph Mankiewicz looks back on his life and career.  C13

Theater: A Beirut basement on Broadway.  C13

Sports B7-13

Boxing: And now, Bowe's 12 rounds of fame.  B7

Hockey: Penguins are 5-2 winners over Rangers.  B7

Editorials/Op-Ed A14-15

Editorials

Homeless policy, in contempt.

No partial deal for Iraq.

Sexual harassment in the Senate.

Let the mayor choose the board.

Letters

A. M. Rosenthal: Our German crisis.

Russell Baker: It never sleeps, either.

Michael Horowitz: States of grace.

LOAD-DATE: November 24, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              291 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 24, 1992, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Delay in Hanoi Ties Is Sought

BYLINE: By STEVEN A. HOLMES,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 5; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 450 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 23


As the United States and Vietnam take tentative steps toward ending their
17-year diplomatic and economic separation, groups of veterans and relatives of
military personnel missing in Southeast Asia have begun a battle to delay the
reconciliation.

For the moment, their target is Senator John Kerry, the Massachusetts Democrat
who heads the Senate Select Committee on P.O.W.-M.I.A. Affairs.

Mr. Kerry just completed a five-day trip to Southeast Asia, where he praised the
Vietnamese for their cooperation in helping to determine what happened to the
2,265 Americans whose fate during the Vietnam War has never been determined.

Suggests Easing of Embargo

In response to what he considers unprecedented Vietnamese cooperation, Mr. Kerry
said at a news conference today that the United States should show its good will
by easing its trade embargo against Vietnam.

But fearful that photographs of Vietnamese officials' turning over helmets,
wallets, diaries and other personal effects to Mr. Kerry will lead to an
impression of Vietnamese compliance and a rush to normalize ties, a group of
advocates have tried to discredit him.

Leaders of these organizations today accused Mr. Kerry, who served in Vietnam,
of coaching witnesses who appeared before his committee in an effort to
discredit satellite photographs these advocates say prove that Americans are
still being held in Laos.

"The Vietnam veterans and family members feel we have been betrayed by Senator
John Kerry," said Thomas Burch, leader of the National Vietnam Veterans
Coalition.

The allegations are not new -- and have been denied by Mr. Kerry -- and the
groups making them are considered by some in the P.O.W.-M.I.A. movement to be
more on the fringe. But that does not mean other more mainstream groups do not
view with alarm Mr. Kerry's actions and reports that the Administration may move
to build closer relations with Vietnam.

Last week, Roger A. Munson, national commander of the American Legion, wrote to
Mr. Bush to urge him to "hold the line" on favorable actions toward Vietnam.
Legion officers say that although the Vietnamese have released thousands of
photographs and other artifacts and allowed committee aides to interview some
soldiers who fought in the war, the increased cooperation has only led to
possible identification of a handful of servicemen.

Without the threat of the continued trade embargo prodding them, Legion
officials say, the Vietnamese will have no incentive to continue to cooperate.

"We feel lifting the trade embargo is going to far," said John Sommer, executive
director of the American Legion. "It's the only leverage we have to resolve the
P.O.W.-M.I.A. issue."

LOAD-DATE: November 24, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: A Vietnamese Government report, an Air Force survival book and a
flight log were given to Senator John Kerry. (Stephen Crowley/The New York
Times)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              292 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 24, 1992, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Roy Acuff, 89, Singer, Dies; The King of Country Music

BYLINE: By JON PARELES

SECTION: Section D; Page 20; Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1043 words


Roy Acuff, the singer and fiddler who was known to millions of Grand Ole Opry
listeners as the King of Country Music, died yesterday at Baptist Hospital in
Nashville. He was 89 years old.

He died of congestive heart failure, a hospital statement said.

Mr. Acuff, in his six decades as an entertainer, became known for his virtuosity
on the yo-yo, his collection of handpainted ties and his ability to balance a
fiddle bow on his nose. But he was first and last a "hillbilly music"
traditionalist.

He performed his best-known songs, "Wabash Cannonball," "The Great Speckled
Bird" and "The Precious Jewel," with an acoustic string band and sang in the
white-gospel tenor style he had learned while listening to Baptist services
performed by his father in the mountains of Tennessee.

Co-Founder of a Company

The climb of Mr. Acuff, particularly after he joined the Grand Ole Opry in 1938,
also coincided with country's shift from string-band and vocal-harmony music to
a style dominated by solo singers with bands.

"I like to think I was the first person to bring voice to the Opry," Mr. Acuff
once said. "I was one of the first fellows who reared back and hit a microphone
with a strong voice."

Mr. Acuff was a power in the country-music business; the character played by
Henry Gibson in Robert Altman's film "Nashville," Haven Hamilton, was said to
have been modeled in part on Mr. Acuff's career. He was the host on weekly Grand
Ole Opry broadcasts, and he founded the Acuff-Rose Publishing Company, the
world's leading country-music publisher, with the songwriter Fred Rose in 1942.

Roy Claxton Acuff was born Sept. 15, 1903, in Maynardsville, Tenn., 24 miles
east of Knoxville in the Great Smoky Mountains. His father, Neill, was a farmer,
lawyer, preacher and amateur fiddle player, and Roy began singing in church. The
family moved to Knoxville, where Roy became a star athlete in high school and
played semiprofessional baseball and basketball after graduation. He eventually
tried out for the New York Yankees.

Skillet Lickers to Crackerjacks

But in 1929, Mr. Acuff suffered a series of sunstrokes and gave up his athletic
career. He spent much of the next two years indoors, listening to the music of
Fiddlin' John Carson and Gid Tanner and the Skillet Lickers and practicing on a
fiddle his mother had given him. Mr. Acuff joined Doc Hauer's Medicine Show in
the spring of 1932, and after a season hawking Moc-a-Tan elixir he left to form
his own group, the Tennessee Crackerjacks.

As their popularity grew, Mr. Acuff's group renamed itself the Crazy
Tennesseeans. They made their first recordings, including "The Great Speckled
Bird," in 1936. Their Grand Ole Opry debut in 1938 generated bagfuls of listener
mail, and Mr. Acuff was invited to appear regularly provided the band changed
its name to something more decorous. As Roy Acuff and the Smoky Mountain Boys,
they began to reach a national audience.

Mr. Acuff scored his biggest hits as the 30's ended, including "Wabash
Cannonball," featuring a train-whistle imitation Mr. Acuff had perfected while
working as a call boy on the Lousville & Nashville Railroad; "Wreck on the
Highway"; "Night Train to Memphis," and "Pins and Needles."

Defeated for Governor

He was given a starring spot on the coast-to-coast Saturday night Opry
broadcasts on NBC radio, and during the 40's he acted in nine films for Republic
Studios, including the 1940 "Grand Ole Opry." During World War II, Mr. Acuff
toured the world to entertain the troops, further expanding the country
audience. He was one of the first country musicians to appear on television.

In 1943, Gov. Prentice Cooper of Tennessee declared that country music was
"disgracing the state"; Mr. Acuff was entered as a protest candidate in both the
Democratic and Republican gubernatorial primaries of 1944 but chose not to run.
Four years later, however, he became the Republican candidate for Governor, with
a platform based on the Golden Rule and the Ten Commandments.

"If they don't work in the Capitol, then I don't want to be Governor," he said.
He was defeated 2 to 1.

Through the 50's, Mr. Acuff recorded for Okeh, Columbia, Decca, M-G-M, Capitol
and finally Hickory Records, which he and Mr. Rose owned. He also continued to
be the host of Grand Ole Opry broadcasts and to tour extensively. By 1962, when
Mr. Acuff became the first living member elected to the Country Music Hall of
Fame, he had sold more than 25 million records.

Gave Nixon Yo-Yo

In 1965, Mr. Acuff suffered severe injuries in an automobile accident. Although
he stayed with the Opry, he cut back his touring schedule and spent more time
working on a country-music museum and instrument collection, which is now at
Opryland U.S.A. During the Vietnam War he again entertained troops overseas.

Despite his distaste for hippies, Mr. Acuff joined the Nitty Gritty Dirt Band
for its 1972 tribute to mountain music, "Will the Circle Be Unbroken." In 1973,
Mr. Acuff became the oldest performer to have a record on the popularity charts,
with "Back in the Country." When the Opry moved from downtown Nashville to more
modern quarters in Opryland in 1974, Mr. Acuff was the host of the opening-night
ceremonies and presented President Richard M. Nixon with a souvenir yo-yo.

Mr. Acuff recorded less frequently through the 70's, although Elektra Records
rereleased some of his Hickory Recordings late in the decade and Columbia
Records released "Historic Edition," a collection of his hits, in 1985. Despite
failing eyesight and hearing, he continued to perform at the Opry nearly every
weekend.

In 1990, Mr. Acuff and other Opry stars went to Houston to entertain President
Bush and other dignitaries at an economic summit meeting.

He received many awards during his lifetime. In December 1991, Mr. Acuff was
honored during a televised ceremony at the Kennedy Center in Washington for his
contribution to the performing arts. Among his other honors were the National
Medal of Art in July 1991 and a Lifetime Achievement Award in 1987 from the
National Academy of Recording Arts and Sciences, the organization that presents
the Grammy awards.

Mr. Acuff's wife, Mildred, died in 1981. He is survived by a son, Roy Neill
Acuff.


NAME: Roy Acuff

LOAD-DATE: November 24, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Roy Acuff. (David Gahr, 1968)

TYPE: Biography; Obituary (Obit)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              293 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 25, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Critic's Notebook;
Sex and Skepticism for Thanksgiving

BYLINE: By JOHN J. O'CONNOR

SECTION: Section C; Page 20; Column 3; Cultural Desk; Word and Image Page

LENGTH: 733 words


Thanksgiving on prime time is still stuffed with sentimentality; television
entertainment has yet to meet a problem that can't be tidily solved seconds
before the closing credits. But the action, as usual, can be found less in the
plots than in the characters. And in that sense, the days of Norman Rockwell and
Frank Capra are long gone, their rock-solid sense of security overtaken by a
world of shifting relationships and tentative commitments.

Television times have changed, obviously, from the days of not just the
heartwarming "Waltons" but also the frisky and carefully virginal "Mary Tyler
Moore Show." Today's content veers unmistakably toward social and multi-cultural
sensitivity, not to mention sexual candor.

Oddly enough, Fox's mildly hip, youth-oriented "Beverly Hills, 90210" offers --
tonight at 8 -- one of this year's more traditional takes on Thanksgiving.
Brandon Walsh, everybody's good guy, decides to invite Jack, a homeless veteran,
to his family's house for a holiday dinner. Jim, Brandon's dad, is a bit wary
("Did you ever see such a literal interpretation of the Golden Rule?") but
relents when a bath and fresh clothes let the real, respectable Jack shine
through. Complications, be assured, will follow.

A far more offbeat view of Thanksgiving was found Monday on, not surprisingly,
CBS's "Northern Exposure." It seems that in Cicely, Alaska, Thanksgiving is also
celebrated as a Day of the Dead, in deference to the local Indians not entirely
impressed with the traditions of white folks, though Marilyn, the Indian nurse,
did admit she was grateful for power tools, penicillin and Ben & Jerry's ice
cream. Meanwhile, beaming good will, the Indians enjoyed their own tradition of
pelting non-Indians with ripe tomatoes. "We have a lot of anger," Marilyn
explained matter-of-factly to an unamused Joel, the doctor from New York, who
insisted: "I am not white. I'm Jewish."

On CBS's "Picket Fences" a couple of Fridays ago, the holiday dinner was spiced
with two crises, each involving age and sex. Douglas the elderly lawyer found
his equally elderly wife Miriam in bed with another man, and immediately started
pressing charges of adultery. "Please don't picture it," the cantankerous
Douglas begged the sheriff. "It's ugly." Meanwhile Jill, the sheriff's wife,
began hyperventilating when her 74-year-old father showed up with his
26-year-old fiancee. He was unapologetic: "Forgive me for aspiring to be more
than texture for your holidays."

Families, evidently, are what -- and where -- you make them. Values can be
hammered out almost on the run. One plot line in the "Northern Exposure" episode
found Chris, the radio disk jockey and philosopher, recalling how the best
Thanksgiving of his like was spent "behind bars with 400 cons," a relief after
being raised by an alcoholic mother who usually took note of the holiday by
switching briefly to Asti Spumante. Experiencing what he described as "a squeeze
on my psyche (the Germans call it Weltschmerz)," Chris confided to his listeners
that "the mellow sweetness of a pumpkin pie off'n a prison spoon is something
you'll never forget."

"Picket Fences" eventually copped out on the May-December romance, revealing
that Dad's fiancee had cystic fibrosis and probably had only a few years to
live. A marriage could be tolerated, presumably, if it didn't last forever. The
message was jarring, not an uncommon fault in this naggingly uneven series. But,
defending his choice, Dad did get one scene in which he was able to tell his
rather smug daughter, "I'm more satisfied being her future than your past."
Parents and children just didn't talk that way back in the sheltered days of
"Marcus Welby, M.D."

On "Beverly Hills, 90210" this evening, Brandon's father, who refused to fight
in Vietnam, ends up in a confrontation with the homeless Jack, a Marine who
served in the Persian Gulf conflict. A subplot involves Brandon's friend Dylan,
everybody's bad boy, signing his father out of prison for the holiday only to
find that Dad wants to spend most of his limited time with a woman friend. She,
however, turns out to be no-nonsense shrewd, warning Dylan to "stop sulking and
get on with your life." In no time at all, the trio is absorbed in a friendly
game of Monopoly and Dylan is saying, "You guys take my room, I'll just bunk on
the couch."

Dr. Welby, you're definitely outta here.

LOAD-DATE: November 25, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              294 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 26, 1992, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Laos Reports a Hard-Liner Is Named to Leader's Post

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Page 11; Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 82 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Nov. 25


Nouhak Phoumsavan, known a hard-line Communist and a friend of Vietnam, was
named the leader of Laos today after the death of President Kaysone Phomvihane,
the official Radio Laos said.

The radio said that a special session of Parliament had elected Mr. Nouhak
Phoumsavan as the leader.

Mr. Nouhak Phoumsavan, a Politburo member since the governing Laos Revolutionary
People's Party was founded in 1955, has long served as the tiny, impoverished
country's Finance Minister.

LOAD-DATE: November 26, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              295 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 27, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

WASHINGTON SEEKS CONDITIONS ON PLAN FOR SOMALIA FORCE

BYLINE: By CLIFFORD KRAUSS,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1286 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 26


Setting conditions on its offer to send troops to Somalia, the Bush
Administration said today that the United States must retain command over them
if it is to lead a United Nations mission to feed the starving country.

President Bush told his top advisers on Wednesday that the failure of a small
United Nations contingent to insure the delivery of adequate supplies to
starving people in Somalia left the United States with no recourse but to
respond more aggressively to prevent more deaths.

Any deployment of American troops -- which could number 20,000 or more on the
ground to secure ports, landing strips and supply routes -- depends on a formal
decision by the United Nations to send a multinational force. So far the United
Nations has sought the consent of rival armed clans before deploying troops to
oversee the distribution of supplies, but has largely failed to contain the
marauding bands that in effect control the country.

Request to Council Set

The Secretary General will ask the Security Council next week to authorize the
use of force in Somalia. [Page A14.]

A reluctant Defense Department joined the State Department in concluding that
only a show of force by the United States and its allies could accomplish the
mission of feeding the hungry and guarantee the delivery of relief supplies.

But relief workers in Somalia were divided over whether further intervention
would reduce violence or cause more. [Page A14.]

Eagleburger Cables Allies

"The military has been extremely conservative about getting involved in things
like this," said an American military official long involved in African affairs.
"But how can you stand by and allow mothers and children to become piles of
bones without it saying something about your humanity?"

The officials said they expected the United Nations Secretary General, Boutros
Boutros-Ghali, to report his recommendations to the Security Council on Friday,
and Acting Secretary of State Lawrence S. Eagleburger cabled allies and Arab
capitals today, urging action and appealing for their advice on the matter.

The decision to offer American troops to a United Nations force came Wednesday
morning at a White House meeting of Mr. Bush; his national security adviser,
Brent Scowcroft; the Director of Central Intelligence, Robert M. Gates; Defense
Secretary Dick Cheney, and Gen. Colin L. Powell, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of
Staff. Mr. Bush had been considering the option for weeks, and according to the
senior official, not a single senior aide opposed the idea.

"Cheney's and Powell's position was if we do it, we have to do it right," the
official said, adding that they argued that as in the case of the Persian Gulf
war, American troops could be put under the auspices of an international
alliance, but must be commanded by American officers.

President-elect Bill Clinton said today that he and his staff had been kept
abreast of White House actions, which he said he supported. "I think the United
States should do more," he added.

Still, Mr. Clinton was exceedingly careful in remarks made to reporters today at
a shelter for women and children in Little Rock, Ark. "What I think we should do
is wait until the options are narrowed," he said as he left the shelter that he
and his wife, Hillary, visit each year on Thanksgiving and Christmas.

Total Could Reach 35,000

American military planning is only in the preliminary stages, but senior
Administration officials said the Pentagon had concluded that it would need an
infantry division of 15,000 to 25,000 troops to secure the port of Mogadishu,
food-distribution points, landing strips and supply roads. With the addition of
Air Force and Navy personnel involved in an airlift and sealift of troops,
supplies and food, the total American military force deployed could amount to as
many as 35,000.

The United States officials said the American contingent could be smaller if
allied nations were willing to contribute large forces.

"This is the Desert Storm way of handling Somalia," a senior Administration
official said. Gen. Joseph Hoar of the United States Central Command has been
asked to determine what kind of force would be necessary.

Administration officials foresee a two-stage operation. In the preliminary stage
lasting between two and four months, called the coalition phase, heavily armed
American and perhaps NATO military forces would secure the ports, landing strips
and other strategic points. Then, the military force would be replaced by a
United Nations peacekeeping force that could be backed up by 2,000-member Marine
contingent kept offshore.

The United States military has gradually become more engaged in relief efforts
in Somalia over the last several months. American military-supported C-130
airlifts of food out of Kenya, and other international efforts, helped reduce
the daily death toll, but one Defense Department official said he thought the
death rate was increasing again.

U.N. Position Awaited

Administration officials cautioned that decisive opposition to the idea of a
multinational force could still coalesce in the United Nations on the part of
Germany, Japan and other countries afraid of becoming bogged down in combat. And
they said several third world nations might come out in opposition because they
oppose outside intervention.

Pressures on the Administration to do something about Somalia grew when
Washington turned its attention to providing relief to the victims in the
fratricidal war engulfing the former republics of Yugoslavia. Now, paradoxically
an increase in American involvement in Somalia could increase the pressure on
Washington to do more to stop the killings between Serbs, Muslims and Croats.

Marlin Fitzwater, the White House spokesman, said in a statement today: "We are
gravely concerned about the people of Somalia and our ability to provide food
and medicine under the dangerous conditions that exist in that country. We are
consulting with the United Nations about the best way to guarantee relief
supplies from around the world."

American military analysts do not believe that the Somali clans can muster
anything more than paltry opposition to an American troop operation. But General
Powell and other military leaders have long argued that the United States should
be cautious about engaging its troops in Yugoslavia or Somalia, countries with
inhospitable geographies where hostilities are deeply rooted and battle lines
are often ill defined. They have expressed concern that military-backed relief
missions could easily become overtly political and long-lasting, once troops
came under fire from forces in the country.

Africa Deployment in 1990

Such reluctance has been expressed by the military since the Vietnam War, and
this proposed operation would be the largest since the Persian Gulf war. The
last time American forces were deployed in Africa was in August 1990, when Mr.
Bush briefly sent 255 marines to secure the United States Embassy in Monrovia,
Liberia, to evacuate Americans from the fighting there.

The American military, the official said, has argued that it did not want to get
involved in a relief operation modeled after the one in Yugoslavia, where the
United Nations is in charge. Pentagon officials have said they could go along
with the arrangement worked out during the Korean War, during which American
troops fought under the United Nations flag, but under American command and
control.

"There is a realization the situation is becoming grimmer and grimmer," said a
Defense Department official who is active in African affairs. "If you project
out a thousand deaths a day over a year, you have an appalling situation."


LOAD-DATE: November 27, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              296 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 27, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Cleaning Up Environmental Policy

SECTION: Section A; Page 32; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 390 words


Management of the nation's environmental policy is a mess. The Interior and
Agriculture Departments oversee natural resources like fish and wildlife,
national parks and forests. The Environmental Protection Agency worries about
air and water pollution and toxic wastes. The Commerce Department concerns
itself with the weather.

President-elect Clinton isn't likely to squander political capital in a bruising
fight to create one big environmental agency. But a recent report from the
Carnegie Endowment for International Peace offers a more achievable proposal
that would strengthen environmental management. The proposal calls for elevating
the E.P.A. to cabinet status and moving other agencies into it.

Jurisdictional jealousies on Capitol Hill thwarted President Bush's attempt to
elevate the E.P.A. One result was that William Reilly, Mr. Bush's E.P.A.
director, lacked clout in internal negotiations on crucial issues like clean
air, wetlands preservation and global warming. Mr. Reilly wasn't regarded as the
equal of cabinet secretaries.

An upgraded E.P.A., the Carnegie report says, should also have wider
responsibilities. One easy way to accomplish that is to give it the National
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, now in Commerce. NOAA supervises policy
over the atmosphere and the oceans -- everything from the ozone layer to coastal
estuaries. It also has a superb scientific staff familiar with global
environmental problems, something the E.P.A. lacks.

Losing NOAA would cost Commerce half its budget. But Commerce would gain in
focus what it loses in size -- becoming, finally, an agency devoted primarily to
helping American business compete effectively in world markets.

NOAA was located in Commerce only through an act of pique. Created in 1970, it
was originally ticketed for Interior. But President Nixon, annoyed at Interior
Secretary Walter Hickel for voicing doubts about Vietnam, gave NOAA to Commerce.
It's been an orphan ever since.

Upgrading the Environmental Protection Agency and transferring NOAA would begin
to bring coherence to environmental policy. If Mr. Clinton likes the idea, he
would be well advised to adopt it now -- before choosing a Commerce Secretary
who might resist giving up half his agency. If Mr. Clinton delays, turf wars
could defeat an eminently sound idea.

LOAD-DATE: November 27, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              297 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 29, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

New & Noteworthy

BYLINE: BY LAUREL GRAEBER

SECTION: Section 7; Page 32; Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 886 words


FLOW CHART, by John Ashbery. (Knopf, $13.) In a 216-page poem that our reviewer,
Marjorie Perloff, compared to Wordsworth's "Prelude," John Ashbery shows how
even the minutiae of television broadcasts, telephone calls and other daily
interruptions can become the stuff of poetry. Of his long works, "perhaps none
is quite so various, so beautiful and so new as 'Flow Chart,' " she said last
year.

CONSCIOUSNESS EXPLAINED, by Daniel C. Dennett. (Little, Brown, $14.95.) It is
difficult for most human beings to think about thinking -- the processes that
enable us to distinguish between a fish tank and a toaster occur with such
apparent simultaneity that breaking them down into neurons and synapses seems to
take all the poetry out of existence. But this book demonstrates that the
computer model of the brain has validity and virtues. "In illuminating these
ideas and relentlessly putting them to the test, Mr. Dennett's exposition is
nothing short of brilliant, the best example I've seen of a science book aimed
at both professionals and general readers," George Johnson said in The Book
Review last year.

TIME'S ARROW: Or, The Nature of the Offense, by Martin Amis. (Vintage
International, $10.) What if time ran backward? That is just how it proceeds in
this novel, which examines the Holocaust through the eyes of a Nazi doctor who,
uncomprehendingly, relives his life from end to beginning. Last year our
reviewer, David Lehman, called Martin Amis a "writer of wit and post-modernist
invention, who sets traps of ironies for readers to stumble into."

ALL BUT THE WALTZ: A Memoir of Five Generations in the Life of a Montana Family,
by Mary Clearman Blew. (Penguin, $9.) Mary Clearman Blew relates her own history
and that of her ancestors, pioneer settlers who staked their claim on the cold
and unforgiving prairies of the central West. This is a "haunting memoir," Susan
Allen Toth said here last year, written "with sadness, fierce pride and an
unforgettable clarity." Another elegiac portrait of the West is to be found in
REFUGE: An Unnatural History of Family and Place, by Terry Tempest Williams
(Vintage, $11). The author recalls two inexorable events of 1983: the gradual
burying of a wildlife refuge by the rising waters of the Great Salt Lake and the
slow death of her mother, whose cancer may have been caused by fallout from
nuclear testing. In January our reviewer, Margaret B. Guthrie, described the
book's prose as "clear, strong and vivid."

PATCHWORK, by Karen Osborn. (Harvest/Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, $8.95.) Over 50
years, three women -- two sisters and a niece -- tell in alternating voices the
story of their changing lives in a South Carolina mill town. Last year our
reviewer, Judith Paterson, called this "a strong first novel," an "essentially
modern, psychologically sophisticated tale of women looking for love and
autonomy in a world dominated by men."

CHILDREN OF CAIN: Violence and the Violent in Latin America, by Tina Rosenberg.
(Penguin, $12.50.) A journalist who lived in Latin America from 1985 to 1990
shows how the region's history of taking power by force perpetuates itself,
sometimes with United States help. This is an "insightful book," Kevin Buckley
said in The Book Review last year, noting the author's "extensive research and
intrepid reporting."

ANNA TELLER, by Jo Sinclair. (Feminist Press, $16.95.) The title character, the
fierce matriarch of a family of Hungarian Jews, comes to her son's home in the
United States as a refugee in 1956, bringing her own brand of tyranny with her.
When this novel was first published in 1960, our reviewer, Herbert Mitgang,
praised the author's "sincere and serious portrait of a larger-than-lifesize
figure."

ADAM CLAYTON POWELL, JR.: The Political Biography of an American Dilemma, by
Charles V. Hamilton. (Collier, $15.) As a preacher and as a politician, Adam
Clayton Powell Jr. often appeared to be at odds with the causes he espoused.
"Adam Clayton Powell Jr. was a rascal tinged with nobility, a victim of his
era's racial vision, which this biography corrects in good measure," Taylor
Branch said here last year.

EXTRAORDINARY PEOPLE, by Paul Gervais. (Harper Perennial, $10.) A finalist for
the PEN/Faulkner Award, this first novel consists of interconnected short
stories about two brothers, both gay, struggling to cope with their mother's
debilitating alcoholism. Last year our reviewer, Lisa Zeidner, found this a
"straightforward, unsentimental" work, distinguished by its "moving, strangely
funny title story."

IN THE EYE OF THE STORM: The Life of General H. Norman Schwarzkopf, by Roger
Cohen and Claudio Gatti. (Berkley, $5.99.) This biography, written by a Times
reporter and an Italian journalist, examines the personality and the past of
"Stormin' Norman," whose memory of Vietnam losses helped fuel his passion to win
the Persian Gulf war. "On the whole it is a rather serious and highly readable
book that provides important insights," Wolf Blitzer said here last year.

CARPOOL, by Mary Cahill. (Fawcett Crest, $4.99.) In a plot reminiscent of Susan
Isaacs's novel "Compromising Positions," a suburban housewife becomes involved
in a murder mystery. Last year our reviewer, Katherine Ramsland, called this a
"diverting first novel" that is "light and unpretentious entertainment."

LOAD-DATE: November 29, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Daniel C. Dennett (Susan Dennett/Little, Brown)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              298 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 29, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THEATER;
'The Speed of Darkness' Is Revived in Croton Falls

BYLINE: By ALVIN KLEIN;

"The Speed of Darkness" by Steve Tesich, presented by the Logodaedaly Company in
association with the Schoolhouse at the Schoolhouse, Owens Road in Croton Falls,
Exit 8 off Interstate 684. Remaining performances today and next Sunday at 4
P.M. and Saturday at 8 P.M. Box Office: 277-8477.

SECTION: Section 13WC; Page 17; Column 1; Westchester Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 706 words

DATELINE: CROTON FALLS


CREDIT the new Logodaedaly Company at the Schoolhouse here with resurrecting a
deserving, demanding play. "The Speed of Darkness" by Steve Tesich was dismissed
on Broadway last year after a mere month's run even though it is crammed with
the excesses of a playwright's fertile imagination. Mr. Tesich is better known
for his screenplays ("Breaking Away," "The World According to Garp") than his
stage plays ("Baba Goya," "Square One"), but this play has boldness, an original
point of view and a powerful payoff.

The reach of Mr. Tesich runs the risk of pretentiousness, but the playwright
comes off valiantly. These are unflinchingly big-time accomplishments: the
shaking up of a family's ordered life, sowing the seeds of tragedy upon a
domestic scene and finally -- actually -- building successfully to a cathartic
release.

Joe is a reluctant, hate-filled, decorated hero of Vietnam. Psychically numbed
by the fallout of war, Joe is outwardly a pillar of the community, Man of the
Year (in South Dakota) and prosperous executive, symbolically, in the
construction business, having worked his way up, just as symbolically, from
garbage removal.

Although rumblings about family scars -- Joe hasn't told his teen-age daughter,
Mary, that he is not her natural father -- portend domestic upheaval, it is not
until the sudden appearance of the mysterious, mentally disturbed Lou, Joe's war
buddy and Mary's godfather, that a family's solidity, first threatened by
uncontrollable forces inside and out, erupts.

Lou is a representative of the "urban homeless," a follower of touring replicas
of the Vietnam Wall as his "farewell tour of duty" and an emissary from M.I.A.
(Missing in America) who insists that he did not survive, that he was rescued
rather than saved, that the war memorials acknowledge those who did not
literally die.

Mr. Tesich's play is suffused with a sense of inevitability that simply is not
graspable in the playing. As a narrator of doom, Eddie, Mary's boyfriend next
door, a product of "generic nervousness," played by Jamie O'Shea, does justice
to a hostilely funny monologue about his own wretched family. But Albi Gorn's
staging underlines unremitting sluggishness, with awkward silences instead of
mounting tension, and the other actors are limited.

Joe's internalized rage, even when it spills over, is constrained in Arthur
Goodman's performance, which appears more perturbed than anguished. Mr. Tesich's
tendency to write bloated lines ("I'm a little too full of nights I remember")
is overemphasized by Mr. Goodman's studied manner of saying catastrophic things
blandly, numbly, with minimal theatrical effect.

Mark Cashman's Lou is overly remindful of Stephen Lang's memorable work in the
original Chicago and then the Broadway production, in high-pitched ingenuousness
but not eeriness. Laura Quinn (Anne, Joe's wife) acts on an overdone note of
upset. Allison A. Snyder (Mary) gives a by-the-numbers account of an
identity-seeking high school senior.

Obviously under the influence of absurdist plays, Vietnam plays, television
situation comedies and Greek tragedy, Mr. Tesich's play suffers a disharmony of
disparate styles. And though his passionate perception of the moral dilemma of a
principled man against a self-interested community, against a canvas of
environmental pollution, is both a contemporary homage to and variation of
Ibsen's "Enemy of the People," the playwright's psychologically stunning
denouement is distinctly his own.

In the end, it isn't enough for Joe to find forgiveness; the people won't hear
of it. Mr. Tesich's implications are far-reaching in an age where confessionals
in public have emerged as an instant form of entertainment, especially on
television talk shows -- so long as an audience is at a safe remove from sharing
guilt. Beyond its blazing antiwar message, "The Speed of Darkness" indicts a
society that encourages revelation within insulation, that voyeuristically urges
others to tell all, only leave us out of it. In Mr. Tesich's play, the truth
that sets one man free distances the people who prefer their heroes to be
self-imprisoned.

Taking on a too little acknowledged play of substance, a modest new company has
overreached.

LOAD-DATE: November 29, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Mark Cashman with Allison A. Snyder in "The Speed of Darkness."
(The Logodaedaly Company)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              299 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 29, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THEATER;
'The Speed of Darkness' in Revival

BYLINE: By ALVIN KLEIN

SECTION: Section 13CN; Page 18; Column 4; Connecticut Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 732 words


CREDIT the new Logodaedaly Company in Croton Falls, N.Y., with resurrecting a
deserving, demanding play. "The Speed of Darkness" by Steve Tesich was dismissed
on Broadway last year after a mere month's run. Although it is crammed with the
excesses of a playwright's fertile imagination, the work of Mr. Tesich, who is
better known for his screenplays ("Breaking Away," "The World According to
Garp") than his stage plays ("Baba Goya," "Square One"), has boldness, an
original point of view and a powerful payoff.

The reach of Mr. Tesich runs the risk of pretentiousness but the playwright
comes off valiantly. These are unflinchingly big-time accomplishments: the
shaking up of a family's ordered life, sowing the seeds of tragedy upon a
domestic scene and finally -- actually -- building successfully to a cathartic
release.

Joe is a reluctant, hate-filled, decorated hero of Vietnam. Emotionally numbed
by the fallout of war, Joe is outwardly a pillar of the community, man of the
year (in South Dakota) and prosperous executive, symbolically, in the
construction business.

Even though rumblings about family scars -- Joe hasn't told his teen-aged
daughter, Mary, that he's not her birth father -- portend domestic upheaval, it
isn't until the sudden appearance of the mysterious, mentally disturbed Lou,
Joe's war buddy and Mary's godfather, that a family's solidity, first threatened
by uncontrollable forces inside and out, erupts.

Lou is a representative of the "urban homeless," a follower of touring
reproductions of the Vietnam Wall as his "farewell tour of duty" and an emissary
from the M.I.A. (Missing in America) who insists that he did not survive, that
he was rescued rather than saved, that the war memorials acknowledge those who
did not, literally, die.

Mr. Tesich's play is suffused with a sense of inevitability that simply isn't
graspable in the playing. As a narrator of doom, Eddie -- Mary's boyfriend next
door, a product of "generic nervousness"-- Jamie O'Shea does justice to a
hostilely funny monologue about his own wreched family. But Albi Gorn's staging
underlines unremitting sluggishness, with awkward silences instead of mounting
tension, and the other actors are limited.

Joe's internalized rage, even when it spills over, is constrained in Arthur
Goodman's performance, which appears more perturbed than anguished. Mr. Tesich's
tendency to write bloated lines ("I'm a little too full of nights I remember")
is overemphasized by Mr. Goodman's studied manner of saying catastrophic things
blandly, numbly, with minimal theatrical effect.

Mark Cashman's Lou is overly remindful of Stephen Lang's memorable work in the
original Chicago and then the Broadway production, in high-pitched
ingenuousness, but not eeriness. Laura Quinn (Anne, Joe's wife) acts on an
overdone note of upset. Allison A. Snyder (Mary) gives a by-the-numbers account
of an identity-seeking high school senior.

Obviously under the influence of absurdist plays, Vietnam plays, situation
comedies and Greek tragedy, Mr. Tesich's play suffers a disharmony of disparate
styles. And though his passionate perception of the moral dilemma of a
principled man against a self-interested community, against a canvas of
environmental pollution, is both a contemporary homage to and variation on
Ibsen's "Enemy of the People," the playwright's psychologically stunning
denouement is distinctly his own.

In the end, it isn't enough for Joe to find forgiveness; the people won't hear
of it. Mr. Tesich's implications are far reaching in an age where confessionals
in public have emerged as an instant form of entertainment, especially on
television talk shows -- as long as an audience is at a safe remove from sharing
guilt. Beyond its blazing anti-war message, "The Speed of Darkness" indicts a
society that encourages revelation within insulation, that voyeuristically urges
others to tell all, only leave us out of it. In Mr. Tesich's play, the truth
that sets one man free distances the people who prefer their heroes to be
self-imprisoned.

Taking on a too little acknowledged play of power and substance, a modest new
company has overreached.

"The Speed of Darkness," at the Schoolhouse, Owens Road, Croton Falls, N.Y.,
Exit 8 off Interstate 684. 914-277-8477. Remaining perform ances today and next
Sunday at 4 P.M. and Saturday at 8 P.M.


LOAD-DATE: November 29, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Mark Cashman with Allison A. Snyder in "The Speed of Darkness"
in Croton Falls, N.Y. (The Logodaedaly Company)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              300 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 29, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Reading, Writing and Arithmetic and, Now, Right and Wrong

BYLINE: By KATE STONE LOMBARDI

SECTION: Section 13WC; Page 1; Column 1; Westchester Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1728 words


FORGET for the moment why Johnny can't read. Consider instead why Johnny can't
tell right from wrong. Can he be taught to make morally informed decisions? And
should he be taught tolerance for those different from himself?

Mirroring a nationwide trend, many schools in Westchester County are grappling
with these questions. Educators are studying and, in some cases, implementing a
re-introduction of moral and democratic values into both the curriculum and the
school setting.

For many parents and teachers, the focus represents a long-overdue recognition
of the schools' critical role in combatting what they see as a deteriorating
moral climate surrounding children. But others are balking at what they see as
the schools' intrusion into what has historically been the role of the family.
And some argue that an emphasis on values detracts from the schools' principal
job of teaching academic subjects.

Critical to the debate, of course, is just what -- or whose -- values will be
taught. Evelyn Stock, a former member of the Scarsdale School Board, described
the quandary by recalling a retreat that board members took some years ago to
study the issue.

'Core Values'

"It was easy to get the first few, like respect yourself, or respect others, but
when we started to get into things like patriotism, we were still coming off the
Vietnam War, and it was controversial. Charity was another one. It meant
different things to different people," she said.

Despite the difficulty some communities have in coming to a consensus, many
people argue that there are some basic principles almost everybody can agree on.

"People have become more comfortable talking about this," said Maureen Grolnick,
principal of Bronxville High School. "One needn't be embarrassed by it; it's not
a cliche value of 'law and order' or 'motherhood and apple pie.' There are some
values around decency and responsibility toward oneself and others that we share
pretty much across the board and that don't need to get us into a terribly
painful conflict about what is the role of the school or the role of the
family," she said.

The State Department of Education has held several conferences on values
education. The most recent was last week in Albany, and several Westchester
school districts were represented. The State Board of Regents has also taken a
strong interest in the issue. It has identified what it calls "core values" on
which it says there is universal agreement. These include responsibility,
honesty, self-discipline, self-respect, respect for others, commitment to
equality, justice, rule of law and the work ethic.

Reaction to New Focus Is Mixed

"After four decades of neglect, values education is being emphasized again in
many public schools of New York State," said Emlyn I. Griffith, a member of the
State Board of Regents. "The Regents strongly support this initiative. The
Regents have defined basic core values as principles of intrinsic enduring worth
-- the standards of conduct required of everyone in a self-governing society,"
he said.

Values education can occur on two levels. First, children can be given moral or
ethical guidance and taught critical thinking. Second, the atmosphere for
learning can be one that underscores the importance of values. That is, not only
should Johnny theoretically learn how to respect other people but he should also
do so while not wearing a cap in class, putting his feet up on his desk or using
abusive language toward the teacher.

The reaction to the new focus on values is mixed. For some it is a welcome
relief.

"I'm finding that there is a visceral response to being given permission and
validation for teaching values in the school," said Tom Laconna, a professor at
the State University of New York at Cortland and a leading expert in the field.
"There has been a mounting frustration in the face of a tidal wave of cultural
and moral sleeze that has been washing over us, Madonna's sex book being the
latest example. There is a deep anger on the part of parents and teachers that
significant social institutions have not been able to address this."

Some Parental Opposition

While some administrators might welcome the license to re-emphasize values,
parents are not always quite so sanguine. Mark Soss, principal at the Roaring
Brook Elementary School in Chappaqua, described an incident where a fourth
grader had come to school wearing a T-shirt that bore a statement that was
blatantly sexual in nature. The principal asked the child to turn the shirt
inside out and asked that he not wear it to school again. To his surprise, the
child's parents objected to Mr. Soss's position, saying it was an infringement
on their child's freedom of speech.

George Cohen, a human relations specialist for the White Plains Public Schools,
has faced similar dilemmas. Mr. Cohen says he has seen a breakdown of discipline
among students, with foul language used in the classrooms and a lack of respect
for authority so basic that some children are willing to ignore direct requests
from administrators and teachers. Children also show a lack of fear of any
disciplinary action. Compounding the difficulty, he says, is the attitude of
some parents.

"In the old days, if the school disciplined you, you were also going to get
punished at home," Mr. Cohen said. "Now if the school punishes you, the parents
run to the rescue. They keep the school from doing anything that sends the
message that you have to be responsible for your own behavior," he said.

That is not to say that all parents oppose values in the schools. Many embrace
the schools' interest in this area.

Values Start in the Family

"Our P.T.A. believes values should be a marriage of both the schools'
responsibility and the family's. That way kids get the message louder and
clearer," said Caren Fried, chairwoman of the parent education committee for the
Chappaqua P.T.A. Mrs. Fried's committee is organizing a Parenting Symposium
titled "Values Start in the Family . . . Then What?" for parents in the district
next month.

The implementation of values education varies widely in the district. In White
Plains, second graders are taught Socratic reasoning: they are given a text and
are taught how to question its assumptions. At higher grade levels, in an
attempt to reduce racial tension and promote tolerance, students with different
backgrounds participate in ethnic sharing panels.

In Croton, students are trained in hands-on democracy. The traditional student
council at Croton-Harmon High School has been replaced by a school governance
congress, where various "stakeholders," that is, students, teachers,
administrators, parent representatives and custodial and secretarial
representatives, meet weekly to make decisions affecting the school community.
The congress has decided a host of issues, including academic eligibility for
participation in extracurricular activities and whether suspensions should take
place in or out of the school building. The congress gives students the skills
they need to participate in a democratic society, said Sherry King,
Superintendent of the Croton Schools.

In Chappaqua, the district has developed what it calls standards of excellence,
by which graduates of Horace Greeley High School will be evaluated. Students
will be assessed in areas of "personal growth" and "responsible citizenship" as
well as for academic excellence.

Values or Political Correctness?

But some parents are uncomfortable with the concept of giving equal weight to
the more nebulous areas of personal growth and citizenship and believe that
children will actually be evaluated for their "political correctness."

"The irony of this development is that you have a group of educational
professionals whose left-of-center political orientation dominates the
educational establishment, introducing a concept of 'growth of ethical
reasoning' to an educational system which their liberal forefathers assured us
needed to be free of any religious orientation to be truly liberal and
democratic minded," said Paul Atkinson, a Chappaqua parent with two children in
the school system. "They're reintroducing school prayer on their terms,"

Mr. Atkinson also said that he believed the central mission of the schools was
becoming distorted by the emphasis on values. "It detracts both in time and in
orientation from the teacher's basic role. It's a lot easier for a teacher to
worry about a child's self-development than to sit down and work with a child
who is having trouble learning some fundamental reading or writing skills," he
said.

But proponents of values education are not discouraged by a certain amount of
parental disapproval.

"Conflict is inherent in everything," said Georgine Hyde, vice president of the
New York State School Board Association and area director for the region that
includes Westchester. "I consider character development and values education a
part of the educational sequence. Do we ask parents if we have to teach reading
or writing? A child is not born with math skills or reading skills, and a child
is not born with values. If you are not developing a whole child, you are only
bringing him part of an education."

An Old Debate

The debate over the importance of values education is not a new one. Even
Aristotle bemoaned the moral state of his day's youth. Like other educational
trends, this one has come in and out of favor with administrators. It has also
appeared in different guises.

In the 1970's, for instance, a program known as "values clarification" became
popular. In this model, values were viewed to be relative.  Students were given
moral quandaries, and asked for their responses. There were no right or wrong
responses, the point was simply that the students should "clarify" their
positions, or know where they stood.

The current resurgence in values education follows a relatively dormant period
in the 1980's, but in this incarnation, values are not a matter of opinion but
clearly a matter of right and wrong.

"There is a tremendous amount of interest in this right now," said Tom Laconna.
"What's different about the current scene is that values are seen as having
objective worth. They are good for the individual, good for the whole human
community and therefore they have a claim on our collective conscience."

LOAD-DATE: November 29, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              301 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 29, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Operation Balkan Storm: Here's a Plan

BYLINE: By George Kenney and Michael J. Dugan;  George Kenney is a consultant to
the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace. Michael J. Dugan is a retired
Air Force general and former Air Force chief of staff.

SECTION: Section 4; Page 11; Column 2; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 865 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


Here's how the Balkan crisis could unfold.

It is late January 1993. President Clinton decides it is in the American
security interest to oppose Serbian aggression in the Balkans with force, in
particular to permit the Bosnians to defend themselves. His advisers believe
there is a third option beyond the choices President Bush claimed he faced --
either doing nothing or sending in hundreds of thousands of ground troops. Mr.
Clinton's advisers develop a three-step plan based on the use of American
competitive advantages.

The first step is coalition building. The U.S. should not act unilaterally --
that was the mistake we made in Vietnam -- yet the U.N. Security Council is
deadlocked on the use of force, as is NATO. A coalition is possible only through
ad-hoc arrangements. Three allies, Great Britain, France and Italy, must be
included; they provide staging bases and a limited number of air, naval and
ground forces which support a U.S.-dominated air power operation. The coalition
arms and trains Bosnian forces, who conduct unconventional operations on the
ground to recover their country.

President Clinton persuades several allies to agree to this plan. Here, Russia
is a key player. Were Russia to disapprove at the start, the coalition would
still keep it fully informed, while leaving the door open for cooperation. There
is reason to believe Russia could be talked into participating: it has a natural
interest in being seen as a player on the world stage in this peace-making
effort.

The second step is insuring coordination with United Nations operations and
deliveries of humanitarian relief. U.N. personnel become Serbian targets so the
U.N. suspends its convoys. The U.N. operations are thus subordinated to larger
war aims.

But with coalition support, the armed Bosnians are as able as the U.N. to
deliver aid. In addition, the United States drops food packages on refugee areas
from planes flying above ground fire. Bosnian forces create "safe haven" areas,
which help prevent the depopulation of Bosnia and save tens of thousands of
lives. The havens also keep hundreds of thousands of refugees out of Western
Europe.

The third step is active belligerency, in two phases: first, destroying Serbian
forces in Bosnia and, second, using concentrated force against Serbia itself.

In phase one, the U.S. uses Awacs aircraft and F-15 fighters to establish
visible allied air supremacy over all the territory of the former Yugoslavia.
Next, Serbian heavy artillery and armored units in Bosnia are prime targets for
air strikes. British and French infiltration teams deploy anti-battery radar to
locate Serbian artillery positions near areas under siege.

From bases in Italy and from one carrier in the Adriatic, U.S. F-15's, F-16's,
F-18's and F-111's systematically neutralize the Serbian artillery units with
precision-guided bombs and missiles. Using the Joint Surveillance Target Attack
Radar System -- Jstars -- or other sophisticated monitoring systems, the U.S.
finds Serbian armored units; fighter aircraft destroy them. Where necessary,
A-10 ground-attack aircraft help escort Bosnian convoys carrying relief
supplies. Lacking heavy weapons and facing a resurgent Bosnian force, Serbian
forces begin to fall back.

At this point, the Serbian Government in Belgrade could either up the ante or
back off. Desperation, however, may drive the Serbs to test the coalition's
resolve by sending new forces into Bosnia from bases in Serbia and Montenegro,
by renewing the conflict in Croatia, or by starting a diversionary war in
Kosovo, or any combination of the above.

Such action would prompt phase two: U.S. aircraft and Tomahawk missiles destroy
centers of gravity in Serbia. We instruct Serbian troops to stay in their
barracks; if they do not, we track their movements with Jstars and hit them with
air strikes. Technology using carbon-fiber strands allows us to render useless
Serbia's electricity grid, without destroying it, so that once hostilities cease
power may be restored.

Other technology allows us to turn petroleum products in refineries and storage
tanks into useless jelly, without destroying the facilities. We destroy Serbian
communication installations. At the same time, we take over Serbian air waves to
make our intentions to end the war clear to the Serbian people.

That is a war the Serbians cannot win.

Such an operation need not involve huge forces. This would be a joint Air
Force-Navy operation of moderate difficulty. The U.S. would need, approximately:
one carrier battle group with about 60 aircraft in the Adriatic; plus 3 Awacs, 1
Jstar, 5 to 10 KC-135 tankers, 24 A-10's, 24 F-15's, 18 F-111's and 24 F-16's
with assorted stand-off and precision-guided weapons.

The operation would not be free, but United States costs in blood and treasure
would be modest compared with that of the Bosnian trauma. Moreover, there are
indications that, if asked, Saudi Arabia would be willing to consider paying a
substantial share of these costs. Other states would also likely contribute.

A win in the Balkans would establish U.S. leadership in the post-cold war world
in a way that Operation Desert Storm never could.

LOAD-DATE: November 29, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

SERIES: Bill's List

TYPE: Op-Ed; Series

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              302 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 29, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

POP MUSIC;
Joan Baez, the First Lady of Folk

BYLINE: By JAMES GAVIN;  James Gavin has written about pop music for Details
magazine and The Village Voice.

SECTION: Section 2; Page 25; Column 1; Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1127 words


Until recently, people were asking Joan Baez, "Do you still sing?"

"At first I was furious," she says. "Then I thought, 'Well, how are they
supposed to know?' "

One of the defining voices of the 1960's, Ms. Baez acknowledges that she had
become musically frozen in time, devoting most of her energy to human-rights
causes. But when she signed with Virgin Records two years ago, she realized that
a retread of the old Baez would not do. The resulting album, "Play Me
Backwards," her 28th album and first major-label recording since 1979, finds her
in a biting, contemporary setting, accented by Latin- and African-flavored
percussion and the twangy sound of the Dobro, a steel slide guitar. Her pure,
throbbing and once serenely detached voice now has a sting. Alongside new
numbers by Mary-Chapin Carpenter, Janis Ian and others, the album contains a set
of Ms. Baez's own songs, all shining with an autumnal wisdom.

In late October, she played the Bitter End in Manhattan as part of a two-month
world tour, focusing -- atypically -- on music, not politics. Standing in front
of a young audience and flanked by a hippie-ish guitarist and bass player, the
51-year-old singer described herself as "den mother to Romper Room." The gray in
her dark crew cut may have suited a den mother, but not the skinny braid that
trailed down her back. And her patter was far from maternal. She praised Sinead
O'Connor -- "She had the courage to screw up" -- and Ms. Baez also had a few
laughs at her own expense. "I said in concert once, 'In my humble opinion . . .
' and burst out laughing. I've never had a humble opinion in my life. If you're
going to have one, why bother to be humble about it?"

Over lunch the next day, Ms. Baez discussed the "identity crisis" that has
plagued her since her emergence at the Newport Folk Festival in 1959. "You take
this little pickle at age 17 1/2 who's given a mantle and an identity at a time
when I still thought of myself as a dumb Mexican from Southern California," she
says. "Then here I was, the Virgin Mary." Pronounced the queen of the folk
revival and the budding peace movement, she placed her soaring, untrained
soprano at the service of one cause after another. "Whenever anyone said, 'So
and so's starving, so and so's in prison,' I assumed it was my responsibility,"
she recalls.

Many of those who loved her singing complained about its increasingly political
nature, but few doubted her personal integrity. "Joan's motives were always
good," says the poet Allen Ginsberg, who has known Ms. Baez since the early
60's. "She sacrificed a lot of time, effort and money to do something useful
with her fame and her beauty."

After the Vietnam War and the dissolution of a brief marriage to David Harris,
who served a sentence for draft evasion, Ms. Baez's values began to seem
antiquated. An early attempt to take the politics out of her music, in the 1975
album "Diamonds and Rust," gave her career a temporary boost; but thereafter,
her album sales dwindled, and around 1978 she realized that her soprano was
turning into a scratchy alto.

"Singing was something I'd never had to think about," she says. "I just opened
up my trap and music poured out. But gravity takes over everything." In 1979 she
found a coach who helped her repair the damage; by that time, however, she was
perilously close to being a has-been. "For a long time all I got at my concerts
were the people who had grown up with me, only now they were bringing their
miserable children who didn't want to be there," she says. "I felt like rescuing
them and running out in the lobby to play bingo or something."

Ms. Baez spent most of the 80's singing on behalf of causes like disarmament,
the anti-apartheid movement and the mistreatment of political prisoners. In
concerts, she recycled her signature tunes over and over. "About five years ago
I started to realize that the concerts had become boring to me," she says. "I
don't know why they weren't boring to everybody else. Maybe they were." After
eight years without an American record contract, she signed with Gold Castle, a
small folk-oriented label, and recorded three albums that were poorly
distributed and scarcely noticed.

When asked why Virgin -- a label that records Janet Jackson and Paula Abdul --
would be interested in her, Ms. Baez points to the success of folkish
singer-songwriters like Suzanne Vega and Tracy Chapman on other labels. "They've
carved out a way for the circle to come back round," she says. "I don't think
anybody can pretend that folk music is coming back, but there seems to be an
appetite for music you have to listen to with a more careful ear." Jeff Ayeroff,
co-chairman of Virgin, says of her music, "Intelligent people of all ages will
be attracted to Joan Baez."

The label spent months sending her contemporary rock songs, none of which she
thought she could sing. She agreed to try writing with her producers, the
Nashville-based songwriters Kenny Greenberg and Wally Wilson, who she says
helped break her out of the art-song mold into a more universal style. "I went
into it kicking and screaming, but as soon as I saw we were getting somewhere
I'd go deal with my ego and get over it." The new material ranges from "I'm With
You," a song of farewell dedicated to her 22-year-old son Gabriel, to the title
number, which casts her as a teller of ominous truths. Mary-Chapin Carpenter's
"Stones in the Road," a cynical tale of fallen innocence, has become Ms. Baez's
debut video. "It makes me laugh," she says, "because there's something so corny
and ironic about making your first video at age 51."

But Ms. Baez has no illusions about regaining the old mantle. Most of her
current dates are in clubs and small concert halls rather than the larger venues
she once played. "My manager said, 'Nothing's going to happen overnight or in
three weeks.' It's much better to be very conservative about our hopes and
dreams right now."

In the meantime, the woman who once made every appearance a political forum is
now airing her views more selectively. At the Bitter End, she even resisted any
temptation to comment on the Presidential election.  "We've done all the whining
and bad-mouthing and accusing that could possibly be done," she says. "It would
be very wise to just shut up for a little while."

Unlike other singers who cling desperately to performing, Ms. Baez looks forward
to the day when she can devote her time to social activism, prose writing or
just catching her breath at her home outside San Francisco. "I think that in a
few years, if somebody comes up and says, 'Are you still singing?' I will
happily say, 'Not really.' Pretty soon I'll be able to say that I've given 40
years of my life to this. Now I need a break."

NAME: Joan Baez

LOAD-DATE: November 29, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Joan Baez -- On her new album, "Play Me Backwards," she has
broken out of her art-song mold into a more universal style. (Edward Keating/The
New York Times)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              303 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 29, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Back in the Saddle

BYLINE: By Edward Hower;  Edward Hower is the author of the novels "The New Life
Hotel" and "Wolf Tickets."

SECTION: Section 7; Page 26; Column 3; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1134 words



SWEET MEDICINE
By David Seals.
250 pp. New York:
Orion Books/Crown Publishers. $20.

CAN you think of novels whose main characters would -- or would not -- enjoy
their creator's books?

Saul Bellow's Herzog would talk you to death in praise of "Herzog." Portnoy
would get a charge out of "Portnoy's Complaint" and probably everything of
Philip Roth's he could get his hands on. Mrs. Dalloway would find most of
Virginia Woolf's works engaging. But Sherman McCoy would probably take Tom Wolfe
to court over "The Bonfire of the Vanities," and Francis Phelan might come in
out of the cold a second time to harangue William Kennedy for invading his
privacy in "Ironweed."

In "Sweet Medicine," by the talented Native American novelist David Seals, the
main character and narrator, known as the Storyteller, answers the question for
us in the prologue: he can't stand his creator. Or so he says. He says he didn't
like Mr. Seals's first novel, "The Powwow Highway," either, and when he and his
ragtag band of warriors invade a suburban shopping mall where the movie version
of the book is playing, they all go to see "The Son of King Kong" instead. "I
hope," the Storyteller says, "you'll stop reading this . . . right now so we can
put this clown out of business once and for all. You're just encouraging him if
you keep reading."

Is this a trick? Of course it is. How can we stop turning pages after a warning
like that? Fortunately, the Storyteller's tale rewards our refusal to take him
at his word. The book is full of adventure, humor, love and sex, and
occasionally some eloquent rage about the way Indians have been treated in
America.

The plot begins where "The Powwow Highway" left off (but you don't need to have
read that novel to understand this sequel). A fat and dumb but brave and lovable
guy named Philbert is being sexually initiated by Bonnie, a beautiful young
woman with a mystical bent. She has just been sprung from jail by a war party of
her fellow Cheyennes, who are hiding out at a shack in the New Mexico mountains,
whooping it up as they watch their own exploits on the television news.

The outlaw band includes Buddy, a hero of the war in Vietnam turned Indian
radical, and his girlfriend, Rabbit, a part-time dealer in controlled
substances. Various wise elders and wisecracking children wander in and out of
the place. Eventually it is decided that the only way to escape the enemy is the
ancient way -- on horseback. The scheme is so absurd that it works. In a scene
worthy of a Saturday morning cartoon (as the Storyteller is the first to admit),
the equestrian Indians break through a cordon of police SWAT teams equipped with
the latest high-tech antiterrorist gear.

But victory goes to their heads. An elder called Grampa decides it's time that
the Anglos start paying for trespassing on a sacred mountain that they have
turned into a fancy ski resort. When he rides his horse onto the highway,
stopping cars, the trouble begins.

The Storyteller lays no claim to being an unbiased reporter. "These . . . people
[the motorists] with their golden cocaine spoons around their necks," he says,
"who thought nothing of the slaughter of thousands of trees and the maiming of
entire mountains so that they could fly in from L.A. and D.C. and have a
wonderful vacation from their vacuous but well-paying jobs sliding and
schussbooming down those raped slopes, grew outraged when their superhighway was
blocked by eccentric Locals." The police aren't amused either, and give chase.
"It was Kit Carson screaming after Geronimo all over again," says the
Storyteller.

The chase continues across the American West for the remainder of the book.
Along the way the warriors spend a winter in the mountains, learning ancient
survival techniques and ceremonial wisdom from the elders. It's not always easy
for these modern Indians to commune with nature. The kids miss television and
the adults sometimes long for pizza. But by the end of the season they have all
become proud of their self-reliance.

Bonnie, who has always thought the visions she saw meant that she was crazy, now
finds that they are authentic communications from the world of her ancestors,
and takes her true name, Red Bird. Philbert, too, is ennobled by his experience
in the wilds, losing weight and gaining maturity. The elders discover that he's
the grandson of a famous Cheyenne chief, "in the direct line of the greatest
Cheyenne chiefs going back thousands of years." He's also a koshare, a sacred
clown who must first experience humiliation in order to achieve greatness. He's
had all the humiliation a fat, slow Indian in America needs, and, taking his
true name, Whirlwind, he assumes leadership of the gang. But by now it's not a
gang so much as a group of pilgrims, determined to reach their sacred homeland
in the Black Hills of South Dakota -- not just to escape the law but also to
assert their cultural identities.

So the book does have its serious side. Buddy stops periodically to give
clandestine television interviews on American history, telling viewers: "You're
too full of the inevitability of your industrial progress and the lies about
democracy and reason which you have built up around you. . . . I saw your
culture in the bloody fields of An Loc and Bien Hoa. I was at the Wounded Knee
siege in South Dakota. . . . I know how ruthless you are in defense of your
delusions." He knows, too, that the only war Indians can win nowadays will have
to be fought with words, not weapons.

Don't worry, the Storyteller doesn't abandon the freewheeling humor that has
propelled his tale. On one occasion he shifts to the point of view of some horny
Indian ponies as they liberate a bevy of purebred fillies from a luxurious dude
ranch. As the pilgrims make yet another miraculous escape from the Feds, they
are taken in -- and nearly lulled into quiescence -- by the Looney Tune-like
denizens of a New Age commune.

All of "Sweet Medicine," in fact, has a cartoony flavor, one that I think its
characters would appreciate if the story were told to them around a fire. The
novel's seemingly simple story line and broad characters are part of an old
tradition of which cartoons are merely a modern form. This is the tradition of
the folk tale, in which good always triumphs over evil, asserting the
righteousness of those who stay true to their beliefs. "Sweet Medicine" is like
a trickster tale, common among Native American peoples, in which a small but
clever and resourceful hero (often a coyote) outsmarts stronger enemies and
lives to fight another day.

I think the Storyteller, a master trickster, secretly enjoys David Seals's
"Sweet Medicine." He's got every reason to be proud of the wit and energy with
which he has beguiled us into reading his creator's tale.

LOAD-DATE: November 29, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              304 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 30, 1992, Monday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1112 words



International    A3-9

VIETNAM HAS M.I.A.'S, TOO

When U.S. officials press Vietnam to help search for 2,265 Americans listed as
missing in the war, the Vietnamese inevitably mention that many more Vietnamese
soldiers are missing -- more than 300,000.  A1

BEIJING-HANOI RELATIONS

China's Prime Minister is to travel to Vietnam for the first such visit by a
Chinese leader in over two decades, but ties between the neighbors remain so
strained that they threaten the peace in the region.  A6


IRAN'S NUCLEAR ARMS PROGRAM

A draft C.I.A. report on Iran concludes that Teheran is making progress on a
nuclear arms program and could develop a nuclear weapon by 2000, senior
Administration officials say.  A1

ISRAEL URGES GERMAN RESOLVE

Responding to the neo-Nazi surge in Germany, the Israeli Cabinet condemned the
ugliness and urged the Bonn Government to take action. But the statment avoided
any hint of what Israel might do if the violence continues.  A8

NEO-NAZI GROUP VOWS LEGAL FIGHT

A leader of a neo-Nazi group that has been banned in Germany said the group
would fight in court for its right to exist. Such a case could force judges to
decide what police methods are appropriate to repress political violence.  A8

GIRDING FOR BATTLE IN MOSCOW

Two days before a thousand lawmakers gather for a crucial meeting of the
Congress of People's Deputies, the various combatants over reform in Russia
rallied their forces.  A3

VENEZUELAN VOWS TO STAY ON

Undaunted by a coup attempt on Friday that claimed 230 lives, Venezuela's
President ruled out resigning and vowed to yield only to a successor elected
next year.  A6

4 WHITE SOUTH AFRICANS SLAIN

Gunmen with automatic rifles and grenades attacked a mostly white golf club in
Cape Province, killing 4 people and wounding 17.  A9

PLEA TO SOMALIA AID WORKERS

A bellicose Somalia clan leader urged aid agencies to keep their workers in the
country, although his gunmen are among those who have ambushed the workers.  A9

POLITICAL GAINS FOR IRISHWOMEN

Women in Ireland have made their greatest political gains in 70 years of
independence in elections many called a breakthrough.  A4

National    A10-13, B7

SEEING SIGNS OF A RECOVERY

Many executives say they are convinced that the Clinton expansion has arrived
even before the President-elect moves into the White House. But they add that
the pace of the economic rebound will be relatively slow and that unemployment
will remain a problem.  A1

TREATMENT OF ALIENS IMPROVES

Until recently, illegal immigrant children were held in jails and could linger
there for months. But a pending Supreme Court case has resulted in more humane
treatment.  A1

CLINTON KEEPS CAMPAIGNING

When Bill Clinton was elected it seemed reasonable to assume that he would stop
campaigning. Instead, he has moved smoothly from the last campaign into the next
one. The emerging style of his Presidency is the endless campaign.  A1

CRACKDOWN ON SICK LEAVE

The number of workers calling in sick has increased significantly, and some are
abusing the privilege. To stop the abuses, some companies have hired
investigators to observe people on sick leave.  A12

THE IMPACT OF WOMEN IN PRISON

In the last decade, women have been sent to prison at record rates. And now
attention is being paid to the long-term consequences of keeping almost 90,000
women jailed.  A10

NEW LAWMAKERS BEGIN JOCKEYING

Even before they take office, the members of the largest freshman class to enter
Congress in more than 40 years are jockeying like pros for committee
assignments.  A11

GREEK-AMERICANS HAVE NEW HERO

Greek-Americans in Washington are delirious with glee over George
Stephanopoulos, the communications director for Bill Clinton.  B7

JUDGE REMOVED IN JUROR'S CASE

Pennsylvania's Supreme Court has removed a judge because he punished prospective
jurors who had said that their biases would prevent them from being fair.  A13

ACCUSER SAYS SHE WAS PRESSURED

One of the women who have accused Senator Bob Packwood of making sexual advances
said that she was pressured by a friend to remain silent about her accusation.
B7

Two Montanans are selling Muscovites fresh roasted coffee.A10

Obituaries    B10

Harry Lyon Morris, former Liberian delegate at the United Nations.

Metro Digest    B1

TOUGH TB MEASURES URGED

Wading into one of the most contentious issues in modern medicine, a panel of 34
scientists, ethicists and public health leaders is calling for broad new
measures to stem the spread of tuberculosis in New York City and around the
nation.  A1

A NEW ECONOMIC WAR

Last year Connecticut, New Jersey, New York State and New York City signed an
agreement intended to end the luring of companies from one another. However the
interstate war for jobs is now intensifying, and the so-called nonaggression
pact seems close to collapse.  A1

Business Digest    D1

Arts/Entertainment    C11-14

Reviewing the value of the NC-17 film rating.  C11

Theater: "The Seagull." C11

Music: The Talk of London.  C11

Pop and Jazz in Review C12

Musica Antiqua Koln.  C12

New York Concert Singers.  C12

Dance: Split Stream.  C13

Forces of Nature.  C14

100 years of "Nutcracker." C14

Word and Image:

Books for the holidays.  C13

Documentary on de Gaulle.  C14

Sports    C1-9

Football: Jets' Byrd suffers partial paralysis.  C1

Questions surround Byrd's medical future.  C5

Byrd's teammate describes the collision.  C5

Redskins crush Cardinals.  C4

Vikings defeat Rams.  C6

49ers hold off Eagles.  C7

Saints set back Dolphins.  C7

Steelers beat Bengals.  C7

Torretta the center of Heisman watch.  C4

Columns: Anderson on Dennis Byrd.  C1

On Baseball C4

N.B.A.'s classy new group.  C2

Knicks lose to Pistons.  C3

Nets hardly miss Coleman.  C3

Golf: Stewart gains big payday in Skins Game.  C7

Soccer: Davidson advances to Final Four.  C9

Sports People C3

Tennis: Swiss prepare for Davis Cup.  C4

Editorials/Op-Ed    A14-15

Editorials

Who needs four air forces?
Kurds versus Kurds.
The fright mail gambit.
Richard E. Mooney: Apologizing.

Letters

Anthony Lewis: Tax-exempt politics?

William Safire: Right to intervene.

Christoph Bertram: Everyone a German.

Garry Trudeau: S*x.

Charles Kaiser: Overcoming a death wish.

Neediest Cases B4

LOAD-DATE: November 30, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              305 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 30, 1992, Monday, Late Edition - Final

The Vietnamese Speak Softly Of Their Own 300,000 M.I.A.

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHENON,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 998 words

DATELINE: LANG SON, Vietnam


Me Thi Ha believes she is a widow. But apart from the faded, red-bordered
Government certificate proclaiming her husband a "Vietnamese martyr in the
struggle against America," she has no proof of his death.

Mrs. Ha worries about calling herself a widow because she still does not know
how or when or where her husband died, and she says she probably never will.

"Of course I understand how the Americans feel," she said. "When I read in the
newspapers how the Americans come here to search for the missing soldiers, I
know exactly the pain of the families. We share the same grief."

Missing and Presumed Dead



In Vietnamese homes, the red-bordered certificates are typically displayed in
the finest wooden frames the families can afford, and as household decorations
they are as common here as wall calendars and family photographs. Like the
families of many Vietnamese soldiers, Mrs. Ha received the certificate instead
of a body that the Vietnamese Army could never find.

According to the Hanoi Government, her husband, Capt. To Van Thinh, and more
than 300,000 other Vietnamese soldiers are still missing and can only be
presumed dead from what many Vietnamese in the north still call the War Against
America.

About a million and a half Vietnamese were killed in the war -- 185,000 South
Vietnamese soldiers, 924,000 North Vietnamese and Vietcong and 415,000
civilians. About 58,000 Americans died.

More than three-quarters of the Vietnamese missing are from central or
north-central provinces, although the figure of 300,000 includes Vietcong as
well as tens of thousands of soldiers who served in the South Vietnamese Army.

Careful With Americans

There are death certificates on display everywhere in Lang Son, a city of
merchants and small farmers on Vietnam's mountainous northern border with China,
about 80 miles northeast of Hanoi. Lang Son is the capital of Lang Son Province,
home to nearly 2,400 soldiers listed as missing from the war.

The Vietnamese Government, which is eager to resume diplomatic and economic ties
with the United States, is careful not to offend American visitors by suggesting
directly that the sacrifice of Vietnamese families was greater than that of
families in the United States.

But when American investigators come to Hanoi to press the Vietnamese to
cooperate in the search for 2,265 Americans still listed as unaccounted for in
Indochina, the Vietnamese will turn the conversation -- slowly, carefully,
inevitably -- to the fact that so many more Vietnamese are also missing.

Few Dental Records

Hanoi's recent announcement that it will step up cooperation in the search for
missing Americans by opening up its war archives is thought likely to result in
a relaxation of a 17-year-old American trade embargo on Vietnam.

Vietnam's Ministry of Labor, War Invalids and Social Affairs is responsible for
trying to help Vietnamese families determine the fate of missing soldiers, but
there is little it can do.

"Vietnam is a very poor country, and so the people must take responsibility for
this themselves -- this must be a people's campaign," said Nghiem Xuan Tue, a
military spokesman. "Even when we have a soldier's remains, we have none of the
modern technology to identify them."

Dental records, among the most valuable tools the Pentagon has for identifying
the remains of American troops, are usually not available for North Vietnamese
soldiers, most of whom had never had a dental X-ray.

Families Keep Searching

As a North Vietnamese soldier in the early 1970's, Mr. Tue fought on some of the
most grisly battlefields of the south, and he said it was common for northern
soldiers to be buried hurriedly in shallow dirt graves marked only by a few
stones.

"In the war there was no time to bury a man properly," he said. "I buried so
many myself. You would leave stones on the grave and hope to go back someday to
find it." For thousands of soldiers who were hit by bombs dropped from B-52's,
he said, there were no remains at all.

While the chances of finding a soldier's remains are virtually nonexistent,
nearly 1,000 northern Vietnamese families apply to the Government each month for
the chance to travel south to look for clues to the fate of missing relatives.

Proper Burial Is Essential

Many go armed only with a one-page typewritten letter that was commonly sent to
families by the army informing them of little more than the fact that a soldier
had died; if a family was lucky, the letter mentioned a province where the body
might have been buried.

During the war, communication from the southern battlefields was difficult and
dangerous, and mail from soldiers did not routinely travel north. Many northern
families were not notified for years that a soldier had died or was missing.

Tran Van Ke, a 64-year-old shipping clerk from Lang Son, waited five years
before he learned that his son had died of wounds suffered in South Vietnam.

"His friends came home from the war in 1975 and told us our brave son died in
1970 and that he had been quickly buried," Mr. Ke said, reaching up to remove a
small black-and-white photograph of his son, Tran Ban Tiep, from the wall of the
front room of the family home. The 1968 photo showed a boyish Mr. Tiep, then 18,
in full military uniform, carrying an AK-47 rifle.

"His friends cannot remember where he was buried," Mr. Ke said. "It is my great
hope that we will someday discover where he is buried."

Ancestor worship dominates the spiritual life of the Vietnamese, and it is
considered essential that the remains of the dead be properly buried and
venerated.

"If I could afford the trip, I would go south to look for my husband," said Mrs.
Ha, a retired army cook whose only income, apart from gifts from her three
children, is a $5-a-month pension. "Even if I could not find him, I would like
to try. I am not a religious woman, but I do know I would feel relief in my
dreams if I know where my husband was buried."


LOAD-DATE: November 30, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Tran Ve Ke, a shipping clerk from Lang Son, Vietnam, holding a
picture of his son. Mr. Ke waited for five years before he learned that his son
had died of wounds suffered in South Vietnam. (Johanna Sherry for The New York
Times) (pg. A6)

Map of Vietnam highlighting the location of Lang Son. (pg. A6)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              306 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 30, 1992, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Chinese Premier Making a Rare Visit to Hanoi

BYLINE: By NICHOLAS D. KRISTOF,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 6; Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 661 words

DATELINE: BEIJING, Nov. 29


Prime Minister Li Peng is to travel to Vietnam this week for the first such
visit by a Chinese leader in more than two decades.

Despite the normalization of relations a year ago, dealings between the
Communist neighbors remain so strained that they threaten the peace in the
region.

Mr. Li is to visit Vietnam from Monday through Friday, in part to build on the
resumption of normal diplomatic relations. But his visit is not expected to
achieve any breakthrough on the territorial disputes along the countries' land
border and in the South China Sea.

China and Vietnam fought a brief border war in 1979, and there have been
periodic skirmishes since then. This year China has challenged Hanoi by taking a
more assertive posture toward its territorial claims.

Sensitive to charges that they have been bullying Vietnam, Chinese officials are
eager to portray the trip as a sign of friendship between the former enemies.

'A Very Important Visit'

"It will be a very important visit," said Wu Jianmin, the Foreign Ministry
spokesman. "There is far more common ground between China and Vietnam than there
are differences and problems between them."

One of the most important topics during Mr. Li's visit will be the dispute over
the Spratly and Paracel islands in the South China Sea. The islands are claimed
fully or in part by six nations in the region, but China is in the best position
to back its claims by force.

In May, China signed a contract with an American company to explore for oil in a
region of sea that is much closer to Vietnam than to China. Then in September, a
Chinese ship began drilling near the Gulf of Tonkin, in waters that Vietnam
claims as its own.

Western diplomats take no position on whose territory it is, but they warn that
the dispute could lead to another Chinese-Vietnamese war -- particularly if oil
is found in the South China Sea.

China's trade minister, Li Lanqing, is to accompany Prime Minister Li to Hanoi,
and economic ties are also expected to be on the agenda.

"We expect our trade and economic collaboration will receive a shot in the arm
from the talks," Wei Xiaorong, a trade official, told the China Daily newspaper.

Since relations were formally normalized in November 1991, air links have been
restored and trade has soared. In the first nine months of 1992, trade totaled
$104 million, more than three times the figure in the similar period of 1991.

In fact, total trade is far higher, because many goods are smuggled by merchants
across narrow mountain trails or by fishermen in the South China Sea.

Rail links were supposed to have been restored as well, but China annoyed
Vietnam by building a station in a buffer zone at "Friendship Pass" along the
border. In addition, China announced that a strip of several hundred yards of
what used to be Vietnam was now its own territory.

Another obstacle for trade is the recent practice by the Chinese border police
of seizing cargo ships plying between Hong Kong and Vietnam. At least 19 ships
have been seized, and the total is probably higher since some shipowners try to
avoid publicity. The ships are normally freed after an investigation, but some
cargoes have been confiscated.

China says its purpose is to curb smuggling, and Hong Kong officials say there
may be something to that. But the seizures have focused on ships heading for
Vietnam, and some see them as official piracy -- as well as a way of showing
Vietnam who is stronger.

China was a firm supporter of the Communist Government in Hanoi during the
1960's and the early part of the 1970's. According to Chinese estimates, 300,000
Chinese volunteers took part in the Vietnam War on the side of Hanoi, with 1,100
killed.

Vietnam later angered China by expelling and often severely mistreating its
ethnic Chinese inhabitants. The friendship collapsed completely at the end of
1978, when Vietnam's Army invaded Cambodia to oust the regime of the Khmer
Rouge, China's ally.

LOAD-DATE: November 30, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              307 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 1, 1992, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

U.N. CURBING TRADE WITH KHMER ROUGE

BYLINE: By PAUL LEWIS,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 9; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 632 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, Nov. 30


The Security Council imposed trade sanctions today on areas of Cambodia
controlled by the Khmer Rouge, the much- feared Communist guerrilla force, and
said it would push ahead with free elections next year in the rest of the
country -- without Khmer Rouge participation if necessary.

Although 14 of the Council's 15 members voted in favor of the measures, China --
the Khmer Rouge's main backer in the past -- abstained, thus ending the show of
unity that the five powers with permanent seats had maintained on Cambodia.

The Khmer Rouge, who were responsible for the deaths of as many as a million
Cambodians when they controlled the Government in the 1970's, form the largest
of three rebel factions that signed a peace treaty last year brokered by the
United Nations. The treaty calls on all factions to disarm and form political
parties to compete in internationally supervised elections.

Vote Scheduled in May

The resolution says the United Nations will hold elections next May for
Cambodia's first democratic government, even though the Khmer Rouge now refuse
to take part. The guerrillas are denying United Nations officials access to
areas under its control and are accused of cease-fire violations.

The elections are to be held in about 75 percent of Cambodia, but a vote could
leave a new Government in Phnom Penh facing a heavily armed force that does not
recognize it.

The Council also called for the Cambodians to hold simultaneous presidential
elections, in the belief they would bring back Prince Norodom Sihanouk,
Cambodia's titular leader, as head of state, thus providing political stability.


No Oil In, No Gems Out

In an effort to force the Khmer Rouge to cooperate, the Council ordered a
suspension of all oil deliveries to parts of the country controlled by the Khmer
Rouge and told Thailand to interrupt the profitable exports of timber and gems
that the Khmer Rouge send through Thailand.

But many officials are skeptical about the measures, saying the Thai Army is
unlikely to end its lucrative business links with the Khmer Rouge.

The Khmer Rouge Government, led by Pol Pot, was ousted in 1979 by the Vietnamese
Army after border raids by Khmer Rouge soldiers in which many Vietnamese were
killed. Vietnam then installed leaders who today control the Government.

The United Nations has deployed a huge peacekeeping force in Cambodia, almost
20,000 soldiers, police officers and civilian administrators who have virtually
taken over the running of the country to prepare for elections.

                             --------------------


Khmer Rouge Form a Party

BANGKOK, Thailand, Nov. 30 (Special to The New York Times) -- The Khmer Rouge
announced today that they had formed a political party but that the party would
not sponsor candidates in the elections unless the United Nations met demands
that have been rejected in the past.

Formation of a political party and the suggestion that the Khmer Rouge might
still take part in the election were seen by foreign diplomats as an effort to
blunt any negative publicity that the Maoist-inspired rebels might receive at
the United Nations, where extreme displeasure with the Khmer Rouge has been
expressed over the group's refusal to disarm.

The statement said the new National Unity of Cambodia Party would take part in
the elections only if the peace settlement "is correctly and fully implemented,
particularly when all categories of Vietnamese forces of aggression have
withdrawn from Cambodia."

Khmer Rouge leaders are also demanding that the Supreme National Council, which
represents the rebel factions and the Vietnamese-installed Government, be given
powers now held by the Government.

United Nations peacekeepers say they have been unable to locate any Vietnamese
troops.


LOAD-DATE: December 1, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              308 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 2, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Khmer Rouge Holding Six U.N. Peacekeepers

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 6; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 206 words

DATELINE: PHNOM PENH, Cambodia, Wednesday, Dec. 2


Khmer Rouge rebels held six United Nations peacekeepers today after seizing them
and accusing them of spying for the Vietnam-backed Government, a United Nations
spokesman said.

The men -- three from Britain, two from the Philippines and one from New Zealand
-- were seized on Tuesday near Kompong Thom, 85 miles north of Phnom Penh, said
the spokesman, Eric Falt. He said United Nations officials in Phnom Penh have
been in constant radio contact with the observers, who said they were unharmed.

A Khmer Rouge official in Phnom Penh said nobody was available to comment on the
development.

Mr. Falt also said five peacekeepers were wounded today when their vehicles ran
over freshly laid anti-tank mines on a road near Siem Reap, 140 miles northwest
of Phnom Penh.

The peacekeepers, in the country to guide it through democratic elections by
May, have come under attack in recent weeks as the Khmer Rouge have refused to
cooperate in implementing last year's peace accord.

On Monday, the Security Council imposed an oil embargo and tough economic
sanctions on the guerrilla group in an effort to force it to comply with the
peace accord and said the elections would proceed without Khmer Rouge
participation if necessary.

LOAD-DATE: December 2, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              309 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 2, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

NEGATIVE MIND-SET ON M.I.A.'S CHARGED

BYLINE: By MARTIN TOLCHIN,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 8; Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 382 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 1


A dispute arose at a Congressional hearing today when some military intelligence
officials said that some analysts had a "mind-set to debunk" evidence of live
American veterans who were reported missing in action or imprisoned during the
Vietnam War.

Critics contend that such a mindset hindered the rescue of these Americans from
Vietnamese captivity, and charges such as these have spurred reports that
Americans might still be alive in Indochina.

The dispute erupted today at a hearing conducted by the Senate committee on
P.O.W.-M.I.A. affairs, which has released documents indicating that United
States officials knew that servicemen were being held even after Vietnam
supposedly released all American prisoners in 1973.

The intelligence experts agreed, however, that the investigations were plagued
by "external pressures" from Congress and the families of those missing, as well
as inadequate staffing, resources and lack of coordination among intelligence
agencies.

Some described an atmosphere of cynicism around the investigation. Retired Rear
Adm. Thomas A. Brooks, a former chief of naval intelligence, said, "We had been
confronted with so many reports that were deliberate fabrications or grossly
inaccurate that the analysts became cynical." He said "professional predators"
who had made money exploiting the P.O.W.-M.I.A. issue had provided reports that
were "given to analysts who knew the personalities involved" and therefore had a
"mind-set to debunk" them.

Retired Col. Kimball Gaines, who conducted a task-force review of the
P.O.W./M.I.A. office in 1986, had used the phrase "mind-set to debunk" to
describe the viewpoint of analysts of the Defense Intelligence Agency, which
initially had sole intelligence reponsibility for these issues.

But Col. Joseph Schlatter, an intelligence officer who coined the phrase while
working for Colonel Gaines, told the committee that he had been mistaken. "At
the time, I felt this charge was somewhat valid," he said. "Now, I state without
reservation my belief that this is a bogus charge."

He deplored the pressures on the analysts. They were "beset by so many outside
tasks," he said, "that they were constantly running from one crisis to another
and didn't have time to do the important pick-and-spade work."

LOAD-DATE: December 2, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              310 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 2, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Eating Well

BYLINE: By Marian Burros

SECTION: Section C; Page 4; Column 1; Living Desk

LENGTH: 1306 words

DATELINE: SANTA CRUZ, Calif.


JOHN ROBBINS, crusader, animal-rights activist and idealist, shares household
chores with his wife, Deo, and their 18-year-old son, Ocean. He does about 40
percent of the cooking and washes the dishes.

"Deo does the bathrooms," Mr. Robbins said as he sat in the study of his 1950's
house, with 1950's carpet that was probably orange and yellow and brown when it
was new. "That's because I weasel out of that."

Mr. Robbins, who has an audience of hundreds of thousands for his animal-rights,
pro-environment, vegetarian message, said he did not feel guilty about leaving
this work for his wife, "because I love her and she loves me."

"Guilt is a negative emotion," he said.

Psycho-speak comes naturally to this former psychotherapist who wrote "Diet for
a New America" (Stillpoint Publishing) in 1987 and "May All Be Fed," a cookbook
(William Morrow), in 1992. He has been preaching his three-pronged gospel ever
since. While health professionals talk about the need for better nutrition and
environmentalists about the importance of cleaning up the planet, Mr. Robbins
has combined both ideas and tacked on a third, animal rights. They are all
connected, he says.

The inclusion of the animal-rights message with nutrition and the environment
has provoked concern. Dr. Dean Ornish, author of "Dr. Dean Ornish's Program for
Reversing Heart Disease" (Ballantine, 1992), admires Mr. Robbins's work, but
sees problems with the inclusion of animal rights. "I respect what he's doing in
terms of raising awareness about the healthful effects of a vegetarian diet,"
Dr. Ornish said. "But it goes beyond what I write about. His approach and mine
differ; he tends to polarize people, I tend to build bridges."

Mr. Robbins's lectures are heard by thousands, particularly by young people, and
sales of his first book are over 300,000, his publisher says.

Part hippie, part charismatic leader, Mr. Robbins, 44 years old, an heir to the
Baskin-Robbins fortune, has gone from the home of his childhood in Hollywood,
with an ice-cream-cone-shaped swimming pool, to a tiny rented house whose
interior may not have been painted in decades.

"Around here the three of us share housework," said Deo Robbins, who was born
Annette. (The name came to her in a dream.) "None of us particularly like it,
but we do what we have to do." These mundane pursuits are not high on the
Robbinses' list of things to do. Saving Americans from themselves is.

Admirers compare Mr. Robbins's impact with that of Rachel Carson, using
adjectives like extraordinary and compelling to describe his work.

Detractors use adjectives like hyperbolic.

"Every so often a book comes along which has the capacity to awaken the
conscience of a nation," wrote Cleveland Amory in promotional material
accompanying Mr. Robbins's book. Mr. Amory, the author and animal-rights
advocate, is a board member of Earthsave, the group founded by Mr. Robbins. "
'Silent Spring' was one such book," Mr. Amory wrote. "John Robbins's volume is
destined to be another."

Mr. Robbins's message is not always clear. In his books, better nutrition and a
cleaner environment flow from animal rights. In person and in videos, Mr.
Robbins appears to have reversed the order: if people had healthier diets and
cared more about their environment, animals would be treated more humanely.

"I think in an ideal society there is going to be some animal agriculture, but
organically raised and humanely slaughtered," Mr. Robbins said in an interview
in his home just outside of Santa Cruz.

Mr. Robbins disapproves of the militant animal-rights advocates. "I have very
strong feelings you don't fight violence with violence," he said.  "I am not
cutting out animal agriculture. If people are saying that, that's their
problem."

"Diet for a New America," with Lassie-type stories about cows and chickens,
dolphins and pigs, wastes little time in getting down to basics: scenes of
cruelty in factory farming practices, complete with graphic photographs. Few
people fail to be touched. Then, it is easy to make the point that meat and
dairy products are not essential for an adequate diet, and from there to argue
that factory farming destroys the environment. Much of what Mr. Robbins has to
say about diet in this country is unremarkable: we eat too much meat and dairy
products. Much of what Mr. Robbins has to say about the inhumane treatment of
animals on factory farms is correct. But Mr. Robbins undermines his case by
exaggerating; facts mix with factoids and anecdotes. He contends, for example,
that cattle raising is responsible for the deforestation of America.

Wrong, says Alan R. Durning, a senior researcher at Worldwatch Institute, an
environmental research center in Washington, and co-author of "Taking Stock:
Animal Farming and the Environment." "I don't know of any significant expansion
of farmlands taking over forests," Mr. Durning said.

Charles Benbrook, a consultant on food safety in Dickerson, Md., and former
executive director of the National Academy of Sciences Board of Agriculture,
disagrees with Mr. Robbins's contention that meat and dairy products contain
more pesticides than plant foods. "There's no way analytically to come up with
numbers," Mr. Benbrook said.

Even some who should be allies worry about Mr. Robbins's exaggerations.

"I applaud his stand," said Debra Blake Weisenthal, formerly of Vegetarian
Times. "It certainly tells the whole story, but the figures are probably
overblown. We have to come up with accurate figures if we expect to be taken
seriously."

Some of Mr. Robbins's admirers think the emphasis on animal rights detracts from
the message.

Greg Drescher, president of Gifford, Drescher & Associates, a Boston firm that
plans conferences on food, health and the environment, says the message is
right. But he added: "What's being missed is an opportunity to support a strong
position for reduced meat consumption from a nutrition and environmental
perspective without the other baggage. By putting all of the issues together he
makes it harder for a broad group of people to support the issues."

Mr. Robbins concedes that his message can be confusing. "It makes it a little
complicated for the bumper-sticker mind and the sound bite," he said.

In the 60's, Mr. Robbins rebelled against his family's materialism. "In my
family, roughing it meant room service was late," he said. He had mixed feelings
about his father, who was one of the founders of the Baskin-Robbins ice-cream
business. "I wished he would spend more time with me and less on business," he
said. "I sometimes thought my primary importance to him was that I would carry
on the business." Today, he says, he has a good relationship with his father.

"I could have gone to Harvard, Yale or Stanford," he said, "but part of my
rebellion was to go to a public college." He chose the University of California
at Berkeley.

"I was reading Emerson when I was 11 years old," he said. "I was reading Thoreau
and Whitman. I think my destiny, my potential came from my soul."

Though he would accept no money from his father, he allowed him to hire a lawyer
to keep himself out of the Vietnam War and today justifies it this way: "I
realized my father, by purchasing the attorney's services, was helping lawyers
to do pro bono work, keeping other people out of the war."

Mr. Robbins' first book was published in 1987 and, in the beginning it was
reviewed only in the fringe press. Television appearances brought it into the
mainstream. Michael Jacobson, executive director of the Center for Science in
the Public Interest, a Washington-based advocacy group, thinks Mr. Robbins knows
young people. "I can see animal rights and humane treatment of animals being a
major influence on the direction of the American diet in the next 10 or 20
years," Dr. Jacobson said.


NAME: JOHN ROBBINS

LOAD-DATE: December 2, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: John Robbins eating a vegetarian meal at his home. (Jim
Wilson/The New York Times)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              311 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 2, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Buy Up the Somalis' Guns

BYLINE: By Raymond Bonner;  Raymond Bonner, who writes frequently about American
foreign policy, has lived in Africa for four years.

SECTION: Section A; Page 23; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 885 words

DATELINE: NAIROBI, Kenya


When someone proposes any action to save starving women and children, it is hard
to counsel caution without appearing cruel. But the proposal to dispatch up to
30,000 American troops to Somalia must be considered as dispassionately as
possible. The Bush Administration should explore whether we might be able to buy
peace and humanitarian relief before sending in military forces.

The use of combat troops is premised on humanitarian objectives, as against
protecting our national security, the traditional justification for deploying
forces. That is noble and a much more preferable use of troops than, for
example, the invasions of Grenada and Panama. But if the humanitarian role is
the one we will play in the post-cold-war world, we should contemplate where it
leads us.

Immediately, we would have to send troops to Liberia, where the carnage among
warring factions is taking a hundred lives a day. We would have to start getting
together supplies for at least 50,000 troops that are desperately needed in the
southern Sudan to help provide relief. The death and starvation there is nearly
as horrendous as in Somalia and is likely to get worse, and the Sudanese
Government constantly blocks relief efforts.

There isn't a demand for intervention only because photographs and stories of
emaciated elders and children with distended bellies covered with flies haven't
gotten out of the Sudan.

Before America rolls into Somalia, because the U.N. has failed there, it had
better understand what it is getting into. Somalia is not another Vietnam:
America is not likely to get bogged down in a military quagmire. The Somali
warlords really are little more than gangsters and should be quickly vanquished.

Fine. Then what? Who is going to run Somalia? It no longer is a functioning
country: it has no Government, no phone system, no infrastructure, no police
force, no banks, virtually no business other than war. It may be possible to
re-create Somalia, but it will take years. Are we prepared to stay that long, or
would we, in the end, lose heart and pull out prematurely?

Does all this mean that the situation is hopeless, that the world must stand by
and watch people die? No.

To begin with, the former United Nations special envoy to Somalia, Mohammad
Sahnoun, ought to be brought back immediately. He was dismissed by Secretary
General Boutros Boutros-Ghali in October after he repeatedly criticized the U.N.
for its failures in Somalia.

In a few months, Mr. Sahnoun, who spoke Arabic, had made extraordinary progress.
He had gained the cooperation of the non-governmental relief organizations, who
had lost confidence in the U.N. because for nearly a year the U.N. was out of
Somalia when the relief workers needed its support. He was earning the warlords'
respect. He was impartial, while most Somalis believe the U.N. had sided with
the regime of Mohamed Said Barre, which was ousted in January 1991. And he
offered to be a broker between the warring clans, which the U.N. had previously
declined to do. Mr. Sahnoun was even able to get members of clans who had not
spoken for years together for a few days in the Seychelle Islands in October
before he was dismissed.

Then, a high-level representative must be appointed to work with Mr. Sahnoun on
a political settlement. Jimmy Carter, the only American President who ever made
a state visit to sub-Saharan Africa, is the obvious choice, and George Bush and
Bill Clinton together should agree to put him to work.

With Mr. Sahnoun and Mr. Carter talking with the clan leaders about a political
solution, there is another, astonishingly simple way to reduce the mayhem and
starvation.

During a trip to Somalia, I asked a friend in his 20's what the world should do.
Buy the weapons off the street, he said. On its face, the idea sounded naive:
stop the war by offering to buy weapons. But it just might work. The young men
who are running around shooting off guns aren't trained troops or dedicated
guerrillas. They aren't fighting for an ideology -- for Marxism or Islam, for
capitalism or freedom. Some are barely as tall as the weapons they carry; most
are teen-agers.

"Give them an alternative and they will take it," said an African doctor who has
spent considerable time in Somalia. The alternative might not be only money but
even seeds and agricultural implements so the youngsters can begin farming.

For $120, my young Somali friend said, one could buy an AK-47 rifle. He thought
that $10 million to $15 million could buy up almost all the weapons, small and
large, as well as the ammunition in Somalia. Even if it cost four or five times
that much, it would be a pretty cheap investment, given the potential return.

Obviously not all weapons would be turned in, and some Somalis would use the
money to buy another weapon. But any reduction in the number of weapons would
mean a reduction in the number of people being killed. And it would mean fewer
people dying of starvation because there would be fewer weapons pointed at
relief convoys and used in raids on food warehouses.

Buying weapons is not a foolproof solution to Somalia's misery, of course. But
it should at be tried before dispatching troops. If in the end, that is the only
solution, then at least there would be fewer guns aimed at American troops.

LOAD-DATE: December 2, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              312 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 2, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

The Military Can Successfully Integrate Gays;
Toll on Leadership

SECTION: Section A; Page 22; Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 436 words


To the Editor:

Re "Lift the Ban on Gay Soldiers" (editorial, Nov. 15): I would like to
communicate why the military should not allow homosexuals in their ranks. It has
nothing to do with a gay person's ability to do an individual job. Gays run the
gamut of ability as does everyone else. It also does not have a lot to do with
AIDS. It has everything to do with followership.

My credentials include leading Special Forces and Airmobile Units in heavy
combat in Vietnam, a graduate degree in psychology and five years of teaching
leadership and management. My last 12 years have been spent as a vice president
of human resources in a civilian company.

As someone who experienced much infantry combat during three tours in Vietnam
and who subsequently spent time in my military career studying and teaching
leadership, I suggest that, as historians and military sociologists have written
for decades, cohesion is what makes effective fighting units. And cohesion will
be affected by having homosexuals in a unit if they are in leadership positions.

Soldiers won't fight as effectively for leaders they can't respect and most
soldiers will not respect a homosexual. I can imagine the response of soldiers
and sergeants in an elite military unit like the 82d Airborne Division or a
Marine infantry company upon learning their company commander was gay. He would
be the subject of ridicule, jokes and disrespect, and the company would become
the laughingstock of other units.

Unfortunately for homosexuals, most men find their sexual activities repugnant.
The mental image of your commander engaging in oral or anal sex is just not
conducive to followership, and although this may not ac
cord with today's civil rights, it's a fact that won't easily be changed.

Although those who haven't experienced combat may believe that rules and
regulations can be used to force leadership, the disintegration of the United
States Army in the latter years of the Vietnam War is evidence that rules alone
cannot make a unit fight. At the small-unit level, where combat takes place,
trust, respect and confidence in your leaders make the difference between
winning and losing or living and dying.

Although there are cases of homosexuals having successful military careers,
their success was based on no one's knowing they were homosexual. If no one
knows, no one cares. Had they been known to be homosexuals (male in particular)
and allowed to remain in service, they would not have had successful careers
because they could not have been effective leaders.

RAMON A. NADAL
Boiling Springs, Pa., Nov. 19, 1992

LOAD-DATE: December 2, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing.

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              313 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 3, 1992, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Direct-Mail Schemes Aimed at Kin Of P.O.W.'s Condemned as Deceit

BYLINE: By MARTIN TOLCHIN,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 5; Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 370 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 2


Senator John F. Kerry today condemned as "grotesque" and "fraudulent" some
lucrative fund-raising strategies that exploited the hopes of families of
Americans missing or imprisoned during the Vietnam War.

Those direct-mail and telemarketing campaigns raised millions of dollars,
ostensibly to pay for efforts to free Americans held in southeast Asia. But
Joseph Salta, one direct-mail specialist who testified, said that of the $1.9
million he had raised, only $200,000 actually went to efforts to track down
Americans. The remainder was spent on his fees (17.65 percent of all
expenditures) and production costs, he said.

"I find that unconscionable," said Mr. Kerry, a Massachusetts Democrat who is
chairman of the Select Committee on P.O.W.-M.I.A. Affairs.

At a hearing on the fund-raising methods of such groups, the Senator said many
campaigns used bogus information that bred cynicism and despair and hindered the
efforts of legitimate organizations. The direct-mail specialists who testified
said today that the information they used in their mailings was provided by
their clients.

Preying on Families

Mr. Kerry said that he would send the information to the Justice Department for
possible criminal investigation.

"It shocks me and stuns me that people can stoop to these mechanisms to get
money out of people," the Senator said.

Senator John McCain, an Arizona Republican who was a prisoner of war in Vietnam,
said, "Sadly, the publicity attending this issue has been a powerful attraction
for far too many scoundrels."

"They have preyed on the anguish of families, and helped to turn an issue which
should unite all Americans into an issue that often divides us," Mr.  McCain
said. "What they have done rivals the cruelty of those Vietnamese who have
exploited this issue for their cynical purposes."

The Senators also questioned Bruce W. Eberle, a direct-mail advertising
specialist whose firm, Bruce Eberle and Associates, sent an emotional appeal
that purported to have been written on the deck of a ship in the China Sea.

"Just today, I heard one more heart-rending account of an American serviceman
being held captive by Communists in Vietnam," said the fund-raising letter.

LOAD-DATE: December 3, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              314 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 3, 1992, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

KHMER ROUGE HOLD U.N. PEACEKEEPERS

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHENON,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 11; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 753 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Dec. 2


The Cambodian peace settlement was threatened again today as the United Nations
announced that six of its peacekeepers had been seized by Khmer Rouge guerrillas
on spying charges and that several others had been wounded in three attacks.

The captive soldiers -- three from Britain, two from the Philippines and one
from New Zealand -- were detained by the Khmer Rouge on Tuesday, only hours
after the United Nations Security Council voted to impose trade sanctions
against the Maoist-inspired rebels. The Khmer Rouge have refused to disarm under
the peace accord reached last year to end Cambodia's 13-year civil war.

It was not immediately known if the arrests and the attacks were related to the
Security Council vote. But an Asian diplomat in Cambodia said, "With so many
incidents in such a short period of time, I think it's fair to assume the worst
about the Khmer Rouge."

The Winds of War

Diplomats and United Nations officials in Phnom Penh, the capital, say that
after months of sporadic cease-fire violations by the Khmer Rouge and the
Cambodian Government, they fear resumption of a full-scale civil war. The Khmer
Rouge were responsible for the deaths of more than one million Cambodians when
they controlled the Government in the 1970's.

About 22,000 United Nations soldiers and civilian officials are in Cambodia to
enforce the peace accord. In a nearly $2 billion operation, the most expensive
in its history, the United Nations is responsible for disarming all factions and
overseeing an election next spring.

A United Nations spokesman, Eric Falt, said the six soldiers were seized at
midday Tuesday as they traveled by rubber boat along the Stung Sen River in
central Kompong Thom province, where they were checking reports of troop
movements.

According Mr. Falt, the soldiers were stopped at a Khmer Rouge checkpoint, told
to go ashore and detained on charges of spying for the Cambodian Government. "We
understand that they had passed other checkpoints before being stopped at that
one," he said.

Mr. Falt said the United Nations had asked senior Khmer Rouge officials in Phnom
Penh to accompany a negotiating team to Kompong Thom to win the release of the
six soldiers. "After a full day of talking to them, we have been unable to
secure assistance," he said.

"It's very surprising," he said. "The eyes of the world, the international
community, are going to be looking at this episode very carefully. I'm sure the
Khmer Rouge understand that it will have repercussions."

On Wednesday, a senior peacekeeping soldier from France was shot in the lower
back when a United Nations helicopter in which he was traveling was fired on
about 40 miles north of Phnom Penh. The source of the gunfire was not
identified, but the Khmer Rouge have been blamed in the past for similar
attacks. The soldier was reported to be in good condition.

In two other incidents today, vehicles carrying United Nations civilian police
ran over freshly laid mines on a well-traveled road near Siem Reap, in
northwestern Cambodian. At least five soldiers were wounded. The United Nations
said that two officers, a Tunisian and an Indonesian, were seriously wounded.

What the Khmer Rouge Want

As a result of the Khmer Rouge failure to disarm, the Security Council voted
Monday to ban imports of oil to territory controlled by the Khmer Rouge and to
block exports of lumber from those areas. The resolution also asked that the
United Nations go ahead with elections, with or without the participation of the
Khmer Rouge, which had been the most powerful rebel force during Cambodia's
civil war.

The Khmer Rouge have said they will not begin to disarm until the Supreme
National Council, which represents the Khmer Rouge, two other rebel groups and
the Government, assumes powers now held exclusively by the Government, which is
led by Prime Minister Hun Sen. The Government was installed by Vietnam after
Hanoi ousted the Khmer Rouge in an invasion that began in late 1978.

The effectiveness of the sanctions have been thrown into doubt by the hesitation
of Thailand to guarantee that it will enforce the trade bans. The Khmer Rouge
earn tens of millions of dollars each year -- the vast bulk of their income --
from Thai traders who buy lumber and gems from Khmer Rouge-held areas of western
Cambodia.

While insisting it will cooperate fully, the Thai Government, long a military
patron of the Khmer Rouge, has said it will not allow United Nations border
checkpoints on Thai territory.

LOAD-DATE: December 3, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Map of Cambodia showing location of Kompong Thom province.

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              315 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 3, 1992, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

The Genetic Blending of Afro-Amerasians

SECTION: Section A; Page 24; Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 254 words


To the Editor:

"For Afro-Amerasians, Tangled Emotions" (news article, Nov. 16) contains an
important error when it describes these biracial people as "culturally
Vietnamese, politically American and genetically black."

It is scientifically wrong to call these children of Asian mothers and black
fathers "genetically black," thus totally discounting their mothers'
contribution to their genetic makeup. They are neither genetically black nor
genetically Asian. These people are biracial -- their genomes are blended -- and
this fact must be appreciated for them to be respected and accepted for who they
are.

The distinction is important not only with regard to these children of the
Vietnam War. Racially blended families are becoming increasingly common in our
society. According to the National Center for Health Statistics, 2 percent of
all marriages in the United States are interracial, and births to
black-and-white couples more than quintupled from 1968 (9,600) to 1988 (51,000).
(By comparison, total births in 1988 were about 12 percent higher than in 1968.)

Furthermore, more than half of all Asian-Americans born in the United States
intermarry. Biracial or multiracial individuals deserve to be recognized for who
they are, although this demands that we move beyond familiar categories.

As a science writer, I feel a professional interest in correcting this mistake.
As mother of a biracial child, I feel a personal interest in doing so.

MILDRED LEINWEBER DAWSON
New York, Nov. 21, 1992

LOAD-DATE: December 3, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              316 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 December 4, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

MISSION TO SOMALIA;
U.N. BACKS A SOMALIA FORCE AS BUSH VOWS A SWIFT EXIT; PENTAGON SEES LONGER STAY

BYLINE: By MICHAEL R. GORDON,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1243 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 3


The United Nations Security Council approved tonight a United States-led
military intervention to protect the delivery of aid to Somalia, and the Bush
Administration assured Americans that the international force would complete its
mission quickly and return home.

But the assurances were undercut by disagreements between the White House and
Pentagon officials over how long it would take the force, which is to include at
least 28,000 United States troops, to complete its mission.

The White House talked of a swift return of the American forces, perhaps before
President-elect Bill Clinton takes office on Jan. 20, and aides to Mr. Clinton
also said they hoped for a quick end to the mission.

Clinton Backs Measure

Mr. Clinton welcomed the United Nations decision, calling it "an historic and
welcome step" that would give "new hope" to Somalis, Reuters reported from
Little Rock, Ark.

"I commend President Bush for taking the lead in this important humanitarian
effort," Mr. Clinton said in a short statement. "I appreciate his keeping me
informed as he makes decisions regarding possible courses of action for the
United States."

Despite the White House appraisal of the time needed, Pentagon officials said
the operation could take several months. Deploying the force, carrying out its
mission and then withdrawing might prove more complicated than the White House
suggested, they added.

With the vote, the United Nations has accepted a major new military and relief
engagement in a troubled part of the world for the fourth time since the end of
the cold war, following earlier deployments in the Persian Gulf, Cambodia and
the Balkans. [Page A14.]

Washington's Goal

The first United States unit, a flotilla approaching the coast of Somalia with
1,800 marines aboard, is expected to land in Somalia in several days. But a
senior Pentagon official said tonight that it could take a month to have the
full contingent in place.

United States officials said they planned to concentrate on delivering aid and
not on demilitarizing the country, even though United Nations Secretary General
Boutros Boutros-Ghali has said that it is important to disarm the warring clans
in Somalia.

The military plan, presented to Mr. Bush today by Gen. Joseph P. Hoar, the
Marine officer who heads the United States Central Command, is bigger than
initially portrayed by some Administration officials, who had said the force
would likely be half that size.

One reason the force is so big is that Somalia is so devastated by fighting that
a large number of combat engineers, transportation crews, water-purification
teams and other support troops have to be brought in.

France announced today that it would make a "significant contribution" to the
military operation. French press reports said 2,000 soldiers would be sent from
a French base in neighboring Djibouti and would be supported by 10 Mirage
fighter planes and 20 helicopters.

The Associated Press reported tonight that Belgium, Zimbabwe, Nigeria and Kenya
were considering sending troops. Italy also offered help.

Reuters quoted United Nations diplomats as saying Morocco, Algeria, Egypt and
Kuwait would also contribute forces.

Mr. Bush met today with Defense Secretary Dick Cheney, Gen. Colin L. Powell,
Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, and General Hoar at the White House. He
also telephoned world leaders to drum up support, and plans to meet with
Congressional leaders on Friday to discuss the United States role.

The American force is to be commanded by Lieut. Gen. Robert B. Johnston,
commander of the 1st Marine Expeditionary Force at Camp Pendleton, Calif. He
served as Gen. H. Norman Schwarzkopf's chief of staff during the Persian Gulf
war.

The Americans would be deployed in two waves. The Marines would be the first
ground combat forces on the scene. The 1,800 marines now off the coast would
come ashore to secure the ports and airfield at Mogadishu and perhaps airfields
at Baidoa and Waajid. They would be followed by 16,000 marines from the 1st
Marine Expeditionary Force, while huge storage ships based at Diego Garcia in
the Indian Ocean delivered weapons, vehicles and food.

New York Division to Go

The marines will be followed in a week or so by Army troops from the 10th
Mountain Division in Fort Drum, N.Y., officials said. The division is commanded
by Maj. Gen. Steven Arnold, the Army's chief operations officer in Riyadh, Saudi
Arabia, during the gulf war.

There will also be a large sealift and airlift of supplies, recalling the hectic
early weeks of the deployment to the Persian Gulf.

The United States mission is aimed at securing Somalia's ports and airfields,
opening supply routes and establishing protected centers to prevent food
intended for starving Somalis from being stolen by armed bands.

According to the Pentagon plan, the United States would then hand the operation
over to a United Nations peacekeeping force and withdraw its combat troops.
General Hoar's plan was said by officials to cover a 30-to-60-day period.

Target for Inauguration Day

The White House went out of its way today to suggest that the operation might be
over even more quickly. "We obviously would like to resolve the military aspect
of it as quickly as possible," said Marlin Fitzwater, the White House spokesman.
"And because the President leaves office Jan. 20, we would like to have them out
before then."

But one senior Pentagon official dismissed the schedule suggested by Mr.
Fitzwater as "utterly ridiculous."

The problem is not that military officials fear a Vietnam-style morass. Pentagon
officials are confident that the Marine and Army troops can make short work of
any organized opposition by Somali clans.

Clans Wait for U.S. to Leave

Rather, Pentagon officials said, the concern is that armed bands may re-emerge
as the American force tries to withdraw and a less powerful United Nations force
moves in.

"If the armed clans fade away in the night because we have deployed overwhelming
force and we go a month without sniping attacks, you could say that the country
is pacified," said a senior Pentagon official who asked not to be identified.
"Then after we get up to leave, the clans could come back out of the woodwork
again."

Officials are also discussing plans to collect weapons from the heavily armed
population by offering rewards. Some 100,000 Somalis are believed to armed with
a variety of American and Russian weapons -- small arms like AK-47 assault
rifles, mortars and rocket-propelled grenades.

In recent years Somalia has also acquired Soviet-made, radar-guided SA-2 and
SA-3 surface-to-air missiles, heat-seeking surface-to-air missiles and American
artillery and anti-tank weapons. But the heavier weapons cannot be maintained
without spare parts, and the main threat is believed to come from the small
arms.

"Between the stuff the Russians and we stuck in there during the great cold war,
there are enough arms in Somalia to fuel hostilities for 100 years," a Pentagon
official said.

But the Pentagon plan concentrates on the delivery of assistance, not disarming
the country. That may prove to be a point of contention in determing when a
"secure environment" has been established.

"We're not looking to go in with guns blazing," the Pentagon spokesman, Pete
Williams, said today. "We're seeking to provide humanitarian relief. I wouldn't
expect a big confrontation."

LOAD-DATE: December 4, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Members of the Army's 10th Mountain Division being immunized at
Fort Drum, N.Y., for possible deployment to Somalia in a relief effort. (Michael
J. Okoniewski for The New York Times) (pg. A1); Gen. Joseph Hoar, the Marine
officer who heads the United States Central Command, leaving the White House
yesterday. (Associated Press) (pg. A14)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              317 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 December 4, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 987 words



International A3-20

U.N. BACKS U.S. MISSION
The U.N. approved a U.S.-led military effort to deliver relief supplies to
Somalia. The White House said the force of 28,000 U.S. troops would return home
quickly, but Pentagon officials were skeptical.  A1

SOMALIS OFFER THEIR VIEWS
News analysis: Many Somalis say the U.S. intervention in their country fails to
address clan violence, economic reconstruction and political reconciliation.  A1




SERBIA VIOLATES FLIGHT BAN
The U.S. says Serbia is violating the U.N. ban on flights over Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Washington is consulting its allies on a resolution authorizing
force to stop the flights.  A1
Yugoslavia's Prime Minister cannot run for President.  A13

SCUFFLE AT RUSSIAN CONGRESS
An attempt by foes of Russia's Government to hold a secret ballot before the
Russian Congress fueled a scuffle at the podium, forcing the Speaker to cut
short the third day of the session.  A3

KOHL SPEAKS OUT ON VIOLENCE
For the first time, Germany's Chancellor acknowledged criticism that he had
reacted too slowly to a wave of rightist violence.  A3

ITALIAN PROSECUTOR FOUND DEAD
One of Italy's most prominent public prosecutors was found dead at his home,
apparently a suicide, four days after newspapers accused him of having links to
the Mafia.  A7

CAR BOMB KILLS 14 COLOMBIANS
A car bomb exploded in Medellin, Colombia, killing at least 14 people, in an
attack that the authorities attributed to drug traffickers.  A20

BOMBING WOUND 64 IN ENGLAND
At least 64 people were wounded in two bombings at rush hour in Manchester.
Suspicions were directed at the I.R.A.  A6

OIL TANKER CRASHES IN SPAIN
An oil tanker crashed onto rocks near a foggy harbor in Spain, breaking apart in
heavy seas and spilling millions of gallons of crude oil.  A9

NO P.O.W.'S LEFT, EX-ADMIRAL SAYS
James B. Stockdale, who ran as Ross Perot's Vice Presidential candidate, said he
was convinced that no U.S. prisoners of war were left behind in North Vietnam
when the U.S. pulled out its ground forces in 1973.  A18

Khmer Rouge rebels freed 6 U.N. peacekeepers.  A10

New Delhi Journal: India is seeking solutions to cope with beggars.  A4

National A22-29, D17-18

G.M. SLASHES AT PARTS PLANTS
General Motors identified nine factories due for shutdown in the next three and
a half years. Because seven of them make parts, the move underscored the
company's commitment to relying heavily on outside suppliers.  A1

NEW STEP ON TEEN-AGE PREGNANCY
Baltimore public health officials plan to offer female students a surgically
implanted contraceptive at clinics in city schools.  A1

POPULATION GROWTH SURGES
The country's population is growing faster than was projected just four years
ago. The Census Bureau now estimates that there will be 383 million Americans by
the year 2050, a 50 percent rise in six decades.  A1

GAIN AGAINST A LETHAL DISEASE
Medical teams won Federal approval to treat cystic fibrosis by inserting genes
into patients' frail airway tissue. If the effort is successful, it could amount
to a cure.  A28

NEW INDUSTRIAL HEALTH RISK
A broad study found that women who are exposed to certain chemicals while
working in the nation's semiconductor factories face a significant risk of
miscarriage.  A29

AS MANY QUESTIONS AS EVER
News analysis: Health-care factions recently at war now seem to be finding
common ground. But the growing consensus is on general principles, not details.
D17

Many health insurers now see opportunities for growth.  D17

CLINTON HUDDLES WITH GREENSPAN
The President-elect met with the Fed chairman to try to arrive at what a Clinton
aide called "a common understanding of the economic situation." D18

Clinton narrowed his list of choices for Interior Secretary.  D18

SOME NASTINESS FROM NATURE
Researchers have concluded that over the long term, the Seattle-Tacoma area
faces a kind of geological triple threat: earthquakes, tsunamis and volcanic
eruption.  A22

CHURCH SETTLES SEX ABUSE SUIT
Sixty-eight men and women who say they were sexually abused by a Roman Catholic
priest as schoolchildren announced that they had reached an out-of-court
settlement with a Massachusetts diocese.  A22

The outcome of a U.S. Senate election is under challenge.  A22

The California National Guard was criticized for its riot response.  A27

Texas failed again to resolve its school financing problem.  A26

An Oregon woman who abandoned her ill father was convicted.  A24

One antipoverty strategy focuses on transportation.  D18

Law Page B20

An unusual, and troubling, case of tax fraud among college students.

Metro Digest B1

SEEKING CHANGES ON HOMELESS
The Deputy Mayor in charge of New York City's homeless policies asked state
officials to loosen state rules -- which he himself helped write -- that have
required the city to provide shelter immediately to all who say they are
homeless.  A1

Sports B7-13

Baseball: Yankees may take another shot at Bonds.  B9

Basketball: San Antonio's "weird duo." B7

Knicks lose another road game.  B7

Column: Vecsey on soccer and hooliganism.  B7

Football: Did spearing play a role in Byrd's injury?  B7

Neediest Cases B5

Business Digest D1

Weekend C1-31

Holiday window-dressing.  C1

The Plaza off screen.  C1

Film: "The Distinguished Gentleman." C1

Obituaries D19

Editorials/Op-Ed A30-31

Editorials

Intervention in Somalia.

Congress can't let George do it.

At last, honest food labels.

Topics: Courage of the Bahais.

Letters

A. M. Rosenthal: In a Serbian prison.

Anthony Lewis: Changing the rules.

James Carville and Paul Begala: It's the candidate, stupid!

LOAD-DATE: December 4, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              318 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 December 4, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Khmer Rouge Rebel Group Frees 6 U.N. Peacekeepers in Cambodia

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHENON,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 10; Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 495 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Friday, Dec. 4


A band of Khmer Rouge guerrillas today released six United Nations military
observers who were taken hostage Tuesday and accused of spying for the Cambodian
Government, the United Nations said.

The peacekeepers -- three from Britain, two from the Philippines and one from
New Zealand -- were freed after a group of Indonesian negotiators provided the
captors with a letter from a local Khmer Rouge commander demanding the release.

The abduction, in Kompong Thom province, raised new alarm among diplomats and
United Nations officials, who have come to fear that the Maoist-inspired rebels
of the Khmer Rouge intend to sabotage a United Nations-sponsored peace
settlement meant to end Cambodia's civil war.

A Sequel to Sanctions

The peacekeepers were taken captive only hours after the United Nations Security
Council voted to impose economic sanctions against the Khmer Rouge over of their
refusal to disarm. The Khmer Rouge, who were responsible for the deaths of more
than a million Cambodians in the 1970's when the rebels controlled the
Government, have refused to disarm under the United Nations peace treaty that
its leaders signed last year.

The six soldiers had been permitted to resume radio contact Thursday with the
United Nations peacekeeping force and were reported to be in good spirits.
"Everybody is fine, they're free," said Eric Falt, a United Nations spokesman in
Cambodia.

A United Nations helicopter that attempted on Wednesday to travel to the scene
of the abduction was fired upon, injuring a passenger, Lieut. Col. Thierry Monet
of France, a senior commander of the United Nations forces. Colonel Monet was
shot in the lower back. After surgery in Phnom Penh, he was reported in good
condition.

The Khmer Rouge say they will not rejoin the peace process until the Supreme
National Council, which includes members from the Khmer Rouge, two other rebel
groups and the Government, is given powers now held exclusively by the
Government.

The Khmer Rouge and the other rebels fought for nearly 13 years to overthrow the
Government, which was installed by Vietnam after its 1978 invasion of Cambodia.

Possible Renegades

Mr. Falt, the United Nations spokesman, said Khmer Rouge commanders had
initially insisted that the abductors in Kompong Thom were not part of the Khmer
Rouge because the group has a strict policy of avoiding confrontation with
United Nations troops.

The spokesman said that, based on initial evidence, it seemed the abductors were
a band of Khmer Rouge rebels acting without authority from senior guerrilla
commanders. "It would seem that this was an independent action," he said.

The captors had initially insisted they would not release the six peacekeepers
until Government troops withdrew from areas near the abduction site. The United
Nations demanded an unconditional release of its soldiers, who were taken
hostage as they observed troop movements from a rubber boat in the Stung Sen
River.

LOAD-DATE: December 4, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              319 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 December 4, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

ALL P.O.W.'s FREED, EX-ADMIRAL SAYS

BYLINE: By STEVEN A. HOLMES,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 18; Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 385 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 3


James B. Stockdale, who ran as Ross Perot's Vice-Presidential candidate, said
today that he is convinced that no American prisoners of war were left behind in
North Vietnam when the United States pulled out its ground forces in 1973.

Mr. Stockdale, a former Naval aviator who was the highest-ranking American held
by the Vietnamese at the Hoa Lo prison in Hanoi, told a Senate committee that
American prisoners had set up an elaborate system to account for inmates in all
prisons throughout North Vietnam.

When North Vietnam released 591 prisoners as part of the Paris peace accords, he
said, all those who had been identified by the other prisoners were let go. "I
have no evidence of anybody that was left intentionally or is alive," he added.

He stressed, however, that his knowledge related only to prisoners in North
Vietnam, not those in Laos.

The retired admiral's testimony before the Senate Select Committee on
P.O.W.-M.I.A. Affairs may help debunk persistent reports that Americans soldiers
or aviators were left when the United States withdrew. Mr. Stockdale was the
leader of Americans held at Hoa Lo, known as the "Hanoi Hilton."

Mr. Stockdale is given another measure of credibility because of his affiliation
with Mr. Perot, one of the strongest advocates for missing American prisoners in
Southeast Asia. His wife, Sybil Stockdale, was a founder of the National League
of Families, the largest organization of family members of missing servicemen.

                             --------------------


China to Aid Search

BEIJING, Dec. 3 (AP) -- China has agreed to receive a team that will investigate
reports of American servicemen listed as missing or held prisoner in the Korean
and Vietnam wars, Senator David L. Boren said today.

The Oklahoma Democrat said Chinese officials will allow investigators to visit
sites in China where American pilots were reported to have crash-landed in the
Vietnam War.

Washington has no evidence that any prisoners remain alive in China, said Mr.
Boren, who is visiting China.

But intelligence informants have said American prisoners in the Korean War were
taken to China. Beijing says that 21 American soldiers came at their own request
and that two remain. One, identified as James Veneris, has taught English at a
Chinese university.

LOAD-DATE: December 4, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              320 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 December 4, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

On Stage, and Off

BYLINE: By Bruce Weber

SECTION: Section C; Page 2; Column 3; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1449 words



Seeking a Stage for 'Angels'

Imagine that you are a 36-year-old playwright, used to struggling with words on
a page in the relative obscurity common to the profession. You are at work on a
mammoth project, political in theme, historical in scope, fantastical in its
theatrics, savage in its humor and, not incidentally, homosexual in its outlook.
You are experimenting with the work out of town, and at more or less the moment
you realize that there is much work to be done -- vast rewriting on the second
half of the play and a restaging of the whole thing -- it becomes uncomfortably
evident that your work is to be the main event of the New York drama season.
Broadway theater owners squire you around their theaters. Producers woo you. The
New Yorker magazine profiles you. Reporters seek you out. All this for a play
that was to come to the Joseph Papp Public Theater in early February.

This, essentially, was Tony Kushner's Thanksgiving as he mulled the future of
his two-part, seven-hour opus, "Angels in America: A Gay Fantasia on National
Themes," while shuttling among New York City; Dusseldorf, Germany (where the
Royal National Theater's production of "Millennium Approaches," Part 1 of
"Angels," played four performances), and Los Angeles, where "Angels" has been
extended through Sunday at the Mark Taper Forum. Decisions about who will
produce, who will direct, what theater the play will land in and whether both
halves of the play will arrive at the same time are expected by Monday.

"I haven't seen the show in a month, and I need to go back and look at it one
more time," Mr. Kushner said before leaving New York for a weekend in Los
Angeles.

What has been confirmed is that the Los Angeles directors, Oskar Eustiss and
Tony Taccone, and the set designer, John Conklin, will not accompany the play to
New York, and that among those who have been considered to direct the show here
is George C. Wolfe. With Mr. Kushner's acknowledgment that Part 2,
"Perestroika," will require a month's worth of rewriting, these changes
virtually guarantee that the production will not arrive in New York on its
original schedule.

"It's more likely for March or April," said Gordon Davidson, the artistic
director of the Center Theater Group in Los Angeles, which is putting on the
play at the Taper and is collaborating on the New York production. "To proceed
in logical fashion, one would like to set the director, then talk about the
creative team and where we will do what. But what we want to do is come to
closure on the theater, no matter what."

The delay also bodes ill for the Public's chance to get the play. "The Public
hasn't totally been ruled out," Mr. Davidson said, "because what's the point
until you know exactly? But the Public timetable was predicated on our picking
up what was here and moving it."

Mr. Kushner said that the Public was still in the running, but that to move the
play there first would probably mean keeping it there, ostensibly because the
Broadway theaters would balk at getting the play on the bounce, after the
initial publicity had dissipated.

"My tarot cards say I should go to the Public, but I'm not sure I'm going to
listen to the tarot cards," Mr. Kushner said with a weary laugh.

Meanwhile, all three Broadway theater owners' groups have bid for the play. The
Nederlander Organization has offered the Nederlander Theater, although most
people close to the negotiations say that choice is unlikely because of the
theater's out-of-the-power-loop location on West 41st Street. Jujamcyn Theaters
has offered the Walter Kerr. The Shubert Organization has had Mr. Kushner tour
an array of theaters with the likeliest possibilities being the Booth (where it
is generally thought that the current tenant, "Someone Who'll Watch Over Me,"
won't last until spring) and the Royale, which could be available should
"Conversations With My Father" not survive the impending cast change from Judd
Hirsch to Jim Belushi.

"We were showing off," said Philip J. Smith, Shubert's executive vice president,
referring to the theater tour. "And it was an education for Kushner. He gets up
on the stage; he sits in the theater; he runs up and down; he enjoys himself."
Asked what the organization would do if Mr. Kushner requested an occupied
theater, Mr. Smith said, "We'll work out something, and we won't bruise anyone
in the process."

Jujamcyn, meanwhile, is pitching Mr. Kushner its reputation for long,
career-nurturing associations with playwrights, notably August Wilson, and
paying particular attention to Mr. Kushner's stated wish to stage the play in an
inviting venue for the downtown gay and lesbian community.

Rocco Landesman, the president of Jujamcyn, said he would bring only "Millennium
Approaches" to New York in the spring and would budget development money for
"Perestroika."

"If we produce it," he added, "we'll aggressively market it, with discounts, so
people downtown can come uptown and don't go broke in the process." To that end,
at the suggestion of the independent producer Ben Mordecai, Jujamcyn is
currently financing an audience survey at the Taper, in hopes of finding clues
to marketing the play successfully. "I assume Jujamcyn won't pay to process the
results unless they get the play," Mr. Mordecai said.

On the brink of his decision, Mr. Kushner offered a bit of self-deprecating
hyperbole to describe the last few weeks. "I've been wandering in the desert,
eating a lot of locusts, wearing a hair shirt," he said. "I'm a little
fartootst."

Raising the 'Redwood Curtain'

"Redwood Curtain," Lanford Wilson's three-character drama about a Vietnamese
teen-ager's search for her father, a former American soldier, is apparently
coming to Broadway at last. Expected to arrive last spring, it was undermined by
an internecine battle at the Circle Repertory Company over whether the company
could afford to produce the play itself.

Now the play, which has had runs in Seattle and Philadelphia, has been recast
(with Jeff Daniels as the Vietnam veteran and, most likely, a newcomer, Sung Yun
Cho, as the teen-age girl; Debra Monk continues as the girl's adoptive aunt) and
recapitalized at $950,000 (without Circle's financial involvement). It is
scheduled to open on March 29 at the Brooks Atkinson Theater, with a
pre-Broadway run in San Diego.

"The primary problem before was the financial pressure on Circle Rep," said Ben
Mordecai, a producer of the show with Circle Rep, Robert Cole, William Suter and
James Nederlander, who owns the Atkinson. "They were being forced to make
decisions about expending cash up front -- for art design, direct mail --
without capitalization in place. This time around we can deal with things in a
more practical way." Mr. Mordecai said that not all the deals for the
capitalization money have been closed, "but we're feeling very good."

The dispute last spring resulted in the resignation of Max Weitzenhoffer as
Circle Rep's board chairman. He had opposed Mr. Wilson, the director, Marshall
W. Mason, and Circle's artistic director, Tanya Berezin -- all of whom were
founding members of Circle Rep -- in their effort to get the board to provide
$120,000 in support. "A lot of time and effort was being made on behalf of this
show to the detriment of the company," Mr. Weitzenhoffer said this week, adding
that he thought the play was better suited for Off Broadway than on.

The final straw came at a board meeting last spring when Mr. Weitzenhoffer was
given a letter by Mr. Wilson, Mr. Mason and Ms. Berezin (all of whom are board
members), suggesting the board had let them down.

"It was one of the nastiest letters I ever received," said Mr. Weitzenhoffer,
who has not been to a board meeting since June and said he has been considering
resigning from the board altogether.

Ms. Berezin said the wounds suffered by the company have largely healed. "The
board had been mainly concerned about the financial health of the company,
without thinking about how the finances could be nurtured by the artistic
development of the company," she said. "There wasn't much communication, and
that's probably as much my fault as anybody's. But there's been much
reconciliation in the end. Now, as artistic director, I feel supported by the
board."

It doesn't hurt, she added, that the company is no longer at financial risk with
"Redwood Curtain."

Open Call for 'No Shame'

"No Shame," the Public Theater's Saturday late-night series of performance
sketches, is holding an open call for performers with a wish to exhibit their
wildest experiments. "The more bizarre, the better," said a spokesman for the
Public, Bruce Campbell. Auditions are Monday at noon.

LOAD-DATE: December 4, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH



GRAPHIC: Al Hirschfeld, whose sketches of performers have become a mark of
achievement for those so honored, will himself be honored on Monday at the Stage
Directors and Choreographers' annual fund-raiser at Laura Belle, 120 West 43d
Street. On display (and on sale) will be caricatures of Mr. Hirschfeld by 13
Broadway stars, including the one above, by Kevin Kline. Information: (212)
302-5359.
Photo: "Turning the Tables"

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              321 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 5, 1992, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

MISSION TO SOMALIA;
Bush Declares Goal in Somalia to 'Save Thousands'

BYLINE: By MICHAEL WINES,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1; Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1304 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 4


President Bush ordered troops into Somalia today on a mission to "save thousands
of innocents," as the Pentagon outlined an operation that will leave soldiers
and marines in Somalia well into the Administration of President Bill Clinton.

Mr. Bush gathered broad support for the intervention from top leaders of
Congress, from other world leaders and from Mr. Clinton himself, and then went
on television at midday to announce an operation that thrusts the United States
into a new post-cold-war role as a military force on behalf of humanitarian, not
strategic ends.

"I understand the United States alone cannot right the world's wrongs," Mr. Bush
declared in his speech, delivered just 47 days before he leaves office. "But we
also know that some crises in the world cannot be resolved without American
involvement, that American action is often necessary as a catalyst for broader
involvement of the community of nations." [Transcript, page 4.]

28,000 Troops Going

Military leaders said they would send 28,000 troops into Somalia, beginning next
week and proceeding in four stages. The State Department said that Britain,
Belgium, France, Canada, Pakistan and Jordan would also contribute troops or
supplies and that Germany and Japan, among others, were expected to contribute
money and perhaps equipment.

But the bulk of the force will be American. Administration officials expressed
hope that the United States could begin to hand off some of the country to the
existing United Nations peacekeeping operation before Mr. Clinton is inaugurated
on Jan. 20, but it was clear that the new President would inherit an ongoing
military operation.

Defense Secretary Dick Cheney and Gen. Colin L. Powell, Chairman of the Joint
Chiefs of Staff, said at a news briefing that American support troops and
marines stationed on ships off shore would be left on duty for an undetermined
period to act as a deterrent to Somalia's warring clans even after most of the
American expeditionary force was withdrawn. [Page 5.]

Bush Seeks a Balance

Mr. Bush ordered the start of the operation after days of consultations with his
top advisers and heads of other countries. He had sought to strike a balance
between his desire to begin a big enough operation to insure minimal risk and
the approaching political reality of his departure from office.

"Only the United States," he said, "has the global reach to place a large
security force on the ground in such a distant place quickly and efficiently
and, thus, save thousands of innocents from death."

Mr. Bush emphasized in his speech that American troops would not seek to
influence Somalia's political crisis, but that they would also not allow
themselves to become targets for harassment or attack from factions in the
country's tribal wars.

"Our mission is humanitarian," he said, but commanders will "take whatever
military action is necessary to safeguard the lives of our troops and the lives
of Somalia's people."

General Powell later said that includes the right to stage pre-emptive strikes
against threats to American forces.

Mr. Bush said: "The outlaw elements in Somalia must understand this is serious
business. We will accomplish our mission. We have no intent to remain in Somalia
with fighting forces, but we are determined to do it right -- to secure an
environment that will allow food to get to the starving people of Somalia."

Appeal by President

The President sought to convince Congressional leaders and the public that the
American role in the Somali relief effort was both morally necessary and
reasonably painless.

He said American forces "will not stay one day longer than is absolutely
necessary" to end the looting and attacks that have hampered the delivery of
food and other supplies to starving Somalis. And he told House and Senate
leaders that the Pentagon anticipates little serious resistance, that commanders
have broad leeway to defend themselves if threatened, and that the costs of the
operation will be offset, at least in part, by foreign donations.

General Powell said he hoped to have most American forces in place in Somalia by
early January and to "see our way clear of this operation in a few months."

But he quickly hedged that prediction with a bundle of conditions and, in some
cases, contradictions. He said a contingent of marines and Navy support forces
would probably have to remain off the Somali coast as a "posse" ready to move
back in should trouble erupt later. He said "a few units" of ground forces would
remain in Somalia indefinitely to support United Nations peacekeepers, who are
expected to take over once the flow of relief once the country is made secure.

He refused to be tied down either to a specific date on which the American
presence in Somalia will end, or a cap on the number of troops that eventually
will be deployed there.

To the contrary, General Powell suggested that the initial deployment of 28,000
troops was based on plans to impose order and distribute relief supplies only in
southern Somalia, the region most ravaged by famine and strife among warring
clans.

"We will keep our eye on the north," he said, and decide later whether a similar
military effort is needed to assure the safe passage of food and medical aid
there.

"Don't concentrate so much on the numbers as on the fact that we will send what
is necessary to accomplish the mission and to take care of our troops and do it
in the most efficient way we possibly can," he said. "These numbers may go up
considerably. They may be lower."

General Powell said he believed that only a few American troops would likely
remain in Somalia after the initial military operation, and that they would in
effect serve as an appendix to the United Nations peacekeeping effort.

One Senator Is Critical

One of the few dissenters at a White House briefing for Congressional leaders
this morning, Senator Hank Brown of Colorado, said later that he believed that
Mr. Bush had committed American forces "without clear, precise military
objectives." Without a stated date to end the operation, a limit to American
involvement and well-defined rules governing their authority, he said, the
troops face some of the same dangers that other American forces faced in Vietnam
and Lebanon.

Mr. Brown was especially critical of the United States' primary role in the
invasion, saying troops from a Muslim country should have led any invasion into
Somalia, which is mostly Islamic.

In addition to the six nations that have pledged troops or supplies to the
effort, African and Arab nations are expected to announce their own commitments
soon, officials said.

Mr. Brown said, "The vast majority of the people at the meeting were in favor of
the President's action," a view echoed by the Speaker of the House, Thomas S.
Foley, a Washington Democrat.

Mr. Foley said Mr. Bush "has acted wisely and in a circumstance where he had
very little choice without grave humanitarian consequences resulting." While
House and Senate committees will monitor the American military operation, he
said he did not foresee any urgent need to hold hearings or enact resolutions to
certify support for the White House's decision.

Mr. Clinton was briefed on the Somalia operation today by the Defense
Department, the Central Intelligence Agency and the State Department. Later, he
emphatically approved Mr. Bush's decision, saying in a written statement,
"Impediments to delivery of relief supplies and particularly looting of
life-saving food supplies simply must not be allowed to continue."

"The mandate our armed forces and our partners in the coalition will fulfill is
to create a secure environment to save lives," Mr. Clinton said, "and I commend
President Bush for his leadership on this important humanitarian effort."

LOAD-DATE: December 5, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: President Bush ordered the deployment of 28,000 troops in the
American-led mission to Somalia. Lance Cpl. Matthew Hindman cleaned his weapon
yesterday at Camp Pendleton, Calif. (Jim Wilson/The New York Times)(pg. 4)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              322 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 5, 1992, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

MISSION TO SOMALIA;
Crossing a Line, and Redrawing It

BYLINE: By THOMAS L. FRIEDMAN,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1; Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1209 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 4


The decision to intervene in Somalia marks a turning point in American foreign
policy: for the first time American troops are entering a country uninvited, not
to shore up an anti-Communist regime, protect American wealth or stifle a
strategic threat, but simply to feed starving people.

President Bush, with the enthusiastic backing of President-elect Clinton, has
crossed a red line.

He has said in effect that because the United States is now the world's only
remaining superpower it cannot ignore responsibility for grave humanitarian
crises in which American actions, and only American actions, could well mean the
difference between life and death for hundreds of thousands of people. Even
though the United States has no military, economic or political interests at
stake in such crises, it must respond anyway, he said.

The problem is that if halting starvation or upholding human rights are now
legitimate criteria for American intervention abroad, as compelling as
protecting traditional strategic interests, where does President-elect Clinton
draw the new red line? How much starvation is necessary, or how bad does the
human-rights situation have to become, to justify American action? If Somalia,
why not Bosnia, and if Bosnia, why not Kurdistan, and if Kurdistan, why not
Haiti?

The question has particular poignancy for Mr. Clinton, who entered politics as a
student leader fighting against the old rationale for military intervention in
Vietnam and now must fashion a new rationale as the opening act of his
Presidency.

In an era when America is facing no overwhelming strategic threats from abroad,
and when it can afford to let its ideals increasingly govern its foreign policy,
it will become critical for the Clinton Administration to explain not only where
it chooses to intervene, but also where it chooses not to intervene. Otherwise,
every area of the world will come clamoring for help.

Interests and Principles

"The challenge for the Clinton Presidency will be twofold," said Michael J.
Sandel, a political theorist at Harvard University. "On the one hand, he will
have to articulate clearly the principles on behalf of which we may need to
intervene -- whether it is upholding human rights, averting starvation or
promoting democracy."

But on the other hand, said Mr. Sandel, those principles will have to be
tempered by some sober practical considerations about where Washington can be
effective at a cost that is tolerable to the American public.

"Clinton will have to be honest with the American people about both the
principles justifying intervention and the practical considerations that might
restrain such action," Mr. Sandel said. "Otherwise he will seem inconsistent and
hypocritical and ultimately undermine the domestic consensus for intervention."

During his tenure, Mr. Bush tried to make those distinctions with his deeds
instead of his words. First he intervened to rescue Kuwait, after an invasion by
Iraq, which marked the first time since the Korean War that American troops led
a coalition abroad to uphold the United Nations Charter and the principle of the
sanctity of international borders.

That step forward, though, was made easier by the fact that behind the
diplomatic principles at stake in the Persian Gulf were also the hardcore
American interests in oil flows and strategic concerns about Iraq's growing
arsenal.

Intervening in Somalia, though, goes one step further. In effect, Mr. Bush,
through his actions in Iraq and Somalia, has now defined his vision of the
boundaries of American post-cold-war intervention.

Necessity of U.S. Action

There are the cases, Iraq for example, where principles and major strategic
interests are at stake, which virtually demand that Washington organize an
international coalition to respond. And there are the cases, Somalia for
example, where there are principles and no strategic interests at stake -- or
real opposition forces on the ground -- which make it relatively easy for
Washington to organize an international coalition to respond.

The struggle comes in dealing with problems that fall in between the poles of
Iraq and Somalia. In Bosnia, for example, there are just enough strategic
interests and human rights at stake to draw world attention and invite action.
But there are too many armed forces on the ground to make such an intervention
easy and the strategic interest at stake for the United States is not major but
rather limited, and thus cannot justify the potential costs in American lives.

Mr. Bush came about as close as he ever will to detailing the new rationale for
American foreign policy when he said today: "In taking this action, I want to
emphasize that I understand the United States alone cannot right the world's
wrongs, but we also know that some crises in the world cannot be resolved
without American involvement, that American action is often necessary as a
catalyst for broader involvement of the community of nations."

Mr. Clinton has so far preferred to avoid any detailed description of his own
vision. Today he had his spokesman, George Stephanopoulos, read a short
statement in which he underscored his support for "President Bush's decision."
When Mr. Stephanopoulos was asked later about whether that was a harbinger of
the Clinton foreign policy, he said: "Well, I don't know if I can comment on
that kind of a hypothetical. But at the moment, Governor Clinton supports this
operation."

Clinton aides say privately that they are increasingly aware that while Mr. Bush
is making the tough decision to go in, it is Mr. Clinton who will be saddled
with the even tougher decision of how to get out. And they are growing worried
about how it could divert Mr. Clinton from his campaign vow to remain focused
like a "laser beam" on the economy.

They should be. Harry Truman first described the American intervention in Korea
as a "police action." His successor, Dwight D. Eisenhower, found it to be
something rather larger.

And even if Mr. Clinton finds he can withdraw the American troops from Somalia
early in his term, as Mr. Bush suggested, that may not be the end of the story.

Ronald Reagan could attest to that. On Aug. 25, 1982, Mr. Reagan dispatched 800
Marines to Beirut to ease the withdrawal of Palestinian guerrillas in the wake
of the Israeli invasion. He promised that they would only stay for a maximum of
30 days. So anxious was Mr. Reagan to get the American troops out that he
withdrew them two weeks before the 30-day deadline, as soon as the guerrillas
had gone.

Four days later, Christian militiamen stepped into the vacuum and massacred
hundreds of Palestinians at the Sabra and Shatila refugee districts.

Two days after that, the Reagan Administration, racked with guilt for having
pulled American troops out too early, ordered them back without any preparation
or strategic rationale. Only after 241 American servicemen were blown up in a
suicide-bombing 17 months later were the forces finally withdrawn.

But the lesson remained: that in accepting leadership for an international
relief effort, whether in Lebanon or Somalia, the world's only superpower may
assume a moral obligation for events that lasts well beyond the withdrawal of
American forces.

LOAD-DATE: December 5, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Gen. Colin L. Powell outlining plans yesterday for the dispatch
of American troops to Somalia. (Jose R. Lopez/The New York Times)(pg. 1)

TYPE: News Analysis

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              323 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 5, 1992, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Khmer Rouge Frees 6 U.N. Soldiers in Cambodia

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHENON,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 3; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 452 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Dec. 4


Khmer Rouge guerrillas today freed six United Nations military observers who had
been held captive in central Cambodia this week and warned the United Nations to
keep its peacekeeping troops out of Khmer Rouge areas.

The peacekeepers -- three from Britain, two from the Philippines and one from
New Zealand -- were abducted on Tuesday in an incident that increased United
Nations concern that the Khmer Rouge were on the verge of resuming a full-scale
civil war.

On Thursday night, Khmer Rouge radio said the group agreed to free the soldiers
even though it believed that they had "spied, taken photos and located
coordinates" to assist Vietnam and the Vietnamese-installed central Government
of Cambodia.

The rebel broadcast said the 22,000-member United Nations force in Cambodia "is
actively cooperating with Vietnam and the puppet regime in military, diplomatic,
economic and propaganda fields to put the nation and the people of Cambodia to
death."

The Khmer Rouge were responsible for the deaths of more than one million
Cambodians when it controlled the central government from 1975 to 1979, a reign
of terror that was ended by a Vietnamese invasion.

Challenge to U.N. Authority

The seizure of the six military observers in central Kompong Thom province,
where they were on a mission to observe troop movements by the Khmer Rouge and
the Cambodian Army, was the most serious challenge to date to the authority of
the United Nations peacekeeping force that was dispatched to Cambodia under
terms of a peace settlement negotiated by the United Nations last year.

Diplomats and United Nations military officials say they are still uncertain
whether the band of rebels who abducted the peacekeepers were acting on their
own authority or on orders from senior Khmer Rouge officials.

At a news conference at Phnom Penh airport after his release, Lieut. Col. Mark
Walton of Britain said he believed that the abductors had initially been acting
independently but that Khmer Rouge commanders later became involved. The leader
of the team of abductors "was definitely in communication with a higher
authority," Colonel Walton said.

The Khmer Rouge said in their radio broadcast that the abductors had acted
appropriately in seizing the peacekeepers since, it said, the United Nations
soldiers were "spying" on behalf of the central Government. "And we have already
warned them several times not to enter into these areas without prior
permission," the rebel radio said.

The abduction came only hours after the United Nations Security Council voted to
impose economic sanctions on the Khmer Rouge, which has refused to disarm under
terms of the peace treaty their leaders signed last year.

LOAD-DATE: December 5, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              324 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 December 6, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Editor's Choice

SECTION: Section 7; Page 3; Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1981 words


THERE are nine titles on the Best Books of the Year list: four novels, one by a
British writer, one by a Canadian and two by Americans; a volume of three
connected stories by an American poet; a biography of Henry Kissinger by an
American journalist; a historical essay by an American historian on the most
famous Presidential speech; a grand old writer's posthumous account of a tragic
forest fire; and a history of a battle over scientific ideas by a British
philosopher who has become a scientist.

They were chosen by 11 editors of The Book Review from a list of 36 nominated by
the editors themselves from among books reviewed since last year's Christmas
Books issue.

Agreement came only after 12 long weekly meetings, and an unusual number of
books rose or fell by one or two votes. More than ever, in their judgment about
the books editors maintained a stubborn independence from the opinions of the
reviewers of the books. Thus, while the descriptions of the best books given
here are drawn from the reviews that appeared in The Book Review -- as they
always have been -- this year they are drawn more often from the letter than
from the spirit.

If an earlier part of a multivolume work has appeared on a previous Best Books
list, subsequent volumes are not considered for later lists. And diaries and
letters -- collections of writings not intended by their authors to be books --
are not eligible for nomination. But 1992 may be remembered more for volumes of
letters than for any other kind of book. There was the great collection of
correspondence of Gustave Courbet, as episodic, exciting and turbulent as almost
any of the big 19th-century novels. And there were letters of Albert Einstein,
Albert Schweitzer, Oskar Kokoschka, Rolfe Humphries and Bertrand Russell, as
well as exchanges of letters between Evelyn Waugh and Lady Diana Cooper, Simone
de Beauvoir and Jean-Paul Sartre, Vita Sackville-West and Harold Nicolson, and
Hannah Arendt and Karl Jaspers.

The Best Books are not included in the list of Notable Books of the Year, which
begins on page 57.

THE ANT AND THE PEACOCK
Altruism and Sexual Selection From Darwin to Today.
By Helena Cronin.
Cambridge University Press.

Helena Cronin, who studied philosophy before she became a researcher in zoology
at the University of Oxford, is a lucid explainer of science for readers with no
scientific training; she brings to her engaging book the spirited style of a
naturally gifted writer. The ant of her title stands for the conundrum of
altruism -- why certain creatures sacrifice themselves for others; and the
peacock stands for the puzzle of sex differences -- why some male animals are
dangerously ornamented. Charles Darwin and Alfred Russel Wallace independently
discovered evolution and published their theories together in 1858. But they
disagreed deeply on how to explain altruism and sex differences in the light of
natural selection; their disagreements continue among evolutionists today. Ms.
Cronin's pursuit of the conflicting ideas is a surprising adventure, a
revelation of how scientists think. Her book is a fascinating history of the
development of scientific theory and the growth of a global scientific
community.

THE ENGLISH PATIENT
By Michael Ondaatje.
Alfred A. Knopf.

Four people left behind in a Tuscan villa as World War II sweeps north out of
Italy grapple for a truth no human being can ever find: an Englishman slowly
dying of burns from an airplane crash, a Canadian nurse stubbornly caring for
him, a friend of her family who is a professional thief turned military spy and
a Sikh soldier in the British Army charged with defusing hidden German bombs and
mines. These people are so brilliantly drawn and singular they seem like icons
in a mosaic, representing innocence, passion, loss and endurance. The
kinesthetic quality of the descriptions of air warfare and bomb disposal in the
novel gives an eerie beauty to scenes that make chills run through a reader, but
the author's probing of his characters' inner passions fills one with even more
apprehension. In the end this intensely theatrical tour de force reveals, if not
a great peace at the heart of the human mystery, a vision of how heroic the
struggle is.

JAZZ
By Toni Morrison.
Alfred A. Knopf.

With her customary virtuosity Toni Morrison brings us into the heart of Harlem
early in this century, a Harlem permeated with the thrum of the music evoked by
her title, a Harlem to which black people fleeing from fear in other places came
to find their riskier selves. Her episodic novel, played out in intense prose
rhythms, is about three people who came together simply because they were put
down together -- powerless innocents enchanted and deceived by the music of the
world, who believed life would be good to them. A cosmetics salesman, the son of
a wild cave woman, purveys illusion until he himself is caught in a romantic
illusion spun by a foxy teen-ager whom he kills. His wife, luxuriating in the
thralldom of jealousy and obsessed by longing for the baby she never had, seeks
to possess the image, memory and soul of the dead girl. Ms. Morrison always
conjures up worlds with complete authority; this time it is a world without soft
lights or shadows, drawn in the bold strokes of a poster.

KISSINGER
A Biography.
By Walter Isaacson.
Simon & Schuster.

Henry Kissinger has not wielded power in Washington for 16 years, but curiosity
about him remains so intense that he continues to be one of the most famous
people in the world. When Walter Isaacson began work on this book, the former
Secretary of State became so intrigued he opened up access to friends and
records and gave the Time magazine editor many hours of interviews. That may
have been one of his gravest miscalculations ever. Based on enormous
documentation and years of interviews, this biography, in range and research, is
the book to end all books on Mr. Kissinger. It is compulsive, and compulsory,
reading. As the evidence accumulates, it becomes a devastating portrait of a
refugee from Nazi Germany who became one of the most admired men in America. But
he profoundly distrusted the politics of popular democracy, here and in other
countries, and he joined with President Richard M. Nixon to run the Government
as if it were a two-man conspiracy.

LINCOLN AT GETTYSBURG
The Words That Remade America.
By Garry Wills.
Simon & Schuster.

In this brief, bracing and provocative book, Garry Wills, the historian and
columnist, argues that in the Gettysburg Address Abraham Lincoln, with
consummate skill, changed the Constitution from within, making the hope it
embodies triumph over its words by insinuating the ringing affirmation of
equality from the Declaration of Independence into people's minds as the
foundation of the American Government. Single-handedly he made Jefferson and the
signers of the Declaration the true founding fathers of the nation and created
the notion of a national citizenship. Mr. Wills demonstrates word by word that,
in a century when orators were steeped in the classical traditions of formal
speech, Lincoln was the greatest master of all; he created a revolution in style
so effective that all modern political prose is indebted to the Gettysburg
Address.

THE LOST UPLAND
By W. S. Merwin.
Alfred A. Knopf.

With the agile eloquence of the impassioned poet he is, W. S. Merwin, in three
stories that form a pastoral epic, draws readers into the lives of people in the
Dordogne region of southwest France where he has had a house for several
decades. He creates a texture of soil and water, vine and garden, castle and
hovel, mist, sunshine and moonlit shadows so sensuous that one feels one has
known this upland for a lifetime. Mr. Merwin is adept at treating human behavior
as part of nature and at fashioning a sense of place from people's conduct.
These people view the unwelcome present through the prism of the past, thus the
title of the book and the sweet longing it leaves behind. The truffle-rich foie
gras of one village permeates a tale of gossip, decadence and genteel rascality
in the first story; the taste and smell of a vintner's private cru seep into the
last, about the waning of an old culture. And in the middle story Dordogne
shepherds are transformed into heroes of the struggle we all wage against time,
with greater zest the more we realize no one ever wins it.

OUTERBRIDGE REACH
By Robert Stone.
Ticknor & Fields.

An unsettling moral proposition can be glimpsed behind this novel: that seeing
through everything and believing in nothing may be the most stupid way to cheat
oneself of life. An advertising copywriter for a boat company -- he is a
middle-aged Vietnam veteran and a parody of a Hemingway hero -- volunteers to
sail solo around the world in a race after the company's owner, who was to make
the race, disappears. The adman's wife suppresses her fears about the adventure
and decides it may revitalize her husband and their marriage. But a film maker
producing a documentary about the boat has an affair with her while her husband
battles the sea alone. Even richer in literary allusions than Mr. Stone's other
books, and told in a gritty idiom, this shapely novel has great power. Like a
thriller it makes us care intensely about what will happen next and who will be
hurt. And it is impossible to read the last dazzling hundred pages without
feeling something terrible has happened and no one is to blame.

REGENERATION
By Pat Barker.
A William Abrahams Book/Dutton.

Pat Barker has been the model of a working-class realistic novelist, but here
she leaps the lines of gender, class, geography and history at once. And she
takes another daring chance: her novel is about real people who published their
own memoirs. "Regeneration" is the story of the British poet Siegfried Sassoon,
a World War I combat hero who in 1917 writes a highly publicized letter
protesting the war and is sent by a baffled Government to a hospital where the
distinguished neurologist and psychologist W. H. R. Rivers is pioneering
treatments for shell shock. As an intense father-son relationship develops
between the men, Ms. Barker's themes -- war and madness, war and manhood -- make
the madness of war more than metaphor. But, in the tradition of literary
realism, she confronts reality without polemics, anger or artifice. Her story
becomes a magnificent antiwar novel and a wonderful justification of her belief
that plain writing, energized by the named things of the world, will change
readers profoundly by bringing them deep into imagined lives.

YOUNG MEN & FIRE
By Norman Maclean.
University of Chicago Press.

This great book about young firefighters who parachuted into a 1949 Montana
forest fire shortly before it blew up into a firestorm that killed 13 of them is
a magnificent drama of writing, a tragedy that pays tribute to the dead and
offers rescue to the living. Norman Maclean was 74 years old in 1976 when he
began a quest to discover what really happened in the fire, and ill health in
his last few years prevented him from completing his book before he died at 88.
But, if it lacks the finish he wanted to give it, "Young Men & Fire" has searing
power. Maclean's search for the truth, which becomes an exploration of his own
mortality, is more compelling even than his journey into the heart of the fire.
His description of the conflagration terrifies, but it is his battle with words,
his effort to turn the story of the 13 men into tragedy, that makes the book a
classic. He does not try to win a brawl with truth but to pay his respects to
it. He struggles openly and dramatically with the literary forms of tragedy,
allowing into his notion of the tragic uncertainty, mystery, even absurdity --
in a word, the modern condition. In the end he has let us see how all true
artists work.

LOAD-DATE: December 6, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              325 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 December 6, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

A Noteworthy Collection

BYLINE: By LAUREL GRAEBER

SECTION: Section 7; Page 86; Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 2318 words


This selection of paperbacks is from the New & Noteworthy column since the 1992
summer reading issue. It includes novels, stories, poetry, biography, memoirs,
essays, travel and current affairs.

AFRICAN SILENCES, by Peter Matthiessen. (Vintage, $10.) Three essays on the
disappearance of African wildlife, based on trips by the author.

AFRICAN VISAS: A Novella and Stories, by Maria Thomas. (Soho, $10.95.) A
posthumous collection by an American writer who lived in and loved Africa.


AGE OF IRON, by J. M. Coetzee. (Vintage International, $10.) A novel in which a
dying South African woman recognizes her own complicity in apartheid.


BACKLASH: The Undeclared War Against American Women, by Susan Faludi.
(Anchor/Doubleday, $12.50.) The ways in which sexism is striking back.


BEYOND DESERVING, by Sandra Scofield. (Plume, $10.) A novel about Oregon women
who prefer their men a little rough around the edges.


BLOOD MEMORY, by Martha Graham. (Washington Square/Pocket Books, $12.) Her own
account of a life devoted to dance.


BLOOD OF BROTHERS: Life and War in Nicaragua, by Stephen Kinzer.
(Anchor/Doubleday, $14.) The complete history of the Sandinista decade.


THE BOOKMAKER'S DAUGHTER: A Memory Unbound, by Shirley Abbott. (Ticknor &
Fields, $10.95.) A memoir of a father whose shady profession masked a real love
of books.


BRINGING DOWN THE GREAT WALL: Writings on Science, Culture, and Democracy in
China, by Fang Lizhi. Edited and principally translated by James H. Williams.
(Norton, $10.95.) An expatriate scientist and former dissident reflects on his
country.


BROKEN VESSELS, by Andre Dubus. (Godine, $11.95.) A book of essays by a noted
writer of fiction.


BROTHERLY LOVE, by Pete Dexter. (Penguin, $10.) A novel about a family tragedy
in South Philadelphia.


BY HER OWN HAND: Memoirs of a Suicide's Daughter, by Signe Hammer. (Vintage,
$10.) A woman struggles to understand her mother, who killed herself when the
author was 9 years old.


CHAIN REACTION: The Impact of Race, Rights, and Taxes on American Politics, by
Thomas Byrne Edsall with Mary D. Edsall. (Norton, $10.95.) Where the Republicans
and the Democrats have both gone wrong.


COLD WARRIOR. James Jesus Angleton: The CIA's Master Spy Hunter, by Tom Mangold.
(Touchstone/ Simon & Schuster, $13.) The career of the C.I.A.'s chief of
counterintelligence from 1954 to 1974.


CONSCIOUSNESS EXPLAINED, by Daniel C. Dennett. (Little, Brown, $14.95.) A
scientist explains how and why we think.

CUBA: A Journey, by Jacobo Timerman. Translated by Toby Talbot. (Vintage, $9.)
An Argentine journalist takes a hard look at the Castro regime.


DARCY'S UTOPIA, by Fay Weldon. (Penguin, $9.) Wry fiction about a feminist
new-age utopia.


DAUGHTERS, by Paule Marshall. (Plume, $11.) The black heroine challenges her
father -- and patriarchy.


DEAD CERTAINTIES: (Unwarranted Speculations), by Simon Schama. (Vintage, $12.)
Historical events examined by a number of fictional narrators.


DEADLINE: A Memoir, by James Reston. (Times Books/Random House, $14.) The
columnist and former chief of The New York Times's Washington bureau recalls his
scoops.


DEN OF THIEVES, by James B. Stewart. (Touchstone/Simon & Schuster, $12.) The
author shows why this was a fitting name for Wall Street in the 1980's.


THE DEVIL'S CANDY: "The Bonfire of the Vanities" Goes to Hollywood, by Julie
Salamon. (Delta, $12.50.) Why Tom Wolfe's novel was a celluloid flop.


THE DREAM AT THE END OF THE WORLD: Paul Bowles and the Literary Renegades in
Tangier, by Michelle Green. (Harper Perennial, $12.) How Mr. Bowles and
like-minded writers turned Tangier into the Haight-Ashbury of the 1940's.


FLOW CHART, by John Ashbery. (Knopf, $13.) The minutiae of daily life become the
stuff of poetry.


THE FORESEEABLE FUTURE, by Reynolds Price. (Ballantine, $5.99.) Three long
stories about men in emotional crisis.


FREEDOM. Volume One: Freedom in the Making of Western Culture, by Orlando
Patterson. (Basic Books, $15.) Winner of the 1991 National Book Award for
nonfiction, this work examines freedom as a peculiarly Western ideal.


GERONTIUS, by James Hamilton-Paterson. (Soho, $10.95.) A fictional
interpretation of the life of the British composer Sir Edward Elgar.


A GLIMPSE OF SCARLET: And Other Stories, by Roxana Robinson. (Harper Perennial,
$10.) A first collection, all revolving around familial love.


THE GOOD SOCIETY, by Robert N. Bellah, Richard Madsen, William M. Sullivan, Ann
Swidler and Steven M. Tipton. (Vintage, $13.) A look at American life, stressing
that democracy begins at home.


HARLOT'S GHOST, by Norman Mailer. (Ballantine, $12.50.) A saga about spies, sex
and the C.I.A.


HEAT: And Other Stories, by Joyce Carol Oates. (William Abrahams/Plume, $12.)
Short fiction on themes of familial and social violence.


THE HOLE IN THE FLAG: A Romanian Exile's Story of Return and Revolution, by
Andrei Codrescu. (Avon, $11.) A Romanian who left as a teen-ager revisits his
country after the 1989 revolt.


HOW THE GARCIA GIRLS LOST THEIR ACCENTS, by Julia Alvarez. (Plume, $9.) A tale
of 30 years in the lives of sisters from the Dominican Republic.


I REMEMBER NOTHING MORE: The Warsaw Children's Hospital and the Jewish
Resistance, by Adina Blady Szwajger. Translated by Tasja Darowska and Danusia
Stok. (Touchstone/Simon & Schuster, $10.) A pediatrician's memoir of life in the
Warsaw ghetto.


IN OTHER WORDS: New Poems, by May Swenson. (Knopf, $12.) Poetry revealing both
language and the world at play.


INSIDE CENTRAL AMERICA: Its People, Politics, and History, by Clifford Krauss.
(Touchstone/Simon & Schuster, $11.) "One of the most useful books yet to appear
on the region," said our reviewer.


THE KITCHEN GOD'S WIFE, by Amy Tan. (Ivy, $5.99.) Fiction in which a
Chinese-American woman learns the history of her mother.


LADY'S MAID, by Margaret Forster. (Fawcett Columbine, $10.) A novel exploring
the relationship between Elizabeth Barrett Browning's maid and her employers.


THE LAST ITALIAN, by William Murray. (Touchstone/Simon & Schuster, $10.) A paean
to Italy, "fondly and elegantly recorded," our reviewer said.


LONE STAR RISING: Lyndon Johnson and His Times, 1908-1960, by Robert Dallek.
(Oxford University, $16.95.) The first of two volumes by a writer going all the
way with L.B.J.


LOS GUSANOS, by John Sayles. (Harper Perennial, $12.) A novel about Miami
immigrants whose personal dramas are interwoven with Cuban politics.


MAKE NO LAW: The Sullivan Case and the First Amendment, by Anthony Lewis.
(Vintage, $13.) The drama of a 1960 lawsuit that led to a landmark Supreme Court
decision.


MAKING HISTORY, by Carolyn See. (Laurel/Dell, $10.) A novel of technological
dreams and tragedy in the lives of Californians.


MAO II, by Don DeLillo. (Penguin, $11.) The author's 10th novel features both
terrorists and writers.


MARIETTE IN ECSTASY, by Ron Hansen. (Harper Perennial, $10.) A young postulant
at the turn of the century experiences a mysterious religious passion.


MARTHA: The Life and Work of Martha Graham, by Agnes de Mille. (Vintage, $15.) A
biography by a fellow choreographer and confidante.


MATING, by Norman Rush. (Vintage International, $12.) Winner of the 1991
National Book Award for fiction, this novel shows, said our reviewer, "why we
yield when we don't have to."


MAUS: A Survivor's Tale II. And Here My Troubles Began, by Art Spiegelman.
(Pantheon, $12.) The son of Holocaust survivors continues the cartoon history of
his family, which won a special Pulitzer Prize.


MAXIMUM BOB, by Elmore Leonard. (Dell, $5.99.) A Florida judge fond of the
maximum sentence.


MEMOIRS, by Andrei Sakharov. Translated by Richard Lourie. (Vintage, $16.) The
life of the Soviet physicist and dissident.


MENDELSSOHN IS ON THE ROOF, by Jiri Weil. Translated by Marie Winn. (Penguin,
$10.) A 1960 novel about Prague in the grip of the Nazis.


THE MIRACLE GAME, by Josef Skvorecky. Translated by Paul Wilson. (Norton,
$10.95.) Fiction about faith and politics, narrated by a young Czech.


MOLLY IVINS CAN'T SAY THAT, CAN SHE? by Molly Ivins. (Vintage, $11.)
Observations by a syndicated columnist known, our reviewer said, for her "vivid
and salty prose."


THE MONEY MACHINE: How KKR Manufactured Power & Profits, by Sarah Bartlett.
(Warner, $12.99.) A former reporter for The Times analyzes how an investment
firm transformed business in the 1980's.


MOSCOW AND BEYOND: 1986 to 1989, by Andrei Sakharov. Translated by Antonina
Bouis. (Vintage, $11.) Sakharov's memoirs, continued through the summer
preceding his death.


MY HARD BARGAIN: Stories, by Walter Kirn. (Washington Square/Pocket Books, $9.)
Short fiction about life in the Midwest.


NEAR CHANGES: Poems, by Mona Van Duyn. (Knopf, $10.) The Pulitzer Prize-winning
volume by the poet laureate of the United States.


THE NIGHT TRAVELLERS, by Elizabeth Spencer. (Penguin, $10.) A novel of personal
and political conflicts, set during the Vietnam War.


NIXON: Volume Three. Ruin and Recovery, 1973-1990, by Stephen F. Ambrose.
(Touchstone/Simon & Schuster, $16.) How the former President is still the
consummate politician.


OMEROS, by Derek Walcott. (Noonday/Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $12.) A contemporary
epic by the Nobel Prize-winning poet.


ON THE ALTAR OF FREEDOM: A Black Soldier's Civil War Letters From the Front, by
Cpl. James Henry Gooding. Edited by Virginia M. Adams. (Warner, $9.99.) The only
sustained account of the Civil War by a black soldier.


PANAMA: The Whole Story, by Kevin Buckley. (Touchstone/Simon & Schuster, $11.)
How the United States and Manuel Noriega went from wooing to warring.


PANGS OF LOVE, by David Wong Louie. (Plume, $9.) Short stories that often
explore -- but are not confined to -- the Chinese-American experience.


A PASSIONATE APPRENTICE: The Early Journals, 1897-1909, by Virginia Woolf.
Edited by Mitchell A. Leaska. (Harvest/Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, $14.95.) The
author's diary from the ages of 15 to 27.


THE POLK CONSPIRACY: Murder and Cover-Up in the Case of CBS News Correspondent
George Polk, by Kati Marton. (Times Books/Random House, $14.) An examination of
the killing of an American journalist.


PRAIRYERTH (A Deep Map), by William Least Heat-Moon. (Peter Davison/Houghton
Mifflin, $13.95.) A writer finds his Oz right in the heart of Kansas.


PRAYING FOR SHEETROCK, by Melissa Fay Greene. (Fawcett Columbine, $10.) The rise
and fall of a black community leader in a small Georgia county.


REFLECTIONS OF AN AFFIRMATIVE ACTION BABY, by Stephen L. Carter. (Basic Books,
$12.) An African-American law professor's reservations about affirmative action.


THE RISE OF LIFE ON EARTH, by Joyce Carol Oates. (New Directions, $8.95.) A
brief novel exploring the mind of a murderous woman.


SAINT MAYBE, by Anne Tyler. (Ivy, $5.99.) A young man seeks to expiate his guilt
over his brother's death.


SATCHMO, by Gary Giddins. (Anchor, $15.) A biographical homage to Louis
Armstrong.


SAVAGE INEQUALITIES, by Jonathan Kozol. (Harper Perennial, $10.) How public
schools perpetuate the inequities in the lives of America's poor.


THE SEARCH FOR GOD AT HARVARD, by Ari L. Goldman. (Ballantine, $10.) A reporter
for The Times spends a year at the Harvard Divinity School.


SIGNS OF THE TIMES: Deconstruction and the Fall of Paul de Man, by David Lehman.
(Poseidon, $13.) The crisis that ensued when a leading deconstructionist was
found to have been the author of pro-Nazi articles.


THE SLOPES OF LEBANON, by Amos Oz. Translated by Maurie Goldberg-Bartura.
(Vintage International, $11.) Essays, speeches and newspaper columns written by
the Israeli author between 1982 and 1988.


STALIN: Breaker of Nations, by Robert Conquest. (Penguin, $12.) A profile of one
of the 20th century's most murderous dictators.


THE STARCHED BLUE SKY OF SPAIN: And Other Memoirs, by Josephine Herbst. (Harper
Perennial, $10.) A testimony to the travels and imagination of a radical writer.


THE SWEET HEREAFTER, by Russell Banks. (Harper Perennial, $10.) The effects of a
devastating school-bus accident on life in a fictional small town.


A THOUSAND ACRES, by Jane Smiley. (Fawcett Columbine, $12.) A Pulitzer Prize
winner in which "King Lear" unfolds in Iowa, with villains and heroine recast.


THREE BLIND MICE: How the TV Networks Lost Their Way, by Ken Auletta. (Vintage,
$14.) ABC, CBS and NBC: see how they're run.


TRAFFIC AND LAUGHTER, by Ted Mooney. (Vintage Contemporaries, $12.) A surreal
novel about the potential for nuclear destruction, set in Los Angeles.


THE TRANSPARENT MAN, by Anthony Hecht. (Knopf, $10.) Poems exploring the decay
beneath the surface of the familiar.


TRAPS, THE DRUM WONDER: The Life of Buddy Rich, by Mel Torme. (Oxford
University, $10.95.) A memoir and biography of a dazzling drummer.


TURKISH REFLECTIONS: A Biography of a Place, by Mary Lee Settle.
(Touchstone/Simon & Schuster, $10.) A portrait of a country by an author who
loves it.


TWO LIVES: "Reading Turgenev" and "My House in Umbria," by William Trevor.
(Penguin, $10.) Two novellas about women who use their imaginations to transform
a bleak reality.


A VERY THIN LINE: The Iran-Contra Affairs, by Theodore Draper. (Touchstone/Simon
& Schuster, $16.) In our reviewer's words, "the most exhaustive examination" of
the Iran-contra events.


WARTIME LIES, by Louis Begley. (Ivy, $4.99.) A novel of the Holocaust, narrated
by a Polish Jew.


WHAT WAS MINE: Stories, by Ann Beattie. (Vintage, $10.) Fiction showing the
author's introspective side.


WHY AMERICANS HATE POLITICS, by E. J. Dionne Jr. (Touchstone/Simon & Schuster,
$12.) Because, the author says, politicians argue ideology, not issues.

WILL YOU PLEASE BE QUIET, PLEASE?, by Raymond Carver. (Vintage Contemporaries,
$10.) The author's first short-story collection, brought back into print.

LOAD-DATE: December 6, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              326 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 December 6, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

SUNDAY VIEW;
When Games Become Acts Of Heroism

BYLINE: By David Richards

SECTION: Section 2; Page 5; Column 1; Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1900 words


The Irish playwright Frank McGuinness has definitely made things hard for
himself in "Someone Who'll Watch Over Me," although his play is so splendidly
acted at the Booth Theater that you may not realize how hard at first.

After all, any drama that features Alec McCowen in the cast has already taken a
major step toward minimizing its potential trouble spots. As we've known for
some time now, Mr. McCowen is a superlative character actor. What is amazing
here is how little maneuvering room he requires to do the job. A few square feet
is all, illuminated by a single hanging light bulb.

Mr. McGuinness's play, you see, is set in a dank basement cell in Beirut, where
his three characters -- a black American doctor, an Irish journalist and a
prissy English schoolteacher (that's Mr. McCowen) -- are being held hostage.
There are no windows, no chinks in the cinder-block walls, and the heavy metal
door isn't about to give way soon. Furthermore, each prisoner has been shackled
to a wall by a chain that runs to his ankle, allowing him freedom enough to do
push-ups or (in Mr. McCowen's case) a sprightly toe dance in lieu of
calisthenics, but not much else.

Since Mr. McGuinness is taking an essentially realistic view of the rigors of
confinement, you can imagine the obvious restraint he is operating under. Two of
his characters are in place at the beginning of the play, and the third shows up
shortly thereafter. Barring any outside change in their political fortunes, they
will remain in those places until the end. Let the American (James McDaniel)
lunge for the Irishman (Stephen Rea) in a flash of anger; the chain will draw
him up short. If there's to be any action on the stage of the Booth, it is going
to have to transpire in the hostages' heads.

Which brings up the second, considerably more significant, limitation that Mr.
McGuinness has put upon himself. As a survival tactic, his characters have vowed
to ignore the past as much as possible. Memories are forbidden, unless they are
sardonic, mocking, and thereby hold the idea of happier days at bay. To feel is
to risk feeling sorry for yourself, and once that threshold has been crossed,
there's no doubling back.

"They want you to weep," the American warns the Englishman, early on. "Don't
ever do that in here. . . . That's what they want. So don't cry. Laugh. Do you
hear me? Laugh." Mr. McGuinness's hostages laugh in spite of themselves, laugh
even when the noises rumbling up out their throats seem more like strangulated
wails. And when they can't manage that any longer, they turn their faces to the
wall, keeping the pain out of sight.

Fantasy is the only escape hatch. For the play to break free of its constricting
boundaries, the real has to be continually replaced by the imaginary, the sordid
by the capricious, the self-pitying by the ironic. Purposefully hoarding any
autobiographical data, the characters disclose themselves to us almost
exclusively by how they pretend under duress.

They "shoot" epic movies in their minds and "rerun" favorite sporting events.
They throw parties at which they drink invisible vodka martinis to the point of
inebriation. They compose long (unsentimental) letters home, tell jokes, invent
the etymology of words and recite poetry, although poetry is tricky because it
can awaken those unwanted emotions.

Stripped of its political underpinnings, "Someone Who'll Watch Over Me" calls
instantly to mind the work of another Irish playwright, Samuel Beckett, equally
pre occupied with waiting rituals in bleak places. The situation is absurd, a
Middle East variation of "Endgame." For no reasons they can fathom, three people
have been incarcerated, possibly forever, by unseen captors who may be vengeful
madmen or irrational children, but, in either instance, exercise power
quixotically. As the Irishman notes, two words sum up their plight: "Ridiculous,
ridiculous."

In fact, the five scenes that make up the first (and less satisfying) act are
apt to strike you as just so many variations on the theme of filling a void. The
Englishman is newly imprisoned, so he has to come to terms with the volatility
of the Irishman and what Mr. McGuinness, courting stereotype, perceives as the
sleek exoticism of a black American. Once he does, the game-playing resumes in
earnest. After an hour, you may conclude that the mechanism has been more than
sufficiently explored.

You'd be wrong to write the play off at intermission, however. Mr. McGuinness
has a simple dramatic progression in store, and it makes all the difference. At
the start of the second act, the American has disappeared. The cell is down to
two inhabitants, and before the evening is over that number will be halved. The
removal of the American, who has probably been killed, alters the climate
radically. That's no reflection on Mr. McDaniel. The actor, to his credit,
manages to sidestep most of the cliches in a role that requires him to be strong
and saintly and sing spirituals in a crisis. A note of real danger, however, has
been sounded. Time no longer stretches quite so aimlessly into the future. The
very games that served to while away the weeks, an act earlier, assume a new
urgency and even a measure of heroism.

In the play's most dazzling flight of fancy, Mr. McCowen -- jaw firmly set, eyes
emitting laser beams of determination -- decides to replay the 1977 Wimbledon
Ladies' Final and casts himself as Virginia Wade. "Virginia always tossed her
head at a tense moment," he explains, a stickler for details, as he shakes the
tresses off the nape of his neck and promptly serves an ace. Mr. Rea, obliged by
the charade to be Ms. Wade's sizable Dutch opponent, "wee Betty Stove," goes
down swinging. Then, rallying from defeat, he assumes the full, bored majesty of
the Queen herself and presents the winner's trophy to a triumphant Mr. McCowen.
The silliness is sublime because it is pure defiance as well -- two men
cavorting in the maw of death.

The acting in the second act is also richer, less fettered, as if a certain
exhilaration, not caution, were the better part of valor. Mr. McCowen endows the
Englishman with a petulant effeminacy at the outset -- he was in the midst of
preparing a pear flan when he was kidnapped, and a large part of his early
dismay seems to stem from the fact that his dessert was ruined. Later on,
gripping the "steerymajig," he's positively giddy at the prospect of learning to
drive an imaginary car. When, under Mr. Rea's promptings, the vehicle takes to
the air, as it did in the movie "Chitty Chitty Bang Bang," Mr. McCowen is beside
himself with fear and delight.

In the end, this middle-aged mother's boyproves to be the strongest of the trio.
Yet all the actor does is replace petulance, bit by bit, with fussy pride.
Physically soft as he is, he stands unapologetically by his flan, his mother and
his fluttering idiosyncrasies -- which is to say, by himself. The stance is
oddly endearing.

Mr. Rea has a long, drawn-out face, a cascade of dark curly hair and a
temperament that is part leprechaun, part anarchist. If prison can in any
fashion be viewed as a party, he qualifies as the life of it. The antic
performance derives its edge, though, from the underlying suggestion that at any
minute the bravado could crumble, the fire in the eyes sputter and go dead.
Indicatively, this jesting prisoner is always jesting a little too much.

The play's title, as you've probably guessed, is drawn from the Gershwin ballad
"Someone to Watch Over Me," which is played between scenes (Ella Fitzgerald does
the singing), while a tumble of stars lights up the inky darkness. The effect is
lovely the first couple of times, but the director Robin Lefevre overuses it --
his only miscalculation in an otherwise commendably sober staging. I wonder,
moreover, if he shouldn't have saved the music and starlight for the very end,
when it becomes evident how much these hostages really do care for each other.

Up to then, they have guarded against mushy sentiments, ducked behind laughter
and taken refuge in outbursts of zaniness, as the self-imposed rules require.
Under the desperate fun and games, love appears to have been building anyway.
When the moment arrives for leave-taking, it floods the cell, even if Mr.
McCowen and Mr. Rea can only mumble awkward platitudes and shift on their feet.

Slowly, Mr. Rea removes a comb from his pocket and sets about combing the hair
of Mr. McCowen. With no less solemnity, Mr. McCowen returns the favor. Spartan
warriors performed a similar rite before venturing into battle, apparently, and
the historical echo lends overtones of nobility to the scene. But the homeliness
of the gesture is even more telling.

"I am my brother's keeper," it says, louder than any words could. "I am my
brother's reflection."

'Underground'

Theodora Skipitares, who not too long ago investigated the history of urban
development and the legacy of Robert Moses in "The Radiant City," has gone
underground with her latest piece, Off Off Broadway at La Mama.

Appropriately enough it is titled "Underground," and in slightly more than an
hour it examines a wide variety of subterranean creatures -- coal miners in
their mine, Count Dracula in his coffin, Persephone in Hades, an all-American
family in its fallout shelter, a religious fanatic in her buried chapel, and
baby Jessica McClure, who tumbled down a well in Texas awhile back and then kept
the nation riveted to the TV set until she was fished back up.

As is her custom, Ms. Skipitares constructs miniature environments -- the
fallout shelter, for example, or the mine shaft -- and then populates them with
doll-like puppets that deliver strange monologues or act out brief, off-center
dramas. The puppeteers manipulating these figures hover over the sets like dark
gods, curious about what is happening below perhaps, but also curiously detached
from it. Ms. Skipitares is a social critic, and she designs each world and its
denizens with a scrupulous attention to detail. At the same time, she is
something of a metaphysician, and a disquieting sense of dread and dislocation
attends her endeavors.

An Egyptian sarcophagus opens to reveal the mummy inside. Then, the mummy's
chest opens and a heart, still pulsating, floats up out of the cavity. The
customers in a 19th-century New York ale house lean out the windows to complain
about the bitter city water, only to slump over abruptly, victims of cholera.
(The disease can be transported underground in polluted water.) A lonely woman,
nattering listlessly on a stool in the corner of a tuna-processing plant, turns
out to be a former Weatherman who went underground in another way altogether
during the Vietnam War and now doesn't know how to surface. As for the genteel
prophet deep in her "sacred underground heaven," she gets progressively caught
up in a preaching frenzy, losing everything about her that's ladylike, until
she's a mass of shrill, quivering ecstasy.

Watching these crazed and pathetic souls -- mired either physically or
spiritually in the dirt -- can make you feel a lot like a giant Peeping Tom in a
toy village. I suspect that's the effect Ms. Skipitares is after. She wants you
to look hard and close into dark nooks and spooky crannies. You'll discover all
sorts of mini-revelations and Lilliputian enchantments, if you do. Not to
mention astonishments by the thimbleful.

LOAD-DATE: December 6, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Stephen Rea and Alec McCowen in "Someone Who'll Watch Over Me"
-- Wimbledon as a dazzling flight of fancy. (Tom Lawlor/"Someone Who'll Watch
Over Me")(pg. 5); A tableau, from "Underground," of a 1961 American family in
its fallout shelter. (Valerie Osterwalder/"Underground")(pg. 7)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              327 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 December 6, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THE NIGHT;
Symbol, Songs, Food, Traffic

BYLINE: By Bob Morris

SECTION: Section 9; Page 8; Column 1; Styles of The Times

LENGTH: 1238 words


LAST Monday night, Allan Gurganus, the author of the best-selling "Oldest Living
Confederate Widow Tells All," was in the basement of the Museum of Modern Art's
bookstore, looking for slides to illustrate a lecture on narrative in painting,
which he would give the following week in Boston. He was flushed and in a bit of
a rush, because he was expected upstairs to give a reading as part of MOMA's
ceremony to mark A Day Without Art, in memory of people who have died of AIDS.

The 45-year-old Mr. Gurganus, whose plain face and kind blue eyes are offset by
a thick blond drooping mustache tinged with white, was in his trademark reading
outfit: Converse high tops, a formal shirt with black studs and bow-tie, beneath
a ratty old sport coat. A mess, but a considered one.

On his way to the Matisse slides, he caught a glimpse of a Pieta. "The Pieta is
the operative form right now," he said with a sigh. "The innocent young man
dying. What do you do with the body? You want to celebrate it and scream at the
same time." He spoke with the intensity of an opinionated teen-ager and the
wisdom that comes from observing life so deeply that it hurts.

"My two operative experiences are being a Vietnam vet and living through the
AIDS epidemic," he said while writing down the numbers of the slides that he
needed for his lecture. "But you can't look at the sun without smoked glass. You
can't look at issues like these dead on. So the metaphor is what works for me.
An epidemic like this one speeds up your own sense of time, too, both the
personal and the narrative. You feel like you're about a hundred years old
because you've lost so many people. You want to save them on the page."

Later, at the ceremony upstairs, Mr. Gurganus read to a small audience that had
gathered in the lobby. He had chosen the story "Reassurance," from his
collection of short fiction, "White People," which begins with a letter that
Walt Whitman had written to the mother of a dead Civil War soldier, one of the
many dying soldiers he had nursed and comforted in a hospital in Washington for
four years. "Whitman is the ultimate right now," he said, introducing the story.
"He was the artist as defender and nurse, not as esthetic technician."

The second part of "Reassurance" is an imaginary epistle from the dead soldier
to his mother, one that he delivers while she's asleep. Filled with a recently
quieted longing, it's a young man's attempt to reconcile his life and to comfort
his mother so she can go on without him. Tenderly, almost pleadingly, with his
gentle North Carolina drawl ringing against the marble floors and glass
skylights, Mr. Gurganus read: "I am not the ghost of your dead boy. I am mostly
you. I am just your love for him, left stranded so unnaturally alive. . . . " It
wasn't just the voice of a Civil War soldier. It was the voice of anyone who has
died young and left a loved one behind.

When he finished reading, Mr. Gurganus went back to his seat, leaned back, and,
holding his face in his hands, gazed upward toward the sky.

Singing Out for Camp

Camp is a state of mind, and it doesn't always mean drag queens and show tunes.
Around dusk at the Ethical Culture Society on Central Park West last Saturday,
you could imagine the smell of spruce and campfires, the sound of crickets
chirping and canoe paddles dipping into a lake. You could also hear a lot of
kids yakking.

Killooleet, a Vermont summer camp that has attracted the children of New York
liberals since 1927, was having its annual "Sing." There were backpacks. There
were flannel shirts. There were ponchos and chinos and adults wearing name tags
who looked like they were making lots of money and trying to spread it around a
bit. The lobby was filled with young campers hugging one another and the
earsplitting squeals of reunion. Music is a big part of the Killooleet ritual.
The camp is run by the family of Pete Seeger, after all. Last Saturday's "Sing"
featured folksinging counselors and alumni who sat under a camp banner on the
stage in front of an audience that was seated according to the decade they were
campers. In the back of the hall, current campers were eating candy and talking
over the music with the kind of flagrant disrespect one always thinks signals
the downfall of the nation, but really doesn't.

"Don't forget, don't talk during the singing," said the white-haired camp
director, John Seeger, who's a former headmaster of the Fieldston School. "It
annoys other people. I know it's hard to remember, but please try very hard."
This request had an effect on the noise level in the back for about 12 seconds.
But then, it's not easy controlling the type of children who give their camp
cabins names like "Psychotic Minstrels" and "The Hand That Spins the Dreidel."

On stage, the counselors and alumni sang breathtaking renditions of new songs
and standards with the ersatz conviction that only urban sophisticates bring to
folk music. There was a sing-along of "This Land Is Your Land," and an
ethnically inclusive ditty about the winter solstice. Two men played an old
English tune together on a hammer dulcimer. A man with a ukulele wired to an
amplifier sang a song about Uncle Jed who "lives on a farm and never did anybody
no harm." One of the things you believe when you're leaning so left of center
that you're almost in the 1960's is that anybody who lives on a farm could never
do anybody any harm.

The Hostess With the Agenda

Gloria Steinem's lavishly eclectic Upper East Side duplex is a testament to the
fact that one can stick to one's beliefs and still prosper. At a publication
party there on Tuesday night for Robin Morgan, the Ms. magazine editor, and her
new book, "The Word of a Woman" (Norton), a crowd that included Bella Abzug and
Andrea Dworkin filled Ms. Steinem's front parlor, which was scented with
cinnamon sticks and commitment. Ms. Steinem, casually dressed and carrying a
handbasket of French bread in one hand and a tray of cheeses in the other, moved
around her apartment, threaded through a crowd of mostly female guests,
encouraging them to eat. They were too busy talking shop and politics to make a
fuss about the candles burning in front of the fireplace or the other poetic
touches that make her house a home.

"I always knew this was your calling," Carol Jenkins, the Channel 4 newscaster
joked as Ms. Steinem proffered hors d'oeuvres with the studied ease of a Martha
Stewart or some other high priestess of home-entertaining.

"It's genetic," she shot back. Then she walked away with the smirk of a woman
playing host but with an agenda that moves beyond sisal, chintz and cilantro.

Better Late Than . . .

Over at Laura Belle on Tuesday night, Dick Cavett was the emcee at a benefit for
Community Access, an organization that creates housing for the mentally ill. Mr.
Cavett, looking more disheveled than he does on television, was still recovering
from his drive into the city from his house in Montauk, L.I.

"There was a gas tank explosion on the L.I.E.," he said with the equanimity that
comes after you've arrived at your destination but not while you're stuck in
traffic. "I was so late getting here that I didn't have time to to take a
shower. I think my deodorant failed me about Hauppauge."

A woman approached, requesting an autograph for a friend. "Maybe I'll write
'Robert Redford,' " he said before signing, "and give her her money's worth."

LOAD-DATE: December 6, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              328 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 December 6, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THE TRANSITION;
British Sought to Find Citizenship Files on Clinton

BYLINE: By MARTIN TOLCHIN,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 29; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 490 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 5


British officials said today that the Home Office was responding to numerous
press inquiries when it sought last October to learn whether President-elect
Bill Clinton had ever made an application for British citizenship.

But they said that such an application was not listed in the appropriate index
in immigration and naturalization files, and hence no search was conducted. Mr.
Clinton was a Rhodes scholar at Oxford University in the late 1960's.

"You can't search through files if there are no files," said a spokesman for the
Home Office in London when asked about an article in The Washington Post today
that said the office had conducted a "comprehensive" search of immigration files
for information about Mr. Clinton.

Mr. Clinton, asked today about the British action, said, "They should have more
pressing business." He commented during a morning jog in Little Rock, Ark.

Betsey Wright, a former Clinton campaign official, said that the campaign had
received reports that Conservative members of Parliament had been approached by
Republican Party workers about searching Mr. Clinton's files for politically
damaging material.

The British action took place at about the same time that State Department
officials conducted a search of Mr. Clinton's passport records to learn whether
the Democratic Presidential candidate had ever applied for citizenship in an
effort to avoid the draft in the Vietnam War.

State Department investigators obtained evidence suggesting that the White House
may have been involved in conceiving and coordinating the search in an effort to
embarrass the Democratic candidate and influence the outcome of the election.

Instead, disclosure of the search in the waning days of the Presidential
campaign embarrassed President Bush. The disclosure led to the dismissal of
Elizabeth M. Tamposi, Assistant Secretary of State for consular affairs, who
supervised the search. Steven M. Moheban, who worked as her aide for two and a
half years, resigned two days before Sherman M. Funk, the State Department's
inspector general, issued a report on the incident.

In addition, Steven K. Berry, acting Assistant Secretary of State for
legislative affairs, was demoted for his role in the passport search. He has
said he told Ms. Tamposi that the White House wanted consular files searched for
negative information on Mr. Clinton.

Mr. Berry told investigators that the White House wanted to know if Mr. Clinton
had ever expressed a desire to renounce his United States citizenship to avoid
the draft. No letter or other document reflecting such a desire was found.

Referring to Ms. Tamposi, Mr. Moheban said at the time: "She was very careful.
If she hadn't gotten a push from other people, she wouldn't have done this."

The State Department is continuing its investigation, and the General Accounting
Office, the research arm of Congress, is also investigating the circumstances of
the search.

LOAD-DATE: December 6, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              329 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 December 6, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Vietnamese, Easy Target, Fear Ouster by Germany

BYLINE: By STEPHEN KINZER,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 3; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1312 words

DATELINE: BERLIN, Dec. 5


At a cramped social worker's office in the gritty Marzahn neighborhood of
eastern Berlin, a young Vietnamese man heard the bad news.

"Your permit to live here expires at the end of this month," an interpreter told
him after examining his passport one recent afternoon. "Unless something
changes, you're going to have to go back home."

Scenes like that are familiar in Marzahn, which is home to several thousand
Vietnamese who came to East Germany as contract laborers. They fear they will
soon become the first ethnic group to be systematically deported from united
Germany.

"It is the greatest fear of our people," said Van Son Vu, organizer of an
advocacy group for Vietnamese. "We have lived through great changes here, and we
don't fit in Vietnam any more.  The poverty and unemployment there is terrible.
We have made a place for ourselves here, we are happy here, and we want to
stay."

Victims of German Mobs

Germany is enduring a wave of violence against foreigners, and many of the
perpetrators argue that too many foreigners have been allowed to enter the
country. Politicians have endorsed their call for tighter immigration laws and
for the expulsion of some foreigners who already live here.

The Vietnamese want to stay in Germany despite attacks that some of them have
suffered. Several have been harassed on streets, and earlier this year one was
attacked by a gang of skinheads in Marzahn and stabbed to death.

Vietnamese were also among the victims of a major disturbance in the Baltic port
of Rostock in August. They lived in hostels that were surrounded for two days by
rock-throwing youths and jeering citizens. Downstairs apartments were set afire,
but there were no serious injuries.

Some critics of the planned deportation say it will mark a seeming victory for
those who have committed or supported acts of violence against foreigners.

Ease of Expelling Foreigners

"Many of these kids are going to say, 'Now the Government is doing with police
what I was trying to do with rocks,' " Barbara John, Berlin's official advocate
for foreigners, said, adding that the deportation would result in "human
tragedies."

Germany has already announced plans to deport members of one other ethnic group,
Romanian Gypsies. But as was widely said when the announcement was made in
September, few if any have actually been deported.  Those afraid they would be
apprehended have moved to other parts of Germany or traveled to other countries.

But expelling Vietnamese from Germany is likely to be easier than expelling
Gypsies. Gypsies live close to Germany and can come and go almost at will across
porous borders. Vietnamese are easier to identify physically, and once sent home
they are unlikely to return.

Nearly all the Vietnamese now in Germany came here during the late 1980's under
labor contracts between the East German and Vietnamese Governments. The first
and largest group came in 1987, carrying visas valid until the end of 1992. Most
were assigned to work in heavy industries, often in jobs not attractive to
Germans.

Peculiar Visa Status

When East Germany ceased to exist two years ago, about 60,000 Vietnamese
citizens were living here. Most lost their jobs soon after unification, when the
factories where they worked shut down.

Many Vietnamese are now surviving on unemployment payments. Others are engaged
in textile trading, which is legal, and cigarette smuggling, which is illegal
but tolerated. Vietnamese vendors cluster around many train and subway stations
in eastern Berlin, offering clothes and cut-rate cigarettes.

As a result of their peculiar visa status, the Vietnamese are not permitted to
receive bank credit, rent commercial property or start businesses.  Even those
who have applied to run fast-food stands have been turned down.

Last year, the Government offered a free plane ticket and a cash payment of
$2,000 to any Vietnamese who would leave voluntarily. Nearly 50,000 accepted the
offer before it expired. The estimated 12,000 who turned it down are determined
to remain here as long as possible.

State Government Vote

"There are millions of foreigners living legally in Germany because the West
German Government gave them special status as guest workers," said Nguyen Ha, a
translator who lives in Marzahn. "We have been here for five years, paying taxes
and contributing to the economy. Under West German law, we would have been
entitled to stay.  We're only asking to be treated like guest workers in the
West."

Responding to the pleas of Vietnamese and their supporters, the governments of
two eastern states have appealed to the upper house of Germany's Parliament to
prevent the deportations. The upper house represents state governments, and
Interior Minister Rudolf Seiters has said he will stop the deportations if all
five eastern states, together with a majority of those in the west, ask him to
do so. A vote is scheduled for Dec. 18.

The eastern state of Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania is determined that the
deportations proceed. Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania is the state in which
Rostock is situated, and about 900 Vietnamese still live there in hostels that
were attacked in August.

In a position paper, the state government asserted that "many people have
already lost their tolerance for current policies toward foreigners and
asylum-seekers."

Adapted to German Style

"The economic and social difficulties in Vietnam are not a legally relevant
argument," the paper says.

Lothar Kupfer, the Interior Minister in Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania, has
become the leading advocate of deportation for Vietnamese citizens.

"We have to decide as a society whether we want an unlimited number of
foreigners in Germany or if we want to reduce the number," Mr. Kupfer said in an
interview. "If that's what we want, then in specific cases we have to carry
through with the deportation of asylum-seekers or contract workers."

Unlike some other groups of foreigners in Germany, the Vietnamese have proven
able to adapt to the German style of life. Specialists here describe them as
quiet, hard-working, respectful and anxious to assimilate.

"They're always polite and friendly," said the manager of a small bakery in
Marzahn. "Most people here don't have anything against them. If they want to
stay in Germany, it's fine with me."

Fear of Return to Hanoi

Chancellor Helmut Kohl's chief adviser on matters relating to foreigners,
Cornelia Schmalz-Jacobsen, supports the Vietnamese in their campaign to remain
in Germany. But the Chancellor often acts against her advice.

Mrs. Schmalz-Jacobsen said: "We are talking about quite a small number of people
who could be given the right to stay without much problem. I'm afraid their
chances are not good. Not enough voices are being raised on their behalf."

Vietnamese in Germany say their years here have changed them, and that they no
longer want to live in their impoverished, repressive homeland.  They fear they
will be ostracized from society, victimized by robbers and perhaps harassed or
arrested by Government agents.

The German and Vietnamese Governments have negotiated an accord under which
Germany will pay a sum to Vietnam to support resettlement of returning laborers.
In return, Vietnam pledges not to persecute them.

But Vietnam has not ratified the agreement, and diplomats say the sum of money
Germany wants to donate has shrunk to less that half of the $20 million that was
being discussed in the Foreign Ministry a few months ago.

The Government has begun sending letters to as many as 8,000 Vietnamese telling
them that as of Dec. 31, they are "ausreisepflichtig" -- that is, required to
leave the country. Those who do not leave, the letters warn, will be subject to
deportation.

"None of these people will leave volutarily," said Marina Tischer, a social
worker in Marzahn.

LOAD-DATE: December 6, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Van Son Vu, organizer of an advocacy group for Vietnamese in
Berlin. "We don't fit in Vietnam any more," she said. "We have made a place for
ourselves here, we are happy here, and we want to stay." (Gunter Schneider for
The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              330 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 December 6, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Foreign Affairs;
Not Set in Stone

BYLINE: By LESLIE H. GELB

SECTION: Section 4; Page 19; Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 722 words


As President Bush on Friday explained his dispatch of U.S. forces to Somalia, he
sounded eerily similar to President Truman justifying massive new American aid
to Greece and Turkey more than 45 years ago.

Within days, Mr. Truman's carefully crafted language became raw meat for
ideologues casting about for something to worship or hate and for journalists
eager to make government policies far clearer and more momentous than their
authors intended. Over time, they elevated his address into the Truman Doctrine
and stripped away its distinctions and qualifications. If economic aid went to
Greece and Turkey to stop Communism, they came to ask, why not military aid to
Vietnam, Nicaragua, or anywhere else for that same noble purpose?

With intellectuals, politicians and journalists now clamoring again for simple
answers and proclaiming "turning points" and "watersheds," Mr. Bush will have
difficulty explaining the limits of his Somali decision. It could easily assume
the dimensions of a Bush Doctrine -- with unfortunate consequences for Bill
Clinton. For of future Presidents it will be asked: If Somalia, why not Bosnia,
Liberia, Armenia and all countries drowning in civil wars and humanitarian
disasters?

The last cold war President clearly had such thoughts in mind while fashioning
his announcement about Somalia. He may even have reread the March 1947 speech of
the first cold war President.

Mr. Bush spoke of "starvation" and "anarchy" in Somalia. Mr. Truman said Greece
lacked the essentials "for bare subsistence" and was threatened by "terrorist
activities."

Mr. Bush explained that righting the situation in Somalia was beyond the means
of the U.N. Mr. Truman said he had decided that the U.N. was incapable of
"immediate action" and "not in a position to extend help of the kind that is
required."

President Bush insisted that "America must act." President Truman said that the
U.S. "must supply . . . assistance," and that "there is no other country to
which democratic Greece can turn."

Mr. Truman sensed the trap in his own words: Justifying aid to these two
countries might spark demands to contain the spread of Communism worldwide by
any means, indiscriminately. Dean Acheson, his Secretary of State, rushed to
head off just such interpretations. He told Congress that all future aid
requests would be judged "according to the circumstances of each specific case."
But these central and fine points soon vanished in the political-intellectual
maelstrom.

Mr. Bush's intent is also limited -- to use force to end starvation in Somalia.
But he, too, knows he is opening the door to pressures for humanitarian
intervention everywhere. He walked this line Friday as best he could: "I
understand the U.S. alone cannot right the world's wrongs, but we also know that
some crises in the world cannot be resolved without American involvement."
Defense Secretary Dick Cheney also scrambled to underline the "case by case"
nature of the President's decision.

Whenever policy makers try to do something creative or deal with a new
challenge, they cross traditional lines. Mr. Truman did so by asking for foreign
aid to halt Communism. Mr. Bush did so when he justified military intervention
on humanitarian grounds.

But by crossing lines and establishing new policies on Greece or Somalia,
neither wished to tie his own hands. On the contrary, each meant to give himself
fresh choices for new circumstances.

Intellectuals, politicians and journalists rob leaders of choice when they
consecrate policy as doctrine. Policies provide general direction and yet allow
flexibility on ends and means. Doctrines virtually eliminate choice; either
intervention is always called for or it is never permitted. Doctrines demand
consistency over good sense. They demand answers in advance, where there can be
only questions.

To me, Mr. Bush made the right decision on Somalia; but he is wrong not to back
greater force in Bosnia.

Yet his choices on Somalia and Bosnia should have little bearing on what Bill
Clinton should do in Somalia, Bosnia, Haiti, Liberia or Central Asia. Presidents
should always set directions but, especially in a messy world, retain the leeway
to choose. It is pundits, not Presidents, who carve new policies into doctrinal
stone. It is the nation that pays for this orthodoxy.

LOAD-DATE: December 6, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              331 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 December 6, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Election Brought a Catharsis on Vietnam War

SECTION: Section 4; Page 18; Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 270 words


To the Editor:

Some have suggested that the election of Bill Clinton has finally put an end to
the Vietnam War. While his election may show that Americans did not let this one
issue stop Governor Clinton, it certainly doesn't say that the issues of the war
itself and of draft evasion are dead.

Quite the opposite is true. Vietnam vets can thank the Clinton campaign for
awakening and educating the public to the diverse emotions and thoughts of vets
themselves, their families and the rest of the American public who struggle to
understand the disaster called Vietnam.

Before Bill Clinton, most people without military experience seemed very
uncomfortable when veterans discussed their experiences in "Nam." Now that the
issue is out in the open, many vets feel free to vent the whole spectrum of
emotions, from rage at our political and military leaders to guilt for actions
while under stress to distrust of the fickle public, so quick to blame the war
on the men and women who sacrificed everything for this, their country.

Surely there has been a catharsis for Vietnam vets, a generally positive one.
Witness the strong participation in the Veterans Day week ceremonies at the
Vietnam War Memorial.

Personally, I still cannot figure out my mixed emotions regarding Jane Fonda,
Joan Baez and others who went to North Vietnam during the war. I hate them for
"socializing" with the enemy; but I love them for forcing an end to the most
self-destructive war in our history since the Civil War.

MICHAEL J. GORMAN
Whitestone, Queens, Nov. 20, 1992

The writer served in the U.S. Army, 1967-68.

LOAD-DATE: December 6, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              332 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 December 6, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

Notable Books of the Year 1992

SECTION: Section 7; Page 57; Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 19100 words


This list has been selected from books reviewed since the Christmas Books issue
of December 1991. It suggests only high points in the main fields of reader
interest, and it does not include titles chosen by the editors of The Book
Review as the Best Books of 1992. Books are arranged alphabetically under
subject headings.

Art, Music & Popular Culture

 THE AGE OF MISSING INFORMATION. By Bill McKibben. (Random House, $20.) Two
dramatic, intertwined reports -- one an account of the world as reflected in a
24-hour period in the Adirondacks, the other an account of the world as
broadcast on 103 television channels in a single day.

ARCHITECTURE: The Natural and the Manmade. By Vincent Scully. (St. Martin's,
$40.) In what is nothing less than an interpretation of the whole history of
Western architecture, Yale's revered teacher of architecture for some 40 years
explores the relationship of buildings to landscape.

ARRESTING IMAGES: Impolitic Art and Uncivil Actions. By Steven C. Dubin.
(Routledge, $29.95.) An ambitious and impressive chronicle of the past decade's
battles between conservatives and the iconoclastic artists who push their
buttons -- among them Robert Mapplethorpe, Salman Rushdie, Andres Serrano and 2
Live Crew.

THE ART PACK. By Christopher Frayling, Helen Frayling and Ron van der Meer.
(Knopf, $40.) An irresistibly seductive book that uses "paper engineering" and a
battery of scientific and geometric devices to make art history yield up its
secrets.

BEYOND THE BRILLO BOX: The Visual Arts in Post-Historical Perspective. By Arthur
C. Danto. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $25.) Mr. Danto argues persuasively in these
essays that with Andy Warhol's famous boxes art reached its logical end, leaving
us with a liberating pluralism.

BILL GRAHAM PRESENTS: My Life Inside Rock and Out. By Bill Graham and Robert
Greenfield. (Doubleday, $24.) Twenty-five years of rock-and-roll, as seen
through the eyes of the tempestuous visionary whose art was concert promotion
and whose signature was throwing tantrums.

CHRISTMAS IN JULY: The Life and Art of Preston Sturges. By Diane Jacobs.
(University of California, $30.) With the cooperation of Sturges's surviving
relations and friends, Ms. Jacobs has written an affectionate, judicious
portrait of the man who, in five years (1940-44) wrote and directed America's
most insouciant modern movies and then, just as quickly, destroyed himself.

FLASH IN THE PAN: The Life and Death of an American Restaurant. By David Blum.
(Simon & Schuster, $21.) This chronicle of The Falls, a downtown Manhattan
restaurant that treated its customers like dirt and attracted the beautiful
people for about a year, is full of sharp portraits of schemers and hipsters.

FOR A COWBOY HAS TO SING. By Jim Bob Tinsley. (University of Central Florida,
$39.95.) A collection of 60 cowboy songs from the golden age -- 1905-57 -- with
brisk, witty, informative introductions to the songs and their composers in
Brooklyn, Cleveland, Dublin, Hollywood and other homes on the range.

FRANK CAPRA: The Catastrophe of Success. By Joseph McBride. (Simon & Schuster,
$27.50.) This comprehensive biography of the wizard director of "common-man"
movies shows they were actually informed by Capra's right-wing politics.

GEORGE CUKOR: A DOUBLE LIFE. A Biography of the Gentleman Director. By Patrick
McGilligan. (St. Martin's, $24.95.) A full-bodied account of the brilliant film
maker's works, the man himself and his elegantly gay life in a Hollywood that
pretended to celebrate all the middle-class decencies.

HIRSCHFELD: Art and Recollections From Eight Decades. By Al Hirschfeld.
(Scribners, $50.) An abundant retrospective of the work of this great visual
chronicler of the theater.

HOROWITZ: His Life and Music. By Harold C. Schonberg. (Simon & Schuster,
$27.50.) A former senior music critic of The New York Times has written an
important and accessible biography of the pianist who had an almost demonic
power over the keyboard and who feared that he had sold his art for
entertainment's sake.

KEEPING A RENDEZVOUS. By John Berger. (Pantheon, $21.) These reflections on art
and philosophy demonstrate the astounding range of a British-born essayist,
novelist and playwright.

THE LAST DANDY, RALPH BARTON: American Artist, 1891-1931. By Bruce Kellner.
(University of Missouri, $34.95.) A sympathetic, informative and just biography
of the compulsively workaholic magazine illustrator and restless man about town.

LITTLE LEAGUE CONFIDENTIAL: One Coach's Completely Unauthorized Tale of
Survival. By Bill Geist. (Macmillan, $17.) Here is the terror and delight of
Little League players and their ambitious parents.

LOUIS I. KAHN: In the Realm of Architecture. By David B. Brownlee and David G.
De Long, with essays by others. (Museum of Contemporary Art/ Rizzoli, cloth,
$60; paper, $40.) The first comprehensive account of the career of the man who
was probably America's most important post-World War II architect; gloriously
illustrated.

THE MAESTRO MYTH: Great Conductors in Pursuit of Power. By Norman Lebrecht.
(Birch Lane/Carol Publishing, $22.50.) This juicy, garish and tendentious book
of more than 50 thumbnail biographies explores the conductor's place in the
byzantine world of music and in society.

MARLENE DIETRICH: Life and Legend. By Steven Bach. (Morrow, $25.) A celebration
of the one and onliest, with plenty of what appear to be the facts about her
private and public careers.

NO MINOR CHORDS: My Days in Hollywood. By Andre Previn. (Doubleday, $22.50.) An
amiable, intelligent memoir of Mr. Previn's early life as a movie music maker,
with anecdotes of many first-rate colleagues, producers, directors and stars.

PRODIGAL SON: Dancing for Balanchine in a World of Pain and Magic. By Edward
Villella with Larry Kaplan. (Simon & Schuster, $23.) How a guy from Queens
became a great American dancer, and how a great choreographer created through
him a new way of dancing. It wasn't all fun.

THE RISE OF GOSPEL BLUES: The Music of Thomas Andrew Dorsey in the Urban Church.
By Michael W. Harris. (Oxford University, $29.95.) How a preacher's son
transported blues rhythms and showmanship into the black churches in the 1930's.

ROUND UP THE USUAL SUSPECTS: The Making of "Casablanca" -- Bogart, Bergman, and
World War II. By Aljean Harmetz. (Hyperion, $24.95.) Without wallowing in
nostalgia, Ms. Harmetz tells the diverting story of how the beloved movie was
made -- from the gripes of the stars to the wartime shortages that affected the
production.

SCREENING HISTORY. By Gore Vidal. (Harvard University, $14.95.) Epigrammatic,
realistic to the point of cynicism but consumed with nostalgia for what he
believes our Republic was supposed to be, these essays about Mr. Vidal himself
and American culture originated as a series of lectures at Harvard.

SHOWMAN: The Life of David O. Selznick. By David Thomson. (Knopf, $35.) A
massive and masterly biography of the great independent Hollywood producer who
feared, correctly, that he would be remembered primarily for "Gone With the
Wind."

TO THE END OF TIME: The Seduction and Conquest of a Media Empire. By Richard M.
Clurman. (Simon & Schuster, $23.) The smooth, brisk story of how Time Inc., the
straitlaced journalistic company, was courted by and married to Warner
Communications, the racy movie venture, to form the biggest American media
conglomerate ever; written by a former chief of correspondents for Time
magazine.

UNSILENT REVOLUTION: Television News and American Public Life, 1948-1991. By
Robert J. Donovan and Ray Scherer. (Woodrow Wilson International Center for
Scholars/Cambridge University, cloth, $49.95; paper, $17.95.) A history of the
broadcast images that have largely molded our minds over the last 40 years.

VIEW: Parade of the Avant-Garde. An Anthology of View Magazine (1940-1947).
Edited by Charles Henri Ford. Compiled by Catrina Neiman and Paul Nathan.
(Thunder's Mouth, $35.) Breton, Duchamp, Stevens, Camus, Magritte, O'Keeffe and
a host of other woozy and astute writers and artists appear in this vivid
anthology of the short-lived magazine that celebrated New York's international
status.

THE WALLS AROUND US: The Thinking Person's Guide to How a House Works. By David
Owen. (Villard, $21.) Solid research, experience and personal enthusiasm inform
this guide to the reasons for keeping the outdoors out and the methods of doing
it.

THE WRONG HORSE: An Odyssey Through the American Racing Scene. By William
Murray. (Simon & Schuster, $20.) With a sense of madness and irony, Mr. Murray
captures the smells and rumbles of the backstretch, the language of horseplayers
and the incorruptibility of the horses.

YOU SEE, I HAVEN'T FORGOTTEN. By Yves Montand with Herve Hamon and Patrick
Rotman. (Knopf, $25.) Montand, who died last year, collaborated at great length
with the writers of this informative and balanced account of a fine singer and
actor.

Biography & Memoir

 THE ABANDONED BAOBAB: The Autobiography of a Senegalese Woman. By Ken Bugul.
(Lawrence Hill, cloth, $18.95; paper, $9.95.) This pseudonymous personal history
takes a brave, ambitious young woman from her village to Brussels, where she
barely rescues herself from a course of self-destruction.

AFTER GREAT PAIN: A New Life Emerges. By Diane Cole. (Summit, $20.) An
autobiographical account of the courageous -- and finally triumphant --
reconstruction of one woman's life after an almost unimaginable run of grief and
misfortune.

AMERICAN GIRL: Scenes From a Small-Town Childhood. By Mary Cantwell. (Random
House, $20.) Persuasive reminiscences of Bristol, R.I. (a place, by this
account, of surprising decency in the 1930's), by a member of The Times's
editorial board.

AN AMERICAN ENGINEER IN STALIN'S RUSSIA: The Memoirs of Zara Witkin, 1932-1934.
Edited by Michael Gelb. (University of California, $29.95.) This fascinating
memoir relates the struggles of an American socialist and civil engineer, in
love with a Russian movie actress, in a country where nothing worked.

ANTONIA WHITE. Diaries 1926-1957: Volume One. Edited by Susan Chitty. (Viking,
$25.) Notebooks, irregularly kept, about marriage, motherhood, sex, religion and
mental collapse by a fascinating and quite odd Englishwoman; the editor is her
daughter.

BECOMING A MAN: Half a Life Story. By Paul Monette. (Harcourt Brace Jovanovich,
$19.95.) A probing and provocative memoir, affirmative and even celebratory, of
a gay man's journey from "internal exile" through public commitment to
self-acceptance. Winner of the National Book Award for nonfiction.

THE CHAIRMAN. John J. McCloy: The Making of the American Establishment. By Kai
Bird. (Simon & Schuster, $30.) A life of the friend and adviser to nine
Presidents, perhaps the most powerful American who was never really famous.

A CHORUS OF STONES: The Private Life of War. By Susan Griffin. (Doubleday,
$22.50.) Ms. Griffin, a poet, imagines her own life together with the history of
the 20th century in an associative meditation that embraces cellular chemistry
and two world wars.

CHURCHILL: A Life. By Martin Gilbert (Holt, $35.) Rather than attempting a
historian's judgment, the author stitches together bits of a million documents
and lets Churchill be his own interpreter.

CROSSED OVER: A Murder, a Memoir. By Beverly Lowry. (Knopf, $22.) A novelist's
thoughtful -- and very uncomfortable -- effort to figure out a young woman
convicted of a brutal murder in Texas, and to understand her own interest in the
murderer.

DAYS OF OBLIGATION: An Argument With My Mexican Father. By Richard Rodriguez.
(Viking, $21.) A Latino writer who once dismissed his Mexican past offers not
only a merciless dissection of his own character but also a homage to his roots
and an analysis of the tension between the optimism of California and the tragic
determinism of Mexico.

DEAR DEPARTED. By Marguerite Yourcenar. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $25.) First
published in French in 1974, 13 years before the author's death, this
investigation of Yourcenar's mother's family captures a superb sense of
bourgeois life in the comfy Belgian aristocracy.

DE GAULLE: The Ruler 1945-1970. By Jean Lacouture. (Norton, $29.95.) This final
volume in Mr. Lacouture's monument to the colossus particularly features de
Gaulle's foreign policy (alliance but independence) and his theatrical methods
of getting his way.

DESTINY'S JOURNEY. By Alfred Doblin. Edited by Edgar Passler. (Paragon House,
$24.95.) This important, nourishing memoir by the author of "Berlin
Alexanderplatz" looks at human nature under stress and its recuperative powers
in two major episodes: Doblin's flight from Germany to America and his return in
1945.

THE DOUBLE LIFE OF STEPHEN CRANE. By Christopher Benfey. (Knopf, $25.)
Suggestive and elegant, this literary biography presents a fresh theory -- that
Crane, drawn by the excitement of his own ideas, did not write what he lived but
tried to live what he'd written.

DOWN FROM TROY: A Doctor Comes of Age. By Richard Selzer. (Morrow, $20.) An
arresting, idiosyncratic, lyrical memoir of Troy, N.Y., by a man whose parents
battled for his soul, one wanting a doctor, the other an artist; both got what
they wanted.

DRIVEN PATRIOT: The Life and Times of James Forrestal. By Townsend Hoopes and
Douglas Brinkley. (Knopf, $30.) This book unravels many mysteries about the Wall
Street whiz who became our first Secretary of Defense and who killed himself in
1949.

EDGAR A. POE: Mournful and Never-Ending Remembrance. By Kenneth Silverman.
(HarperCollins, $27.50.) Mr. Silverman sifts the evidence to yield an
authoritative life of the unhappy hack who produced a handful of poems and
stories the world cannot forget.

ELEANOR ROOSEVELT: Volume One, 1884-1933. By Blanche Wiesen Cook. (Viking,
$27.50.) A feminist biography that regards its subject not only as a mostly
19th-century woman who invented her own life with very little help, but also as
a self-created political figure of considerable significance.

ELIZABETH I. By Anne Somerset. (Knopf, $30.) A comprehensive, reliable,
readable, relentlessly detailed biography of the often vain and sometimes
bad-tempered Good Queen Bess.

ELTON JOHN. By Philip Norman. (Harmony, $22.50.) An eloquent, analytical and
well-researched examination of the spectacle who is rock's most devoted scholar
and brilliant emulator.

EVELYN WAUGH: The Later Years 1939-1966. By Martin Stannard. (Norton, $29.95.)
Mr. Stannard's perseverance and minute attention to detail show how much more
there was to the aging Waugh than the ogre of reaction in his Somerset cavern.

FORGOTTEN FATHERLAND: The Search for Elisabeth Nietzsche. By Ben Macintyre.
(Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $22.) A journalist's account of the philosopher's
nutty sister, who founded an unsuccessful Aryan colony in Paraguay and twisted
Nietzsche's thoughts and dictums to fit Hitler's purposes.

HEMINGWAY: A Life Without Consequences. By James R. Mellow. (Houghton Mifflin,
$30.) In the last volume of what Mr. Mellow calls his "Lost Generation" trilogy,
a biography weighted heavily toward Hemingway's Paris years (1921-30), the
author's magisterial recounting of personal intrigue and his lyrical
descriptions of the city steal the show.

HENRY JAMES. The Imagination of Genius: A Biography. By Fred Kaplan. (Morrow,
$25.) A thoughtful, balanced book that gives a consistent, persuasive account of
James's development as an author -- and does this in only one volume.

HITLER AND STALIN: Parallel Lives. By Alan Bullock. (Knopf, $35.) Borrowing a
trick from Plutarch, Lord Bullock sets forth the two dictators' lives and
careers chronologically, showing who did what first and to whom; often enough,
it was the Fuhrer who learned tricks from his neighbor to the east.

HOME FIRES: An Intimate Portrait of One Middle-Class Family in Postwar America.
By Donald Katz. (Aaron Asher/HarperCollins, $25.) A wise and respectful story --
names and traumas apparently un retouched -- of one New York family, 1945-90.

IN MY PLACE. By Charlayne Hunter-Gault. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $19.) A
genuinely charming memoir by the female protagonist of the integration of the
University of Georgia in 1961.

INTELLECTUAL MEMOIRS: New York 1935-1938. By Mary McCarthy. (Harcourt Brace
Jovanovich, $15.95.) In this last volume of her memoirs, written just before she
died in 1989, McCarthy looks back at her bohemian life in New York, shows the
slipperiness of retrospect and hands out more clefs to her romans.

THE INTERIOR CASTLE: The Art and Life of Jean Stafford. By Ann Hulbert. (Knopf,
$25.) A literary biography of the polished fiction stylist who is perhaps more
admired these days (especially for her distinctive and ironic stories) than
read.

IT DOESN'T TAKE A HERO: The Autobiography. By H. Norman Schwarzkopf with Peter
Petre. (Bantam, $25.) This folksy and remarkably emotional book is not just the
General's version of the gulf war, but the story of his impressive career and
above all his relations with people.

"I'VE SEEN THE BEST OF IT." By Joseph W. Alsop with Adam Platt. (Norton,
$29.95.) The lively autobiography of a born patrician who made himself an
outstanding reporter, columnist and Washington insider; completed after his
death in 1989.

JEFFERSON DAVIS: The Man and His Hour. By William C. Davis. (HarperCollins,
$35.) Mr. Davis (no relation) has written the best and fullest biography so far
of a man who, despite his faults, was probably the best available leader for the
doomed Confederacy.

JFK: Reckless Youth. By Nigel Hamilton. (Random House, $30.) A British scholar's
gripping first volume of an ambitious life of John F. Kennedy that mines new and
old sources to reveal a dreadful family dynamic from which the young man
struggled, with imperfect success, to emancipate himself.

JOURNEYS IN DREAM AND IMAGINATION. By Artur Lundkvist. (Four Walls Eight
Windows, $17.95.) An amazing, lyrical out-of-body travel book by a Swedish poet
and essayist who returned from a two-month coma with a remarkable store of
imagery.

KEEPER OF THE MOON. By Tim McLaurin. (Norton, $19.95.) A disturbing and poignant
memoir of growing up in the rural South in the 1960's, by a man who seems to
have forgotten nothing of his hardscrabble life.

THE LAST YANKEE: The Turbulent Life of Billy Martin. By David Falkner. (Simon &
Schuster, $22.) From a childhood in a brawling family to the management of a
team in decline, this is a memorable and absorbing account of the lurid and
monotonous life of a useful Yankee.

MAKING LOVE: An Erotic Odyssey. By Richard Rhodes. (Simon & Schuster, $18.) Mr.
Rhodes's report on his lifetime obsessions and performances has the virtue, rare
in autobiography, of sounding like the truth.

MALCOLM: The Life of a Man Who Changed Black America. By Bruce Perry. (Station
Hill, $24.95.) Mr. Perry places the man beside the myth -- including his
autobiography -- to portray a figure who is still a compelling presence in black
political life.

THE MAN TO SEE. Edward Bennett Williams: Ultimate Insider; Legendary Trial
Lawyer. By Evan Thomas. (Simon & Schuster, $27.50.) Though an authorized
biography, this life of the justly celebrated lawyer spares none of Williams's
faults.

PATRICK WHITE: A Life. By David Marr. (Knopf, $30.) A beautifully constructed
account, integrating letters, interviews and narrative, of the difficult and
often nasty novelist who in 1973 became the only Australian to win the Nobel
Prize in Literature.

PATRON SAINTS: Five Rebels Who Opened America to a New Art, 1928-1943. By
Nicholas Fox Weber. (Knopf, $30.) Vivid portraits of how five energetic young
rebels -- Lincoln Kirstein, Edward M. M. Warburg, Agnes Mongan, A. Everett
Austin Jr. and James Thrall Soby -- changed the face of the American art scene
just as the Depression began.

PERSONAL WITNESS: Israel Through My Eyes. By Abba Eban. (Putnam, $29.95.) Life
as it's not lived any more, full of the learning, literature, high sociability
and cosmopolitan patriotism that characterizes Israel's former Foreign Minister.

PILGRIM IN THE RUINS: A Life of Walker Percy. By Jay Tolson. (Simon & Schuster,
$27.50.) Mr. Tolson presents Percy as the hero of his own life, which contained
few outward events but produced a series of revelatory novels and philosophical
essays.

THE RASCAL KING: The Life and Times of James Michael Curley, 1874-1958. By Jack
Beatty. (William Patrick/Addison-Wesley, $25.) A skillful profile of Boston's
grand, colorful, corrupt and effective working-class Irish politician and his
environment.

ROSE MACAULAY: A Writer's Life. By Jane Emery. (John Murray/Trafalgar Square,
$34.95.) A much-needed life of a London literary presence, a born adventurer and
a novelist who capped her career with the miraculous "Towers of Trebizond."

SALEM IS MY DWELLING PLACE: A Life of Nathaniel Hawthorne. By Edwin Haviland
Miller. (University of Iowa, $35.) Mr. Miller doesn't look for what isn't to be
found in Hawthorne's secretive life, and renders well the lively flavor of his
times.

SHARED LIVES. By Lyndall Gordon. (Norton, $24.95.) An evocative memoir of
private lives and public events, distorted by both racism and sexism, in South
Africa in the 1950's and since.

SHE WENT TO WAR: The Rhonda Cornum Story. By Rhonda Cornum as told to Peter
Copeland. (Presidio Press, $19.95.) The unsettling, terrifically readable story
of the Army flight surgeon, helicopter pilot, paratrooper, wife and mother who
was shot down, taken prisoner and sexually molested during the gulf war.

SMALL CRAFT ADVISORY: A Book About the Building of a Boat. By Louis D. Rubin Jr.
(Atlantic Monthly, $21.95.) A distinguished scholar's fine and atypical
memoir-cum-boat-book, combining a 55-year passion for sailing with wise insights
into the relation of work to play.

STELLA. By Peter Wyden. (Simon & Schuster, $23.) After World War II, the author
discovered that one of his Jewish schoolmates, the blond, fair, seductive Stella
Goldschlag, had become a notorious Jewish informant for the Gestapo; 40 years
later, he reconstructs her chilling story.

THE STRUGGLE AND THE TRIUMPH: An Autobiography. By Lech Walesa. With the
collaboration of Arkadiusz Rybicki. (Arcade, $24.95.) Picking up where "A Way of
Hope" left off, Mr. Walesa chronicles his life since the Communists' abdication
in Poland and his rise from the leader of the Solidarity movement to the leader
of his country.

TROLLOPE: A Biography. By N. John Hall. (Clarendon/Oxford University, $30.) With
tact, wit and what looks like an absolute knowledge of Trollope and his works,
Mr. Hall gives us the novelist who made both life and art into marvelous comic
ironies.

TRUMAN. By David McCullough. (Simon & Schuster, $30.) This warm, captivating,
affectionate biography may be the culmination of the 20-year campaign to turn
this President from an ordinary little man into a big folk hero.

WOMAN OF VALOR: Margaret Sanger and the Birth Control Movement in America. By
Ellen Chesler. (Simon & Schuster, $27.50.) A spirited biography of a radical and
feminist organizer who achieved respectability in her lifetime.

WOODROW WILSON. By August Heckscher. (Scribners, $35.) and WOODROW WILSON: A
Life for World Peace. By Jan Willem Schulte Nordholt. (University of California,
$34.95.) Two lives that differ in approach; Mr. Heckscher's primary interest is
the man himself and his intimate relationships, while Mr. Schulte Nordholt
explores Wilson's flaws of intellect and temperament.

THE WORLD IS MY HOME: A Memoir. By James A. Michener. (Random House, $25.) This
haphazardly narrated book by the prolific writer of solid historical fiction
shows the many facets of his unusual mind.

THE WORLDS OF CHRISTOPHER COLUMBUS. By William D. Phillips Jr. and Carla Rahn
Phillips. (Cambridge University, $27.95.) A conscientious, compendious biography
that sticks to the primary sources and concludes that social ambition was
Columbus's main motive.

Business & Economics

CHANGING FORTUNES: The World's Money and the Threat to American Leadership. By
Paul A. Volcker and Toyoo Gyohten. (Times Books/Random House, $25.) In talks
given at Princeton, the authors, former top American and Japanese finance
officials, trade tales from the international monetary front.

A FULL SERVICE BANK: How BCCI Stole Billions Around the World. By James Ring
Adams and Douglas Frantz. (Pocket Books, $22.) A penetrating treatment of the
underlying forces in the Bank of Commerce and Credit International scandal and
of the detective work by several nations that ran the thieves to earth.

HEAD TO HEAD: The Coming Economic Battle Among Japan, Europe, and America. By
Lester Thurow. (Morrow, $25.) A professor and cogent analyst of economics argues
that other societies, operating by other rules, are likely to leave the United
States behind; his probable winner is Europe.

MERCHANTS OF DEBT: KKR and the Mortgaging of American Business. By George
Anders. (Basic Books, $23.) Rather than turning the story of Kohlberg, Kravis,
Roberts & Company's leveraged buyouts into a morality play, this refreshing book
reckons with Wall Street's innovations and recklessness.

MONEY OF THE MIND: Borrowing and Lending in America From the Civil War to
Michael Milken. By James Grant. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $27.50.) With an eye
for salty anecdotes, remarks and personalities, Mr. Grant looks back at the good
old days of elitist bankers and shows what happened when common people got the
notion that they too could borrow money.

THE OVERWORKED AMERICAN: The Unexpected Decline of Leisure. By Juliet B. Schor.
(Basic Books, $21.) Since about 1970 the American workweek has been increasing,
according to Ms. Schor, who perceives a "structural crisis of time" in our
lives.

REINVENTING GOVERNMENT: How the Entrepreneurial Spirit Is Transforming the
Public Sector. By David Osborne and Ted Gaebler. (Addison-Wesley, $22.95.) A
vision and a road map for the sort of government that the authors think will
decentralize authority, promote competition and limit bureaucracy.

THE SEVEN FAT YEARS: And How to Do It Again. By Robert L. Bartley. (Free Press,
$22.95.) Partly a memoir of the supply-side revolution of the 1980's and partly
a learned polemic against people who refuse to applaud the achievements of that
revolution, by the editor of The Wall Street Journal.

Children

 AK. By Peter Dickinson. (Delacorte, $18.) In this moving novel, Nagala is a
mythical African country struggling through a civil war, Paul Kagomi is a
12-year-old warrior and "Ak" is an AK-47. The British novelist is at his best.
(Ages 12 and up)

ALICE. By Whoopi Goldberg. Illustrated by John Rocco. (Bantam, $15.) This very
modern Alice is a suburbanite whose Wonderland is just across the river in
Manhattan. The illustrations are accomplished -- beautiful and sometimes vaguely
menacing. (Ages 6 and up)

CHEROKEE BAT AND THE GOAT GUYS. By Francesca Lia Block. (Charlotte Zolotow/
HarperCollins, $14.) The Los Angeles world and characters first seen in "Weetzie
Bat" return. The next generation of teen-agers, Cherokee and Witch Baby, are
left home alone. (Ages 12 and up)

I SAW ESAU: The Schoolchild's Pocket Book. Edited by Iona Opie and Peter Opie.
Illustrated by Maurice Sendak. (Candlewick Press, $19.95.) These exuberant and
often wicked British children's rhymes, collected over 40 years ago by two
British folklorists, have been illustrated with wonderful watercolors. It's a
beautiful little book. (Ages 5 and up)

JUNE 29, 1999. Written and illustrated by David Wiesner. (Clarion, $15.95.) A
visual tall tale in which Holly Evans's science project unleashes amazing
vegetables that drift over and settle across the United States -- turnips in the
Rockies, cucumbers in Kalamazoo, peas in Peoria. (Ages 5 and up)

LI'L SIS AND UNCLE WILLIE: A Story Based on the Life and Paintings of William H.
Johnson. By Gwen Everett. Illustrated by William H. Johnson. (Rizzoli, $13.95.)
This thrilling fictionalized biography of the black artist William H. Johnson
(1901-70) is told in the voice of his niece, Ernestine Margaret Brown, who was
immortalized in the well-known painting of the book's title. The book is
illustrated with 28 of Johnson's paintings. (Ages 5 and up)

MORNING GIRL. By Michael Dorris. (Hyperion, $12.95.) In alternating chapters,
Morning Girl and her brother, Star Boy, describe their daily lives on a tranquil
but not idyllic island. At the end Morning Girl sees a canoe bringing strange
visitors, just as Christopher Columbus notes seeing a young girl. (Ages 8 and
up)

ONE DAY, TWO DRAGONS. By Lynne Bertrand. Illustrated by Janet Street. (Clarkson
Potter, $14.) This story of a visit by two charming young dragons to their
pediatrician sets out the numbers 1 to 20 in the text and illustrations. (Ages 4
to 7)

THE STINKY CHEESE MAN: And Other Fairly Stupid Tales. By Jon Scieszka.
Illustrated by Lane Smith. (Viking, $16.) Hip, midsize children and their adults
are the intended audience for this sendup, takeoff, post-modern collection of
reconstituted fairy tales. (Ages 8 and up)

TALKING LIKE THE RAIN: A First Book of Poems. Selected by X. J. Kennedy and
Dorothy M. Kennedy. Illustrated by Jane Dyer. (Little, Brown, $17.95.) The mix
of mood, tone, humor and rumination in this collection is broadly
representative, and the illustrations are so skilled they make the combination a
joy. (Ages 3 and up)

Crime

 BONEYARDS. By Robert Campbell. (Pocket Books, $21.) A mournful lament for a
rogue Chicago cop named Ray Sharkey, who becomes a "sacrificial goat" for the
Democratic Party after Mayor Richard J. Daley's death in 1977.

DRIVING FORCE. By Dick Francis. (Putnam, $21.95.) For his 31st novel, Mr.
Francis, once a jockey for the Queen Mother, presents us with an entrancing
mystery, narrated by a disillusioned ex-jockey who finds that his business
transporting horses to English race tracks has become the object of a
complicated scam.

THE HANGMAN'S BEAUTIFUL DAUGHTER. By Sharyn McCrumb. (Scribners, $19.) A dark,
elegiac Appalachian Mountain mystery, in which some of the characters are
haunted by the demons of poverty and loneliness, and one is haunted by visions.

"I" IS FOR INNOCENT. By Sue Grafton. (Holt, $18.95.) In the "I" volume of Ms.
Grafton's alphabet mysteries, Kinsey Millhone hits her stride again as she takes
on the sobering and sordid case of a high-living architect and his murdered
wife.

KING OF THE CORNER. By Loren D. Estleman. (Bantam, $20.) The wrenching finale of
Mr. Estleman's Detroit trilogy finds Doc Miller, an ex-con, trying to put
together a pickup game on a field of broken glass and being drawn instead into a
hunt for a revolutionary.

THE ONES YOU DO. By Daniel Woodrell. (Holt, $19.95.) Rene Shade, the Cajun cop
who is the moral center of Mr. Woodrell's crime novels, moves over, as his
father, John X. Shade, an alcoholic pool hustler, meets his destiny on the
Mississippi River delta.

THE SATURDAY MORNING MURDER: A Psychoanalytic Case. By Batya Gur. (Aaron
Asher/HarperCollins, $20.) Ms. Gur, an Israeli author, presents Chief Inspector
Michael Ohayon unraveling the murder of a teaching analyst at the Jerusalem
Psychoanalytic Institute.

THE VANISHED CHILD. By Sarah Smith. (Ballantine, $20.) In this grim, delicately
told Victorian tale, the unstable hero, Baron Alexander von Reisden, is pulled
into the lives of a rich New York family as he investigates the 20-year-old
murder of a man who looks just like him.

A WALK AMONG THE TOMBSTONES. By Lawrence Block. (Morrow, $17.) Matthew Scudder,
a hard-boiled New York private eye, discovers a level of urban depravity unknown
even to him as he helps a Brooklyn heroin distributor track down his wife's
psychotic murderers.

Education

 DEBATING P.C.: The Controversy Over Political Correctness on College Campuses.
Edited by Paul Berman. (Laurel/Dell, paper, $8.) A well-chosen selection of
interviews, articles and lectures on multiculturalism by some of its best-known
supporters and detractors.

THE IDEA OF THE UNIVERSITY: A Reexamination. By Jaroslav Pelikan. (Yale
University, $30.) Without sounding pious, Mr. Pelikan, a professor at the Yale
Divinity School, gracefully defends the idea of the liberal university,
including "the embalming of dead genius," the imperative to publish or perish
and the university's duty toward the community at large.

POLITICS BY OTHER MEANS: Higher Education and Group Thinking. By David Bromwich.
(Yale University, $30.) Mr. Bromwich argues that cultural politics has swollen
to supply the absence of real politics, resulting in a dangerous polarization.

YOU CAN'T SAY YOU CAN'T PLAY. By Vivian Gussin Paley. (Harvard University,
$15.95.) A master teacher relates what ensued when she told kindergartners they
could not exclude classmates from their games. It seems to have made them nicer.


Essays, Criticism & Letters

 AFTER HENRY. By Joan Didion. (Simon & Schuster, $22.) Reporting from coast to
coast, Ms. Didion, who dedicates this collection of essays to the memory of her
editor, Henry Robbins, shows that sensibility is still her strength and cool
irony still her style. Above all, she knows how to analyze the stories people
make up to make sense of public events.

BEGINNING WITH MY STREETS: Essays and Recollections. By Czeslaw Milosz. (Farrar,
Straus & Giroux, $30.) The 1980 Nobel laureate discusses a variety of themes:
time and ephemerality, nationalism and religion, the cardinal sins, his literary
friends.

A CAPTIVE OF THE CAUCASUS. By Andrei Bitov. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $23.) A
wonderful volume of extended essays by a Russian writer who lost his heart to
Armenia in the 1960's but kept his critical and reflective head for the human
condition.

A DAY AT THE BEACH: Recollections. By Geoffrey Wolff. (Knopf, $22.) Nine
personal essays, or autobiographical reflections, by a skilled writer who has
learned certain lessons in human frailty.

HANNAH ARENDT -- KARL JASPERS: CORRESPONDENCE, 1926-1969. Edited by Lotte Kohler
and Hans Saner. (Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, $49.95.) Forty-three years of
discussion between two world-class intellectuals whose lives were defined by the
great ideas and events of the 20th century.

KURT WOLFF: A Portrait in Essays and Letters. Edited by Michael Ermarth.
(University of Chicago, $24.95.) The invaluable correspondence, intoxicating
recollections and, best of all, engaging voice of perhaps this century's most
discriminating publisher, whose authors and artists included Franz Kafka, Marc
Chagall, Lou Andreas-Salome and Boris Pasternak.

THE LETTERS OF EVELYN WAUGH AND DIANA COOPER. Edited by Artemis Cooper. (Ticknor
& Fields, $27.50.) A wonderfully engaging exchange of observations and
entertainments over more than 30 years between the novelist and the almost
unimaginably golden aristocrat Lady Diana Cooper.

LETTERS OF GUSTAVE COURBET. Edited by Petra ten-Doesschate Chu. (University of
Chicago, $55.) Intense stuff by the great painter, who was a raving democrat
when looking above him in society, a solid bourgeois when looking down.

LETTERS TO SARTRE. By Simone de Beauvoir, edited by Quintin Hoare.
(Arcade/Little, Brown, $24.95.) and WITNESS TO MY LIFE: The Letters of Jean-Paul
Sartre to Simone de Beauvoir, 1926-1939. Edited by Simone de Beauvoir.
(Scribners, $27.50.) The pact -- no exclusivity and no deceit -- between Sartre
and de Beauvoir was a model for thousands of advanced couples. In their letters,
both seem to have had less pleasure in intimacy with various partners than in
betraying personal details thus acquired.

LIFE SENTENCES: Rage and Survival Behind Bars. By Wilbert Rideau and Ron
Wikberg. (Times Books/Random House, paper, $15.) A collection, cool, detached,
reasonable but necessarily painful, of essays and reportage from The Angolite, a
journal published in the Louisiana maximum-security prison at Angola.

MIGRATIONS TO SOLITUDE. By Sue Halpern. (Pantheon, $20.) A provocative book of
essays, chiefly about privacy and independence and their rarity in our part of
the 20th century.

ON CLOWNS: The Dictator and the Artist. By Norman Manea. (Grove Weidenfeld,
$18.95.) These five essays by a Romanian exile are imaginative reflections on
Mr. Manea's past -- a wartime childhood in German-run camps followed by an
adolescence and adulthood under the Ceausescu regime.

OSKAR KOKOSCHKA LETTERS: 1905-1976. Selected by Olda Kokoschka and Alfred
Marnau. (Thames and Hudson, $40.) The great Expressionist shows himself much
concerned with the state of civilization and not less with his love life.

THE PASSION OF EMILY DICKINSON. By Judith Farr. (Harvard University, $29.95.)
Not so much a biography as a persuasive study of how Dickinson's poems, read in
the context of her time, her environment and her days alone behind a locked
door, reveal her sensuality.

PLAYING IN THE DARK: Whiteness and the Literary Imagination. By Toni Morrison.
(Harvard University, $14.95.) With her critic's hat on, Ms. Morrison argues for
the sort of literary scholarship (called "American Africanism") that will bring
the black experience to all Americans and break us of the polite habit of
ignoring race.

POETS, POETICS, AND POLITICS: America's Literary Community Viewed From the
Letters of Rolfe Humphries, 1910-1969. Edited by Richard Gillman and Michael
Paul Novak. (University Press of Kansas, $35.) The view of a smart, honest poet
who knew everybody and did not go in for malice.

THE SELECTED LETTERS OF BERTRAND RUSSELL. Volume One: The Private Years,
1884-1914. Edited by Nicholas Griffin. (Houghton Mifflin, $35.) Russell shines
here first as lover, only secondarily as the mathematical philosopher and
logician.

SISTER'S CHOICE: Tradition and Change in American Women's Writing. By Elaine
Showalter. (Clarendon/Oxford University, $21.95.) Ms. Showalter's latest book of
literary criticism takes its title from a quilting pattern that becomes an
organizing metaphor for some of the distinctions she makes between women's
writing and men's.

STILL LIFE WITH A BRIDLE: Essays and Apocryphas. By Zbigniew Herbert. (Ecco,
$19.95.) Restless essays and sublime short fictions celebrating and revivifying
the Dutch 17th century, by one of Poland's most distinguished writers.

UP IN THE OLD HOTEL: And Other Stories. By Joseph Mitchell. (Pantheon, $27.50.)
Stories, profiles and articles written for The New Yorker between 1938 and 1965
by a reporter of genius.

VITA AND HAROLD: The Letters of Vita Sackville-West and Harold Nicolson. Edited
by Nigel Nicolson. (Putnam, $29.95.) They got along quite well, these golden
Bloomsbury types, both primarily homosexual, both tolerant, both witty, both
outspoken (at home at least), both (after all) in love with each other.

A WOMAN, A MAN, AND TWO KINGDOMS: The Story of Madame d'Epinay and the Abbe
Galiani. By Francis Steegmuller. (Knopf, $23.) A colorful, lively, teasing,
often moving account of an 18th-century friendship (much of it by
correspondence) between a female philosophe and a Neapolitan intellectual,
diplomat and spy.


Fiction

 AN ACT OF TERROR. By Andre Brink. (Summit, $25.) A compulsively readable,
tautly handled novel whose hero, a 13th-generation Afrikaner, becomes an
antiapartheid terrorist.

AFTER MOONDOG. By Jane Shapiro. (Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, $22.95.) A first
novel about a smart, young New Jersey couple who end their marriage and find
that without it, nothing coheres.

AFTER THE WAR. By Richard Marius. (Knopf, $25.) An old-fashioned blockbuster,
richly packed with characters, follows a Belgian-educated Greek on a rather
halfhearted quest to find his lost father in the American South after World War
I.

ALL THE PRETTY HORSES. By Cormac McCarthy. (Knopf, $21.) Overwhelmingly
seductive, dark and difficult, this novel about a 16-year-old with a talent for
breaking horses who leaves Texas to work on a vast ranch in Mexico won the 1992
National Book Award for fiction.

ALMANAC OF THE DEAD. By Leslie Marmon Silko. (Simon & Schuster, $25.) With a
cast of some 70 obsessed, vengeful characters, this wild, mordant novel grapples
with the cruelty of a nation founded on the deracination of American Indian
culture.

ANCESTRAL VOICES. By Etienne van Heerden. (Viking, $21.) First published in
Afrikaans in 1986, this dark, portentous novel broods on a nation's history
through the generations of the Moolman family, a bigoted, jealous, strange,
spectacular lot.

ARCADIA. By Jim Crace. (Atheneum, $20.) A witty, self-aware, polished stylist's
cautionary novel of urban development in the new dystopia, where the nastiest
capitalist generally wins.

AT WEDDINGS AND WAKES. By Alice McDermott. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $19.) This
lovely novel, the author's third in a decade, perceives events in a large but
dwindling Brooklyn Irish family as the memories they later become.

BAILEY'S CAFE. By Gloria Naylor. (Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, $19.95.) A
novelist's virtuoso orchestration of survival, suffering, courage and humor
among black people in Brooklyn, circa 1948.

BASTARD OUT OF CAROLINA. By Dorothy Allison. (Dutton, $20.) This first novel,
perfect of ear, abundant in memorable people, precise and terrible in the
details of poverty and meanness, narrates the life and world of its title
character to the age of 13, when a dreadful trauma persuades her that her life
is finished.

BEFORE AND AFTER. By Rosellen Brown. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $21.) A family is
crushed by bad news and betrayed to chaos by individual choices in this
suspenseful novel that forces its characters to decide between integrity and
survival.

BILLIE DYER AND OTHER STORIES. By William Maxwell. (Knopf, $18.) Tales partly
true yet wholly imagined, located in the childhood of the distinguished writer
and editor, now in his 80's.

BLACK DOGS. By Ian McEwan. (Nan A. Talese/Doubleday, $19.50.) A short, shocking
novel that explores what happens between a husband who thinks a rational society
can solve its problems and a wife who believes, through revelation, that evil is
alive and busy.

BLACK WATER. By Joyce Carol Oates. (William Abrahams/Dutton, $17.) A 26-year-old
woman drowns when a senator's car goes off a bridge; but the point of view in
this powerfully imagined novel belongs to the victim, whom we are made to know
and whose tragedy we are made to comprehend.

BLOOD. By Janice Galloway. (Random House, $19.) A Scottish writer's striking
first collection of short stories, marked by a sense of menace, pain and
emotional rawness.

BLUE CALHOUN. By Reynolds Price. (Atheneum, $23.) The narrator of Mr. Price's
ambitious ninth novel is a loquacious 65-year-old salesman in Raleigh, N.C., who
relates his life story to his granddaughter in order to win her mercy.

BLUE GLASS. By Sandra Tyler. (Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, $19.95.) An unusual
first novel that follows the arc of an adolescent girl's changing relationship
with her mother without identifying either participant as victim or perpetrator.

BOOK: A Novel. By Robert Grudin. (Random House, $19.) A light comic tale about a
disappearing professor, prankishly rendered as a satire on post-modern,
post-structuralist literary theories.

THE BRIDE PRICE. By Grete Weil. (Godine, $20.95.) Mrs. Weil's beautiful novel,
her first to be published in English, interleaves a narrative of King David and
his infidelities with her own life as a German Jew who returned to Bavaria in
1947.

THE BROTHERS K. By David James Duncan. (Doubleday, $22.50.) In this excessive,
flamboyant, unabashedly sentimental novel, Dostoyevsky, Tolstoy, baseball and
the American family are celebrated, and "K" is for strikeout.

THE BUSINESS OF FANCYDANCING: Stories and Poems. By Sherman Alexie. (Hanging
Loose Press, cloth, $18; paper, $10.) A collection (the author's first) that
deals comically and poignantly with basketball, convenience stores, cars and
other artifacts of everyday life; set mostly in the Pacific Northwest.

CAETANA'S SWEET SONG. By Nelida Pinon. (Knopf, $24.) This wonderfully original,
down-and-dirty, slow-motion picaresque, set in a rural Brazilian backwater, is
the second of this Brazilian writer's eight novels to appear in English.

THE CALL OF THE TOAD. By Gunter Grass. (Helen and Kurt Wolff/Harcourt Brace
Jovanovich, $19.95.) Mr. Grass returns to Danzig (now Gdansk), his own childhood
home and the site of "The Tin Drum," where an endearing exemplary couple -- he
German, she Polish, both widowed -- keep on keeping on.

CAMBRIDGE. By Caryl Phillips. (Knopf, $19.) Mr. Phillips's splendid and tragic
novel tells two stories that ought to be one -- that of a thoughtful
Englishwoman in the 19th-century West Indies and that of Cambridge, a proud and
powerful slave.

CARMICHAEL'S DOG. By R. M. Koster. (Norton, $21.95.) The titular hero of Mr.
Koster's novel is a dog whose unqualified love saves a hard-drinking,
foulmouthed, egotistical science fiction writer from the demons (real, not
metaphorical) who inhabit him.

A CASE OF CURIOSITIES. By Allen Kurzweil. (Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, $19.95.)
Mr. Kurzweil's first novel sets a 20th-century narrator in quest of an
18th-century mechanical genius; the result is a witty, curious and studied
account of a mentally lively age.

CAT SCRATCH FEVER: Fictions. By Robert Kelly. (McPherson & Company, cloth, $20;
paper, $10.) Some 30 stories that rummage brilliantly in post-apocalyptic
fantasy or shroud preoccupations with sheltered boyhoods, mythology, sex and
demonology.

CITY OF BOYS: Stories. By Beth Nugent. (Knopf, $20.) A collection with a
hypnotic, obsessive quality, exploring knotted relationships and alliances in an
uncaring world.

CITY OF LIGHT. By Michael Doane. (Knopf, $22.) Mr. Doane's ambitious, topical
novel takes the international political thriller into a whole new landscape --
the innards of a computer network.

CLOCKERS. By Richard Price. (Houghton Mifflin, $22.95.) A big (599 pages) as
well as bighearted novel about a black drug dealer and a white homicide
detective whose paths collide in the mean slums of northern New Jersey.

THE COLOR OF THE SNOW. By Rudiger Kremer. (New Directions, cloth, $19.95; paper,
$9.95.) A novel -- is it? -- that frustrates conventional expectations of
reading fiction but artfully suggests some anxieties of modern German culture.

COWBOYS ARE MY WEAKNESS. By Pam Houston. (Norton, $19.95.) Short stories, mostly
first-person, told with verve and perfect pitch by women entangled with wild men
in a cruel world.

CRASH DIET: Stories. By Jill McCorkle. (Algonquin, $16.95.) Funny, savagely
effective glimpses of men who are largely contemptible and women whose salvation
lies in plowing through.

CRYSTAL RIVER: Three Novellas. By Charlie Smith. (Linden/Simon & Schuster, $20.)
Extraordinary tales that explore the weaknesses and needs that drive people
together and apart.

CUTTING STONE. By Janet Burroway. (Houghton Mifflin, $21.95.) Ms. Burroway's
seventh novel, a deeply religious historical fiction inspired by the little
feast given in the summer of 1914 for Pancho Villa by the citizens of Bowie,
Ariz., explores what it means to be separated from one's past and how one
survives elsewhere.

THE DEATH OF NAPOLEON. By Simon Leys. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $15.) An
elegant, absurd novel, in which Napoleon escapes from St. Helena but is unable
to re-establish his identity, while 20 inmates of a French asylum each maintains
that he is Napoleon.

THE DEVIL'S DREAM. By Lee Smith. (Putnam, $21.95.) Ms. Smith's novel, charming
and bold, pursues country music and the people who make it from Virginia in the
1830's, when the Devil may have invented fiddle tunes, to Opryland in the
1970's.

THE DISTANT LANDS. By Julian Green. (Marion Boyars, $24.95.) Quietly shelved in
the 1930's, when "Gone With the Wind" came out, this languorous 900-page novel
of the antebellum South, written by a lifelong Parisian, re-creates the feeling
of eternal childhood afternoons filled with adults' talk.

THE DIVINE COMEDY OF JOHN VENNER. By Gregory Blake Smith. (Poseidon, $20.) A
word-drunk joy ride with a doctor of divinity who is mad with passion for a
woman named Sabbathday Wells, obsessed with his ex-wife, Medusa, worshipful of
his daughter, Eve, and trying to make his way through hell and purgatory.

DOCTOR CRIMINALE. By Malcolm Bradbury. (Viking, $22.) Mr. Bradbury's wicked
novel casts a cold eye on modern national and intellectual cultures; its title
character, an intellectual acrobat and political deceiver, owes something to the
late Paul de Man.

DONOVAN'S WIFE. By Tom Wicker. (Morrow, $22.) A funny cautionary novel and a
lesson in unethical politics, featuring a no-account Congressman (Donovan) and a
disgusted political reporter who carries a torch for the Representative's wife.

A DUBIOUS LEGACY. By Mary Wesley. (Viking, $21.) This generous British
country-house novel, which concerns love and friendship and how to live, shows
again how smart one can become by paying attention for a long time (the author
is 80 now).

DUCK AND COVER. By Brenda Peterson. (HarperCollins, $20.) Narrated by nine
different characters, this wicked black comedy centers on the reunion of an
eccentric family that is strangely tuned in to the vibrations of the nuclear
age.

EASY KEEPER. By Mary Tannen. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $21.) A novel of
down-to-earth wit and unembittered sharpness about lives built on fantasy in a
Rocky Mountain backwater.

THE EASY WAY OUT. By Stephen McCauley. (Simon & Schuster, $20.) An engaging
novel of bet hedging, loss cutting and white lying in a cast of self-deluding
but fundamentally decent characters drawn from the Massachusetts middle class.

THE END OF THE NOVEL. By Michael Kruger. (Braziller, $17.50.) The
writer-narrator of this very funny novella by a German poet, publisher and
editor decides to have his hero commit suicide, and to remove from the book all
episodes that might provide a motive. An elegant entertainment results.

ENGLISH MUSIC. By Peter Ackroyd. (Knopf, $23.) It's metafiction, but never fear,
it works as a fine novel in which a boy with strange powers meets culture heroes
of the past, real and fictional.

ET TU, BABE. By Mark Leyner. (Harmony, $17.) An unrelentingly egomaniacal,
stream-of-consciousness romp, beginning with a letter to Mr. Leyner's editor and
ending with "Call 1-800-T-LEYNER."

THE EVENING STAR. By Larry McMurtry. (Simon & Schuster, $23.) This entertaining
novel with a somewhat ribald air reunites us with Aurora Greenway of "Terms of
Endearment," who is now in her 70's, and her extended and highly dysfunctional
family.

THE FACADE: M.N.O.P.Q. By Libuse Monikova. (Knopf, $23.) In a novel about the
restoration of a castle in Bohemia, a Czechoslovak writer creates a house of
mirrors to reflect the political distortions of reality in her native land.

FALSE GODS. By Louis Auchincloss. (Houghton Mifflin, $21.) The author's 34th
work of fiction, a collection of six chilly, stylized tales, explores, once
again, the dangers of being male, idealistic and WASP.

THE FAMISHED ROAD. By Ben Okri. (Nan A. Talese/Doubleday, $22.50.) The
post-modern black African novel in English arrives with this engagingly lyrical
novel by a Nigerian.

FATHERS AND CROWS. By William T. Vollmann. (Viking, $30.) In this gargantuan
volume, the second in a projected series of seven novels collectively titled
"Seven Dreams," a chronicle of North America from its earliest days, Canada is
settled, French explorers follow nomadic Indian tribes into the lush
countryside, and the tragic consequences of spiritual imperialism are revealed.

THE FIELD DAY ANTHOLOGY OF IRISH WRITING. Edited by Seamus Deane. (Field Day
Publications/Norton, $150.) With 4,044 pages in three volumes, this whopping,
generous collection takes the Hibernophile reader right up to 1991.

FIELDS OF GLORY. By Jean Rouaud. (Arcade/Little, Brown, $18.95.) This
accomplished first novel, which has sold more than half a million copies in
France, deals with the wounds wrought by World War I on a French provincial
family.

FOOLSCAP. By Michael Malone. (Little, Brown, $19.95.) The author of "Handling
Sin" captures in another novel the sort of absurdity we are apt to think goes on
all the time -- but unlike us, he has the sharp eye and sensibility to capture
it in motion.

THE FORGOTTEN. By Elie Wiesel. (Summit, $21.) Mr. Wiesel, whose art is so
intensely a witness to the Holocaust, confronts in this novel the horror that
befalls a psychotherapist and survivor of the Nazis who is developing
Alzheimer's disease.

FORTUNATE LIVES. By Robb Forman Dew. (Morrow, $20.) This quiet -- virtually
silent -- novel depends on the characters and the musings of a family during the
summer before their son departs.

THE GATE OF ANGELS. By Penelope Fitzgerald. (Nan A. Talese/Doubleday, $19.) A
slim, concentrated novel about randomness in physics and luck in human affairs,
exemplified in the collision of a physics student's bicycle with a young woman
in 1912.

GOOD GOSSIP. By Jacqueline Carey. (Random House, $19.) A witty, appealing
collection of short stories featuring a continuing cast of men and women trying
to end their extended adolescence.

HER MONSTER. By Jeff Collignon. (Soho, $18.95.) This roughly hewn, improbable
first novel about a man who eats Oreos, drools, howls, writes a novel and falls
in love is sui generis and unforgettable.

HIGH COTTON. By Darryl Pinckney. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $21.) A rich, dense
first novel whose wordy, alienated narrator, a black fourth-generation college
graduate, is obsessed with racial scenarios but will not conform to any of them.

HUNGER IN AMERICA. By David Cates. (Simon & Schuster, $19.) In this bitterly
joyless but fine first novel, Jack Dempsey Cliff, a recent arrival to Kodiak,
Alaska, drives a cab, broods about the woman he left behind in Wisconsin and
hungers for hope.

I AM ZOE HANDKE. By Eric Larsen. (Algonquin, $16.95.) In highly mannered but
precisely controlled prose, this novel pursues a daughter's struggle with the
most destructive and terrifying of childhood emotions: abandonment and loss.

I BEEN IN SORROW'S KITCHEN AND LICKED OUT ALL THE POTS. By Susan Straight.
(Hyperion, $19.95.) The stirring 25-year odyssey of a woman with blue-black
skin, powerful superstitions and a sullen disposition, as she migrates from the
Carolina lowlands to the shantytowns of Charleston to the California suburbs.

I, TITUBA, BLACK WITCH OF SALEM. By Maryse Conde. (Caraf Books/University Press
of Virginia, $19.95.) TREE OF LIFE. By Maryse Conde. (One World/Ballantine,
$18.) These two novels by a native of Guadeloupe, now a professor of French in
California, deal with survivors against great odds: in one case, a victim of the
1692 witch trials; in the other, a morally complex patriarch who makes his way
from Guadeloupe to California.

IMPOSSIBLE VACATION. By Spalding Gray. (Knopf, $22.) An exercise in the neurotic
picaresque, this glum, hilarious first-person novel, with its self-absorbed
protagonist, has the rambling, confessional feel of Mr. Gray's customary
performance pieces.

INDIGO: Or, Mapping the Waters. By Marina Warner. (Simon & Schuster, $22.) Ms.
Warner's thought-provoking fourth novel, which spans four centuries of British
colonialism on a Caribbean island, explodes Shakespeare's play "The Tempest" to
explore ethnocentrism and the cruelty of a modern English family.

IN THE LAND OF MEN: Stories. By Antonya Nelson. (Morrow, $19.) Wonderful and
kind stories, set in the Midwest and Southwest, about people in the aftermath of
crisis, characters for whom unhappiness isn't tragic -- it's just a fact of
life.

IN MEMORY OF JUNIOR. By Clyde Edgerton. (Algonquin, $16.95.) Death is much
funnier than usual in this larky novel about a dying couple and most of their
loony relatives.

THE JOURNEY. By Ida Fink. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $20.) A splendidly
constructed novel of survival that considers a pair of sisters who flee the
Holocaust by entering Germany itself, disguised as Polish volunteer workers.

KATERINA. By Aharon Appelfeld. (Random House, $18.) In a narrative of tribal
hatred overcome, the eminent Israeli novelist reimagines the Holocaust through
the eyes of a gentile peasant woman, a runaway who has been taken in by a Jewish
family.

KICKING TOMORROW. By Daniel Richler. (Random House, $21.) Teen-age angst and
alienation in Montreal in the 1970's propel a novel whose punk-rocker hero
aspires to destroy the world with an apocalyptic rock message that will drive
adults "mad with grief."

THE KIND OF LIGHT THAT SHINES ON TEXAS. By Reginald McKnight. (Little, Brown,
$18.95.) Stories that exploit their author's uncannily sharp ear, bleak vision
and incendiary humor.

THE LAST MAGICIAN. By Janette Turner Hospital. (Holt, $23.) The "magician" of
Ms. Hospital's ambitious, powerful novel is Charlie Chang, a photographer and
film maker whose images capture more truth about people than they are willing to
bear.

LEAH, NEW HAMPSHIRE: The Collected Stories of Thomas Williams. By Thomas
Williams. (Morrow, $22.) In the main, these are about men -- dramas of male
escape involving fishing and hunting, woods, ponds and trails.

LET THE DEAD BURY THEIR DEAD: And Other Stories. By Randall Kenan. (Harcourt
Brace Jovanovich, $19.95.) Linked together, these tales and tall tales evoke a
mysterious rural South.

LEVIATHAN. By Paul Auster. (Viking, $21.) A literary looking glass in which
fictional characters are determined by recorded events, real people impinge on
fictional ones, and the subject of the story dies in the first few pages.

LIFE FORCE. By Fay Weldon. (Viking, $21.) The author, a generous satirist and
feminist student of modern mores, delivers a sex comedy that is also a parable
about the act of creativity itself.

THE LITTLE BROTHERS OF ST. MORTIMER. By John Fergus Ryan. (Delta, paper, $10.) A
bunch of rogues drive across Arkansas in this novel full of disorderly sex and
black humor.

THE LIVING. By Annie Dillard. (HarperCollins, $22.50.) Ms. Dillard's novel, in a
genuine epic mode, concerns what befell nearly everyone in the 19th-century
Washington Territory.

LIVING AFTER MIDNIGHT. By Lee K. Abbott. (Putnam, $21.95.) In this collection of
five short stories and a novella, Mr. Abbott's prose exhibits high intensity,
tight focus and a concentration on the depths and dimensions of more or less
ordinary people.

THE LOST FATHER. By Mona Simpson. (Knopf, $22.) A lyrical, astute novel that
eloquently renders the tumultuous emotional state of a woman totally consumed
with looking for her father.

LOVE JUNKIE. By Robert Plunket. (HarperCollins, $20.) A comedy of manners,
dancing on its toes, about a heroically innocent housewife from Bronxville who
falls in love with a gay porno star.

THE LOVE QUEEN OF THE AMAZON. By Cecile Pineda. (Little, Brown, $19.95.) A droll
novel about sex and stuffy society on the upper Amazon, full of well-handled
incongruities and characters who insist on making theatrical fools of themselves
and others.

LOVE'S MANSION. By Paul West. (Random House, $22.) In what is almost an act of
piety, Mr. West re-creates the love story and marriage story of his own parents,
whom he calls Hereward and Hildred Moxon.

THE MALE CROSS-DRESSER SUPPORT GROUP. By Tama Janowitz. (Crown, $20.) One of the
most precise and intuitively rhythmic comic voices in the business brings us
mother love -- the kind that happens between a woman living alone in a Manhattan
apartment and a boy who follows her home from a pizza parlor.

A MAN'S PLACE. By Annie Ernaux. (Four Walls Eight Windows, $15.95.) An
autobiographical novel that confronts the author's painful growth into
incomprehension as she becomes a French intellectual while her father remains a
hard-working shopkeeper.

MAQROLL. Three Novellas: "The Snow of the Admiral," "Ilona Comes With the Rain,"
"Un Bel Morir." By Alvaro Mutis. (HarperCollins, $20.) These interconnected
novellas by a Colombian writer concern the dreams, hallucinations, reflections
and intercontinental adventures of a rootless, philosophical polyglot named
Maqroll, and have the rich, cumulative effect of a single novel.

MARINE LIFE. By Linda Svendsen. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $17.) Short stories,
all about the same unwieldy family, all narrated by a tough-minded, laconic
young girl who sees a lot.

MAZURKA FOR TWO DEAD MEN. By Camilo Jose Cela. (New Directions, $21.95.) First
published nine years ago in Spain, this powerful novel by a Nobel Prize-winning
writer depicts Mr. Cela's native Galicia in the 1920's, 30's and 40's as a
brutal society in which people and animals live together in violence.

MEETING EVIL. By Thomas Berger. (Little, Brown, $19.95.) In Mr. Berger's 18th
novel, a good-enough man's life is taken over by a bad-as-possible man who
suddenly shows up on the doorstep.

MEMORIES OF THE FORD ADMINISTRATION. By John Updike. (Knopf, $23.) All that the
guilty hero of Mr. Updike's 15th novel can really remember from the period is
his extramarital affairs and his unfinished book on President James Buchanan.

MEN WHO WOULD BE GOOD: A Novella and Six Stories. By Gordon Weaver.
(Triquarterly Books, cloth, $18.95; paper, $9.95.) Full of gritty details of
mills, bars and shopping malls, these sad, unnerving tales all concern men
driven by existential problems.

MR. MANI. By A. B. Yehoshua. (Doubleday, $22.50.) A kaleidoscopic novel of
Jewish history that slips back from 1982 to the 18th century through generations
of one family, its exiles and returns.

THE MURDERER. By Roy Heath. (Persea, $19.95.) A grim novel about a young man who
runs from everything until, boxed in by misery of his own creation, he can run
no more.

NATURAL HISTORY. By Maureen Howard. (Norton, $22.95.) Bridgeport, Conn., is the
central character of this abundant, immediate novel, a meditative chronicle of
the members of a family as they win, lose or draw in the pursuit of happiness.

NOTHING BUT BLUE SKIES. By Thomas McGuane. (Seymour Lawrence/Houghton Mifflin,
$21.95.) Through the unfiltered eyes of a real estate developer in Deadrock,
Mont., the macho hero of Mr. McGuane's eighth novel, we see the realistic
portrayal of an entrepreneur on his way down.

OCTOBER, EIGHT O'CLOCK. By Norman Manea. (Grove Weidenfeld, $18.95.) A
collection of dreamlike stories told by a single narrator, a man who, like Mr.
Manea, spent so much of his life in prison camps that he feels as though he died
before reaching manhood.

ON MOZART: A Paean for Wolfgang. By Anthony Burgess. (Ticknor & Fields, $19.95.)
Mr. Burgess, himself a skilled composer when not novelizing, sets his homage in
heaven, where the dear departed utter truths about music that are not easily
available on earth.

PARADISE NEWS. By David Lodge. (Viking, $21.) In Mr. Lodge's witty, entertaining
ninth novel, a herd of English people descend on Hawaii for a two-week holiday,
while a family death and a few other ugly things try to develop in their midst.

THE PATRON SAINT OF LIARS. By Ann Patchett. (Richard Todd/Houghton Mifflin,
$21.) Ms. Patchett's delightful first novel concerns pilgrimage and healing in a
Roman Catholic home for unwed mothers where one young woman comes to stay.

PLAN B FOR THE MIDDLE CLASS: Stories. By Ron Carlson. (Norton, $19.95.) A
collection of wildly humorous tales about the harsh truths of American life,
especially family life, in a time of diminishing expectations.

POSSESSING THE SECRET OF JOY. By Alice Walker. (Harcourt Brace Jovanovich,
$19.95.) In this mythic, polemical novel, the subject is ritual clitoridectomy
and the characters Tashi and Olivia are archetypes, one the victim of gender
imperialism and one the victim of cultural imperialism.

POSTCARDS. By E. Annie Proulx. (Scribners, $22.95.) This lovely novel of the
1940's-80's era turns on a murderer's exile and the decline of the family and
landscape he left behind in Vermont.

PRIMITIVE PEOPLE. By Francine Prose. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $20.) Everyone is
pretending, disguising, dressing up in a novel so funny it hardly matters that
it's about a society in decay.

THE QUICK: A Novella & Stories. By Agnes Rossi. (Norton, $17.95.) The ordinary
world becomes extraordinary in these plain-spoken, honest portraits of the
working class.

RED SQUARE. By Martin Cruz Smith. (Random House, $23.) Arkady Renko, the Moscow
police detective of Mr. Smith's mystery "Gorky Park," sleuths once more, this
time in the gray new world of post-Communist Russia and its reborn precapitalist
criminal entrepreneurs.

RISING SUN. By Michael Crichton. (Knopf, $22.) A shocking and ominous murder
mystery that taps into the fear that the Japanese have declared a full-scale
economic war on the United States and are winning it because we refuse to fight.

A RUSSIAN DOLL: And Other Stories. By Adolfo Bioy Casares. (New Directions,
cloth, $22.95; paper, $10.95.) This collection of contemporary stories by Mr.
Bioy Casares, a winner of Spain's Cervantes Prize, presents a reality twisted by
the fantastic and the grotesque and includes some quiet homages to his close
associates Jorge Luis Borges and Silvina Ocampo.

SACRED HUNGER. By Barry Unsworth. (Nan A. Talese/Doubleday, $25.) A
heartbreaking novel that dramatizes the 18th-century European and African
experiences of slave trading and pokes a stick into the notion of human
perfectibility. The co-winner (with "The English Patient") of the 1992 Booker
Prize.

SAN CAMILO, 1936: The Eve, Feast, and Octave of St. Camillus of the Year 1936 in
Madrid. By Camilo Jose Cela. (Duke University, cloth, $45.95; paper, $14.95.) A
Spanish Civil War novel with a difference: the apolitical vision of its author
is a ringing rejection of fanaticism in any form.

SCAR LOVER. By Harry Crews. (Poseidon, $19.) Mr. Crews's 12th novel, set among
country folk in Florida, concerns a man running from a wound in his heart that
will not heal.

SECOND SON. By Stephen Stark. (Holt, $22.50.) This headlong novel brings
disquieting news about the battle between fathers and sons, a family game of
chicken with love instead of cars as the weapon.

THE SECRET HISTORY. By Donna Tartt. (Knopf, $23.) In this eminently readable,
lush first novel, an unreliable narrator tells a tale of murder, incest,
promiscuity, nonstop drinking and intense relationships in a college town in
Vermont.

SHE'S COME UNDONE. By Wally Lamb. (Pocket Books, $21.) An ambitious first novel,
written in the voice of a 40-year-old woman who recounts her harrowing progress
into adulthood.

SHOW BUSINESS. By Shashi Tharoor. (Arcade, $19.95.) An impressive novel about
the rise, fall and rise again of a matinee idol in Bombay captures the crazy
razzle-dazzle of the world's biggest and gaudiest film industry.

THE SHRINE AT ALTAMIRA. By John L'Heureux. (Viking, $19.) A stark, cleanly told
novel of guilt and redemption following a hideous act of child abuse; the climax
is unspeakably terrible.

STARDUST, 7-ELEVEN, ROUTE 57, A&W, AND SO FORTH: Stories. By Patricia Lear.
(Knopf, $19.) A nifty debut collection by yet another language-stoked
Southerner, mixing syncopated syntax, down-home insight and far-out yet
believable characters.

THE STORIES OF JOHN EDGAR WIDEMAN. By John Edgar Wideman. (Pantheon, $25.) A
Faulkneresque creation of a whole imagined world -- street corners, bars,
churches, family trees -- blossoms in inner-city Pittsburgh.

SYLVIA. By Leonard Michaels. (Mercury House, paper, $10.) This fictional memoir
captures not only the intimate details of Sylvia Bloch, the depressed, paranoid,
mysterious young woman with whom the author once lived, but also the "weird
delirium" of New York in the 1960's.

TALLER WOMEN: A Cautionary Tale. By Lawrence Naumoff. (Harcourt Brace
Jovanovich, $21.95.) With gritty, dark, energetic humor, Mr. Naumoff delivers
this nasty warning to women: don't trust ex-cons, doctors, sex or men younger
than 80.

THE TANGO PLAYER. By Christoph Hein. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $20.) A professor
jailed for a trifle in East Germany is the focus of a fictional inquiry into the
nature of freedom.

THE TAX INSPECTOR. By Peter Carey. (Knopf, $21.) This disturbing Australian
novel chronicles life in the Catchprice family, a clutch of loonies who enlarge
our sympathies and our understanding as we see more of them and the world around
them.

THINGS NOT SEEN: And Other Stories. By Lynna Williams. (Little, Brown, $18.95.)
Vibrant and shapely tales of disasters of the heart, of people haunted by their
unrelenting histories.

THROUGH THE IVORY GATE. By Rita Dove. (Pantheon, $21.) This happy first novel by
a Pulitzer Prize winner for poetry deals with a young black musician and actress
who contemplates in tranquillity the strategies that have enabled her life so
far.

TIME AND TIDE. By Edna O'Brien. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $21.) Subtly conjuring
up the combined misfortunes of Emma Bovary, Anna Karenina and Hedda Gabler, Ms.
O'Brien displays, once again, her imagination for disaster in this melancholy
novel about an Irishwoman living in London who is victimized by ordinary life,
children, parents and especially men.

A TOWER FOR THE SUMMER HEAT. By Li Yu. (Available/Ballantine, paper, $9.) In his
translation of the taunting stories of Li Yu, Patrick Hanan deftly follows the
fancy, playful steps of the 17th-century Chinese satirist as he trounces social
niceties and champions cheerful banditry.

THE TRAINING GROUND. By Siegfried Lenz. (Holt, $24.95.) An East Prussian
family's wartime escape to the West and to prosperity becomes a powerful symbol
of the development of postwar Germany in this open-ended tale by a Hamburg
novelist.

TROMBONE. By Craig Nova. (Grove Weidenfeld, $20.95.) Mr. Nova's restrained,
skillful novel exposes a young man who only wants life to be ordinary to the
perils of trying to save his father, his friends and himself from an array of
extraordinary menaces.

THE TRUELOVE. By Patrick O'Brian. (Norton, $19.95.) In the 15th installment of
their intertwined careers, Jack Aubrey, Royal Navy captain, and Stephen Maturin,
ship's surgeon and agent of espionage, must cope with live women on their
warship as they strive to smite the upstart Bonaparte and his misguided allies.

THE TRUTH ABOUT THE SAVOLTA CASE. By Eduardo Mendoza. (Pantheon, $25.) Though
first published in the final months of the Franco regime, this quirky,
subversive detective novel of terrorism and counterterrorism, now translated
into English, strikes the post-Franco attitude -- hip, stylish and cynical.

TURNING BACK THE SUN. By Colin Thubron. (Edward Burlingame/HarperCollins, $20.)
Racism, exile, memory and lost identity are the running themes in this
thoughtful novel, set in a nameless outback where a disease is turning white
people brown.

TURTLE MOON. By Alice Hoffman. (Putnam, $21.95.) Ms. Hoffman's lovely novel
insists that there is magic in our lives; its chief characters, two damaged
adults and a troubled child, not only believe in happy endings, they are willing
to work for them.

UNDER THE 82ND AIRBORNE. By Deborah Eisenberg. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $20.)
Dark, complex, thematically opulent short stories conveying an atmosphere of
beleaguered disorientation.

UNDERWORLD. By Peter Conrad. (Poseidon, $21.) Mr. Conrad's first novel -- dense,
hermetic, allusive and striking -- takes place in a futuristic metropolis
divided by a valley of criminals and deftly walks the line between parable and
naturalistic narrative.

VANISHING POINTS. By Thea Astley. (Putnam, $21.95.) Two intricately linked
novellas -- "The Genteel Poverty Bus Company" and "Inventing the Weather" --
about disaffected Australians seeking escape from the monster called progress.

THE VAST MEMORY OF LOVE. By Malcolm Bosse. (Ticknor & Fields, $22.95.) Mr.
Bosse's rumpusy 18th-century historical novel exposes a Fielding-type bumpkin to
the wicked Earl of Sandwich and to Fielding himself, who sniffs a sequel to "Tom
Jones."

VERY OLD BONES. By William Kennedy. (Viking, $22.) The sixth novel in the
author's Albany cycle is a sort of excavation into the past of his own career as
a writer, where the undoing of gloom and the reconciliation of family members
are central themes.

VIOLENCE. By Richard Bausch. (Seymour Lawrence/Houghton Mifflin, $19.95.) A
masterly novel that explores public and private forms of violence with
persistence and sensitivity.

THE VOLCANO LOVER: A Romance. By Susan Sontag. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $22.)
One of our paramount critics extends her neck without damage in this grand,
vigorous, witty and moral historical novel about Lord Nelson, his lover Emma
Hamilton, her husband and Neapolitan society in the 18th century.

VOX. By Nicholson Baker. (Random House, $15.) This imagined erotic telephone
call between two characters on an adult party line is breathtaking, funny and
perversely tender.

THE WAR OF DON EMMANUEL'S NETHER PARTS. By Louis de Bernieres. (Morrow, $25.) It
looks like Latin American magical realism, but it's a romance by a Briton; when
the war (a mistake, mostly) is over, everybody moves to an arcadian mountain
valley.

WAS. By Geoff Ryman. (Knopf, $22.) Turning L. Frank Baum on his head, Mr.
Ryman's novel imagines the true life of a girl named Dorothy who lived a
loveless, deprived life in Kansas until she took refuge in madness -- a nasty Oz
from which there is no returning.

WHERE DO YOU STOP? The Personal History, Adventures, Experiences & Observations
of Peter Leroy (Continued). By Eric Kraft. (Crown, $15.) An extremely funny
novel in which the adult Peter recollects and revises his life in the seventh
grade.

WHO WAS DAVID WEISER? By Pawel Huelle. (Helen and Kurt Wolff/Harcourt Brace
Jovanovich, $17.95.) Mr. Huelle's beautifully written first novel is an elegy
for the ancient port city of Gdansk in Poland and for a group of 12-year-old
boys.

WISE CHILDREN. By Angela Carter. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $21.) Carter's 11th
and last work of fiction is a mock memoir narrated by an endlessly imaginative
post-modernist old woman.

THE WRECKING YARD: Stories. By Pinckney Benedict. (Nan A. Talese/Doubleday,
$19.) Stories, often violent, steeped in the physical world, ultimately moved by
the mess man has made of it.

YOUR BLUES AIN'T LIKE MINE. By Bebe Moore Campbell. (Putnam, $22.95.) An
eloquent first novel that shows the lives and hearts of poor black and white
people, with malice toward none.


History

 ALIEN INK: The FBI's War on Freedom of Expression. By Natalie Robins. (Morrow,
$27.50.) This admirable history of the F.B.I.'s dossier collection on
intellectuals shows that the bureau's agents weren't really up to the task set
for them by their crazed boss.

THE ANATOMY OF THE NUREMBERG TRIALS: A Personal Memoir. By Telford Taylor.
(Knopf, $35.) Mr. Taylor, a prosecutor at the trials of German war criminals in
1946, makes a strong case that justice was done at Nuremberg, and seen to be
done.

BAND OF BROTHERS: E Company, 506th Regiment, 101st Airborne From Normandy to
Hitler's Eagle's Nest. By Stephen E. Ambrose. (Simon & Schuster, $25.) The
history of an elite rifle company whose experiences yielded a profound
comradeship.

BENEVOLENCE AND BETRAYAL: Five Italian Jewish Families Under Fascism. By
Alexander Stille. (Summit, $25.) Mr. Stille's meticulous research and
comprehensive understanding yield a fresh perception of the victims, casualties,
heroes and villains, Jews and gentiles alike, who arose in that terrible time.

THE BLACK MAN'S BURDEN: Africa and the Curse of the Nation-State. By Basil
Davidson. (Times Books/Random House, $24.) A British journalist who lost his
heart to Africa during World War II faces the tragic truth: though Europe robbed
Africa of its history, its culture and its nations, many of its countries are
worse off under independence than they were as colonies.

BRITONS: Forging the Nation 1707-1837. By Linda Colley. (Yale University, $35.)
A historian's ambitious survey of the ideas and events that led the Scottish,
Welsh and English subjects of one crown to regard themselves as a single people,
the British nation.

THE BURIED MIRROR: Reflections on Spain and the New World. By Carlos Fuentes.
(Houghton Mifflin, $35.) Looking for continuity in the cultural history of Spain
and Spanish America, from the caves of Altamira to the streets of East L.A., Mr.
Fuentes has written an anachronistic history but a sweeping and forceful
narrative.

BYZANTIUM: The Apogee. By John Julius Norwich. (Knopf, $30.) The second of a
projected three volumes, this readable and provocative history takes the Eastern
Roman Empire from Charlemagne's coronation in 800 to the late 11th century.

CHINA: A New History. By John King Fairbank. (Belknap/ Harvard University,
$27.95.) A grand ambition, grandly achieved in Fairbank's final book: the
analytic narrative is full of intelligent ideas, original contributions and
up-to-date scholarship.

THE CIVIL WAR IN THE AMERICAN WEST. By Alvin M. Josephy Jr. (Knopf, $27.50.) A
learned and powerful narrative that reveals how intimately joined the war and
the Western expansion were.

THE EMPEROR'S LAST ISLAND: A Journey to St. Helena. By Julia Blackburn.
(Pantheon, $22.) That nowhere place in the South Atlantic springs both to mind
and to life in this geographical, psychological and historical account of
Napoleon's final days.

THE END OF HISTORY AND THE LAST MAN. By Francis Fukuyama. (Free Press, $24.95.)
A quixotic, tightly argued work of political philosophy whose rallying cry is
"Back to Hegel" and whose central argument is that liberal democracy is the
natural and inviting end of history.

THE FAMILY ROMANCE OF THE FRENCH REVOLUTION. By Lynn Hunt. (University of
California, $20.) A historian's original reading of the Revolution's themes and
anxieties as they suggest Freudian programs (first, cut off Daddy's head . . .).

FRONTIERS: The Epic of South Africa's Creation and the Tragedy of the Xhosa
People. By Noel Mostert. (Knopf, $35.) A thorough account of the clash,
generations long, between the Cape colonists and the first big, powerful African
nation they encountered.

THE GOLDEN AGE OF AMERICAN GARDENS: Proud Owners, Private Estates, 1890-1940. By
Mac Griswold and Eleanor Weller. (Abrams/Garden Club of America, $75.)
Meticulous documentation by horticultural historians of over 500 great gardens
created when wealth was bold and showy.

THE GREAT GAME: The Struggle for Empire in Central Asia. By Peter Hopkirk.
(Kodansha, $30.) The frankly admiring story of the men (all stouthearted) and
the lands they strove over during more than a century of contest between Russia
and Britain.

HELL'S FOUNDATIONS: A Social History of the Town of Bury in the Aftermath of the
Gallipoli Campaign. By Geoffrey Moorhouse. (Holt, $24.95.) Patriotism, stoicism
and resentment in the home base of a British regiment 2,000 of whose men died in
the fiasco of 1915.

"IT'S YOUR MISFORTUNE AND NONE OF MY OWN": A New History of the American West.
By Richard White. (University of Oklahoma, $39.95.) A lively synthesis
incorporating the work of the revisionist scholars who have renewed the study of
the region.

JAPAN AT WAR: An Oral History. By Haruko Taya Cook and Theodore F. Cook. (New
Press, $27.50.) Powerful, hideous and remarkably candid recollections by
Japanese veterans who confirm the worst allegations of American wartime
propaganda.

THE JEWS OF GERMANY: A Historical Portrait. By Ruth Gay. (Yale University, $35.)
A moving, lively account of a vanished community and the surrounding society,
from A.D. 70 to Hitler.

THE LAST TSAR: The Life and Death of Nicholas II. By Edvard Radzinsky.
(Doubleday, $25.) A convoluted, utterly absorbing tale by a popular Russian
playwright, trained as an archivist, who has pursued the assassination of the
Russian royals since the 1970's and struck gushers of information in the
glasnost era. One of many conclusions: Lenin was consulted and approved.

THE LINCOLN COUNTY WAR: A Documentary History. By Frederick Nolan. (University
of Oklahoma, $49.95.) Mr. Nolan's primary research and thoughtful treatment
capture the spirit of a justly infamous episode of rotten behavior in the West.

MAKING HISTORY. The Struggle for Gay and Lesbian Equal Rights, 1945-1990: An
Oral History. By Eric Marcus. (HarperCollins, $25.) A portrait gallery of 45
politically involved men and women, gay and straight, for many of whom the
coming-out experience was the trigger for activism.

MYSTIC CHORDS OF MEMORY: The Transformation of Tradition in American Culture. By
Michael Kammen. (Knopf, $40.) Mr. Kammen, a brilliant cultural historian,
explores the creation of a usable American past (Margaret Mitchell's Southland,
for instance) in the teeth (or behind the back) of the facts.

NATIVISM AND SLAVERY: The Northern Know Nothings and the Politics of the 1850s.
By Tyler Anbinder. (Oxford University, $39.95.) The history of a weird and awful
period in American politics, when a powerful anti-Catholic movement became, for
a while, the most effective antislavery movement as well.

NATURAL ALLIES: Women's Associations in American History. By Anne Firor Scott.
(University of Illinois, $32.50.) This clearheaded but impassioned survey shows
that women's volunteer societies, far from being frivolous, were the force
behind countless civic projects, from the building of schools to the
establishment of welfare agencies.

THE NEW EMPERORS: China in the Era of Mao and Deng. By Harrison E. Salisbury.
(Little, Brown, $24.95.) A fascinating and detailed picture of the personal
relationships and private lives of China's rulers for 40 years; by a veteran of
The New York Times.

ODD GIRLS AND TWILIGHT LOVERS: A History of Lesbian Life in Twentieth-Century
America. By Lillian Faderman. (Columbia University, cloth, $29.95; Penguin,
paper, $12.) Many sources combined show how lesbian identity has changed in this
century.

ORDINARY MEN: Reserve Police Battalion 101 and the Final Solution in Poland. By
Christopher R. Browning. (Aaron Asher/HarperCollins, $22.) A historian's
penetrating account of some men -- most of them not even Nazis -- who killed
about 83,000 Jews.

OTA BENGA: The Pygmy in the Zoo. By Phillips Verner Bradford and Harvey Blume.
(St. Martin's, $22.95.) Why was a 4-foot-11 Congolese in a cage in the Bronx
1906? This account reflects an America we can now (let's hope) only imagine.

OVER THE EARTH I COME: The Great Sioux Uprising of 1862. By Duane Schultz.
(Thomas Dunne/St. Martin's, $21.95.) A taut, capable narrative of the abominable
doings by both sides that set the tone for America's post-Civil War expansion.

OWEN LATTIMORE AND THE "LOSS" OF CHINA. By Robert P. Newman. (University of
California, $30.) This landmark work on American politics after World War II
tells us how an obscure scholar came to be seen as the Red Menace itself.

THE RADICALISM OF THE AMERICAN REVOLUTION. By Gordon S. Wood. (Knopf, $27.50.)
Mr. Wood argues with learning and grace that if social change is the measure of
radicalism, our revolution was as radical as anybody's.

ROWAN'S PROGRESS. By James McConkey. (Pantheon, $22.) This sensible 100-year
history shows how a doctor and a hospital helped ease Kentucky's Rowan County
into the modern world.

RUSSIA TRANSFORMED: BREAKTHROUGH TO HOPE. Moscow, August 1991. By James H.
Billington. (Free Press, $19.95.) Mr. Billington, a distinguished historian of
Russia, had the luck to be there during the failed putsch of 1991; this is his
perceptive, guardedly optimistic witness to a possible miracle.

THE SCRAMBLE FOR AFRICA: 1876-1912. By Thomas Pakenham. (Random House, $32.)
Exercising both detachment and judgment, Mr. Pakenham relates the endless
movements of the Europeans (and their African enemies) across the huge continent
they snatched from its inhabitants and divided among themselves.

SOLDIERS OF THE SUN: The Rise and Fall of the Imperial Japanese Army. By Meirion
Harries and Susie Harries. (Random House, $30.) A history of the
state-within-the-state that was the Japanese Army before 1945, an organization
addicted to aggression and to exceeding its instructions.

THE SPANISH FRONTIER IN NORTH AMERICA. By David J. Weber. (Yale University,
$35.) A comprehensive account of the encounters, and their consequences, between
Spanish and native culture, and between both and English-speaking Americans.

THE STOLEN HOUSE. By Bernard L. Herman. (University Press of Virginia, cloth,
$35; paper, $16.95.) An account of an 1812 lawsuit leads to a historian's
fascinating examination of economic life when most Americans were poor and the
few rich knew no shame.

TENNOZAN: The Battle of Okinawa and the Atomic Bomb. By George Feifer. (Ticknor
& Fields, $29.95.) A skillful narrative of the brutal battle of April 1-July 2,
1945, which prepared the United States to use atomic bombs rather than fight
another such battle.

UNTO THE SONS. By Gay Talese. (Knopf, $25.) Mr. Talese has brought his enormous
reportorial industry to bear on his own family, especially on his Italian-born
father's side, and has meticulously reconstructed a personal history and a way
of life now distant.

VESTED INTERESTS: Cross-Dressing & Cultural Anxiety. By Marjorie Garber.
(Routledge, $35.) This erudite and exhilarating social history explores how
culture creates transvestites and transvestites create culture.

WE WERE SOLDIERS ONCE . . . AND YOUNG. Ia Drang: The Battle That Changed the War
in Vietnam. By Harold G. Moore and Joseph L. Galloway. (Random House, $25.) A
general and a journalist, both of whom were there, narrate and analyze this
agonizing 1965 encounter as a prototype for the developing war.

Medicine & Psychology

 THE "ABORTION PILL": RU-486, a Woman's Choice. By Etienne-Emile Baulieu with
Mort Rosenblum. (Simon & Schuster, $22.) The discoverer of the antihormone
RU-486 lucidly explains the discovery and its workings, his views on social
responsibility and the political barriers, here and elsewhere, the drug has run
into.

ACCEPTABLE RISKS. By Jonathan Kwitny. (Poseidon, $24.) This well-paced story of
bureaucratic adventure and political protest centers on two men who tried, by
hook and by crook, to change the rules of Federal drug testing when their lovers
and friends began dying of AIDS.

THE AMERICAN WAY OF BIRTH. By Jessica Mitford. (William Abrahams/Dutton, $23.)
The supercharged social critic of "The American Way of Death" takes no prisoners
(especially not men) on her march through the other end of life in this country.

THE ASPIRIN WARS: Money, Medicine, and 100 Years of Rampant Competition. By
Charles C. Mann and Mark L. Plummer. (Knopf, $25.) A fascinating and thoroughly
researched history of a most remarkable little pill.

THE CHANGE: Women, Aging and the Menopause. By Germaine Greer. (Knopf, $24.) The
author of the classic "Female Eunuch" struggles grandly with practically
everything -- historical, medical, psychological, metaphysical -- that concerns
the dreaded event, and finds it in the end a liberating occasion.

I'M DYSFUNCTIONAL, YOU'RE DYSFUNCTIONAL: The Recovery Movement and Other
Self-Help Fashions. By Wendy Kaminer. (Addison-Wesley, $18.95.) The author, a
lawyer and journalist, offers a witty, occasionally harsh account of people who
call their troubles diseases and blame other people for them.

INTOXICATED BY MY ILLNESS: And Other Writings on Life and Death. By Anatole
Broyard. (Clarkson Potter, $18.) Urbane, lyrical, witty and gracious essays by a
former book critic and editor at The New York Times, written mostly in his last
14 months.

THE INVISIBLE EPIDEMIC: The Story of Women and AIDS. By Gena Corea.
(HarperCollins, $23.) This important and disturbing book argues that a
paternalistic medical establishment is so used to seeing women as "other" that
it has failed to recognize AIDS in women.

MEETING AT THE CROSSROADS: Women's Psychology and Girls' Development. By Lyn
Mikel Brown and Carol Gilligan. (Harvard University, $19.95.) Two psychologists
study the transition from childhood to adolescence and find adult women guilty
of teaching girls to suppress their native truthfulness.

THE MISMEASURE OF WOMAN. By Carol Tavris. (Simon & Schuster, $23.) A social
psychologist examines the scientific study of fundamental differences between
men and women; she finds much of it just plain wrong, even when its agenda is
feminist.

TRAUMA AND RECOVERY. By Judith Lewis Herman. (Basic Books, $27.) A clinically
and philosophically sophisticated argument that domestic abuse of women causes a
trauma identical with post-traumatic stress disorder in soldiers, and is equally
treatable with intelligent psychotherapy.


Poetry


 THE BURNT PAGES. By John Ash. (Random House, $19.) A greatly gifted poet who
moves easily from the hieratic to the demotic, John Ash has a deep knowledge of
history that is rare among poets now, along with wit, an eye for the ridiculous
and brilliant craftsmanship.

A GILDED LAPSE OF TIME. By Gjertrud Schnackenberg. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux,
$19.) This poet's darkest and yet most radiant book contains three poetic
sequences so enraptured, so illuminated by annunciations and resurrections, that
they should properly be called visions.

GORSE FIRES. By Michael Longley. (Wake Forest University, cloth, $11.95; paper,
$6.95.) Some of these poems by a leading writer of Northern Ireland are certain
to become anthology pieces. There is no voyeurism or sensationalism in his lines
about the human suffering of his divided land, but his quiet outrage and his
passion for peace burn into the mind.

THE LOVE POEMS OF MAY SWENSON. By May Swenson. (Houghton Mifflin, paper, $9.95.)
A rare, authentic poet of celebration, this American original who died at 76 in
1989 wrote high-spirited, unruly, risky poems that reveal a writer filled with
sexual ebullience and emotional candor.

PROVINCES. By Czeslaw Milosz. (Ecco, $19.95.) In new poems of penetrating
honesty, this famous immigrant from Poland, who won the Nobel Prize in
Literature in 1980, presents a lucid, deceptively straightforward, unforgettable
portrait of the artist as an old man.

QUILTING: Poems 1987-1990. By Lucille Clifton. (BOA Editions, cloth, $18; paper,
$9.) This urban African-American poet's work is personal, visionary,
celebratory, passionate, mercurial, angry, prophetic, vulnerable, funny -- and
always surprising.

SELECTED POEMS. By James Tate. (Wesleyan University/University Press of New
England, paper, $14.95.) The winner of this year's Pulitzer Prize for poetry has
collected work from the last 25 years. James Tate has the rare ability to be
extremely funny in verse, but his comedy partly masks and partly reveals
underlying disorientation and angst.


Politics & Current Affairs

 AFTER APARTHEID: The Future of South Africa. By Sebastian Mallaby. (Times
Books/Random House, $22.) A British journalist who has covered Africa
extensively believes the hardest parts will be achieving democracy and raising
living standards.

AFTER THE WAR WAS OVER: Hanoi and Saigon. By Neil Sheehan. (Random House, $17.)
The surprise of this political travelogue, which serves as an afterword to
"Bright Shining Lie," is the absence of animosity toward the United States.

AMERICA: WHAT WENT WRONG? By Donald L. Barlett and James B. Steele. (Andrews &
McMeel, paper, $6.95.) This expanded newspaper series by two Pulitzer Prize
winners finds that the economy has been altered to favor the already favored.

CAPITOL GAMES: Clarence Thomas, Anita Hill, and the Story of a Supreme Court
Nomination. By Timothy M. Phelps and Helen Winternitz. (Hyperion, $24.95.) Two
journalists' comprehensive, insightful view of the Clarence Thomas story; they
believe its outcome was determined by the political effectiveness of the Bush
Administration and the mistakes of Ms. Hill's supporters.

A COMPLICATED WAR: The Harrowing of Mozambique. By William Finnegan. (University
of California, $25.) A brilliant, sometimes devastating eyewitness report of the
civil war, sponsored by South Africa, that has killed a million Mozambicans.

THE CONSEQUENCES OF THE PEACE: The New Internationalism and American Foreign
Policy. By James Chace. (20th Century Fund/Oxford University, $22.95.) Tailoring
his book for the post-cold-war world, Mr. Chace elegantly restates Walter
Lippmann's idea that America's diplomatic ambitions must be balanced by economic
realities.

THE DISUNITING OF AMERICA. By Arthur M. Schlesinger Jr. (Norton, $14.95.) A sane
and temperate discussion of how ethnic historians are creating intellectual
ghettos, fragmenting society and undermining the ideal of political unity.

THE END OF EQUALITY. By Mickey Kaus. (Basic Books, $25.) Mr. Kaus, an editor of
The New Republic, argues boldly and radically that the present welfare system,
corrupt and corrupting, should be eliminated and replaced by a guaranteed jobs
program.

EVENING CHATS IN BEIJING: Probing China's Predicament. By Perry Link. (Norton,
$24.95.) A cheerless survey of today's China as seen in conversation with its
despairing intellectuals.

FACES AT THE BOTTOM OF THE WELL: The Permanence of Racism. By Derrick Bell.
(Basic Books, $20.) A prominent scholar of race and the law argues, with
allegory, fables and dialogues, that our progress against racism so far has been
illusory.

THE FIRST DISSIDENT: The Book of Job in Today's Politics. By William Safire.
(Random House, $23.) With clarity and verve, Mr. Safire renders Job as the
matchless investigator of innocent suffering and the prototype of resistance to
authoritarian rule.

FREEDOM FROM FEAR: And Other Writings. By Aung San Suu Kyi. (Viking, cloth, $25;
Penguin, paper, $12.) This collection of work by the 1991 Nobel Peace Prize
winner offers her insights into Burmese political history and philosophy;
liberal democratic movements, she believes, have been suppressed but not
extinguished by the Japanese occupation and the Burmese military.

IN MY FATHER'S HOUSE: Africa in the Philosophy of Culture. By Kwame Anthony
Appiah. (Oxford University, $29.95.) In his formidable and sweeping critique, a
Ghanaian-born Harvard professor calls the search for a unique racial destiny an
"ennobling lie," and argues that Africans do not share culture, language,
religion or even a common race.

INNER CIRCLES. How America Changed the World: A Memoir. By Alexander M. Haig Jr.
with Charles McCarry. (Warner, $24.95.) Mr. Haig denies he is Deep Throat,
expresses the frustrations of American foreign policy after World War II,
criticizes the incrementalism that led to our failure in Vietnam and presents a
thoughtful account of how the cold war was fought and why we were so unprepared
for its end.

IN SEARCH OF ANTI-SEMITISM. By William F. Buckley Jr. (Continuum, $19.95.) With
an enormous understanding of Jewish sensitivities, Mr. Buckley argues that those
who wish the destruction of Israel may qualify as anti-Semites, and that
anti-Semites are morally unqualified for public office.

KILLING THE WIZARDS: Wars of Power and Freedom From Zaire to South Africa. By
Alan Cowell. (Simon & Schuster, $23.) The Rome bureau chief of The New York
Times reflects on his days as a correspondent in Africa and ponders the hidden
reasons why all the Western journalists who cover it emerge with identical
views.

LIFE ITSELF: Abortion in the American Mind. By Roger Rosenblatt. (Random House,
$20.) Arguing that most people are in their hearts somewhat ambivalent about
abortion, Mr. Rosenblatt offers a solution: permit abortion but discourage it,
and let all parties learn to live with less than they really want.

THE MAKING OF MIDDLEBROW CULTURE. By Joan Shelley Rubin. (University of North
Carolina, cloth, $34.95; paper, $14.95.) An intelligent study of several
20th-century American efforts to sell culture to the plebs, which did much for
some of the plebs.

MOLEHUNT: The Secret Search for Traitors That Shattered the CIA. By David Wise.
(Random House, $22.) In his seventh nonfiction book on intelligence, Mr. Wise
tells how the agency was crippled in the 1960's by a paranoid hunt for a Soviet
penetrator.

OCTOBER SURPRISE: America's Hostages in Iran and the Election of Ronald Reagan.
By Gary Sick. (Times Books/Random House, $23.) Mr. Sick lays out his case, which
is circumstantial and not conclusive, that the 1980 Reagan campaign made a deal
with Iran not to release the hostages during Jimmy Carter's term.

OH CANADA! OH QUEBEC! Requiem for a Divided Country. By Mordecai Richler.
(Knopf, $23.) An unsystematic, powerful jeremiad against a law requiring that
all public activities in Quebec be conducted exclusively in French -- a law that
Mr. Richler sees as an exercise in cultural small-mindedness, xenophobia and
even anti-Semitism.

ONLY MAN IS VILE: The Tragedy of Sri Lanka. By William McGowan. (Farrar, Straus
& Giroux, $25.) How the people of a terrestrial paradise (still remembered as
Ceylon) turned it, with the assistance of India, into a hell on earth in barely
a decade.

RACE: How Blacks and Whites Think and Feel About the American Obsession. By
Studs Terkel. (New Press, $24.95.) Conversations with people, mostly from the
Chicago area, a number of whom seem still to have convictions that encourage us
to hope.

REBUILDING RUSSIA: Reflections and Tentative Proposals. By Aleksandr
Solzhenitsyn. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $14.95.) This sometimes breathless essay
suggests introducing democracy at the village level, with no secret ballot and
no encysted minorities.

RETHINKING SOCIAL POLICY: Race, Poverty, and the Underclass. By Christopher
Jencks. (Harvard University, $27.95.) Mr. Jencks, a down-to-earth liberal
sociologist, zeroes in on what we know and what we don't about some so far
insoluble problems.

SECOND FRONT: Censorship and Propaganda in the Gulf War. By John R. MacArthur.
(Hill & Wang, $20.) A furious muckraker tells how the United States Defense
Department deployed the weaponry of public relations in Grenada, in Panama, in
the Persian Gulf, and how the press failed to fight back.

SEIZE THE MOMENT: America's Challenge in a One-Superpower World. By Richard
Nixon. (Simon & Schuster, $25.) A forceful argument for a classical,
geopolitical American internationalism.

SHOOT THE WOMEN FIRST. By Eileen MacDonald. (Random House, $20.) A diverse
selection of biographies and interviews of women terrorists, from West Bank
stone throwers and Basques battling for independence to notorious superstars
like the Palestinian hijacker Leila Khaled.

SLIM'S TABLE: Race, Respectability, and Masculinity. By Mitchell Duneier.
(University of Chicago, $19.95.) A sociologist's fascinating report on the codes
of decent behavior that govern the lives of working-class black men he got to
know in a cafeteria.

SUMMER MEDITATIONS. By Vaclav Havel. (Knopf, $20.) Czechoslovakia's former
President and best-known author reflects on politics and finds that it's not
power that matters but goodness.

TELLER'S WAR: The Top-Secret Story Behind the Star Wars Deception. By William J.
Broad. (Simon & Schuster, $25.) This accessible but heavily documented account
of the Strategic Defense Initiative, by a reporter for The Times, argues that
Mr. Teller sold President Ronald Reagan an unworkable turkey.

TWO NATIONS: Black and White, Separate, Hostile, Unequal. By Andrew Hacker.
(Scribners, $24.95.) The thesis of this challenging book by a distinguished
political scientist is that unto this day black people have not received a fair
shake as American citizens -- and that most white Americans don't believe this.

WAKE UP LITTLE SUSIE: Single Pregnancy and Race Before Roe v. Wade. By Rickie
Solinger. (Routledge, $25.) A scholar's grim analysis of the treatment -- and
the difference in treatment -- accorded women and girls who became
extramaritally pregnant.

WHAT IT TAKES: The Way to the White House. By Richard Ben Cramer. (Random House,
$28.) A disheartening examination by a Pulitzer Prize-winning journalist of the
Presidential contenders of 1988: why they did it and what happened to them in
consequence.

WHO WILL TELL THE PEOPLE: The Betrayal of American Democracy. By William
Greider. (Simon & Schuster, $25.) Mr. Greider, a former assistant managing
editor at The Washington Post, presents a comprehensive guide to the American
political system, which, he argues, is now a "grand bazaar" of moneyed interest
groups and a grand attempt to obscure this fact.

Religion

 THE FEMININE FACE OF GOD: The Unfolding of the Sacred in Women. By Sherry Ruth
Anderson and Patricia Hopkins. (Bantam, $20.) Sensitive portraits of the
spiritual lives of more than 100 women, as seen through the eyes of two
feminists.

FUNDAMENTALISMS OBSERVED. Edited by Martin E. Marty and R. Scott Appleby.
(University of Chicago, $40.) The first of five volumes in an encyclopedic study
of fundamentalist movements in just about all the religions and regions of the
earth.

IGNATIUS OF LOYOLA: The Psychology of a Saint. By W. W. Meissner. (Yale
University, $35.) A wise exploration of the twice-born, nearly omnicompetent
Ignatius by a Jesuit who is a psychoanalytically trained psychiatrist as well.

JUDAISM, HUMAN VALUES, AND THE JEWISH STATE. By Yeshayahu Leibowitz. Edited by
Eliezer Goldman. (Harvard, $39.95.) Twenty-seven fearlessly consistent,
provocative essays by Mr. Leibowitz, a physician, philosopher, chemist,
polemicist, lecturer, observant Jew and Zionist, who believes that Judaism may
not survive the state of Israel.

A MARGINAL JEW: Rethinking the Historical Jesus. Volume One: The Roots of the
Problem and the Person. By John P. Meier. (Anchor Bible Reference
Library/Doubleday, $25.) This gently skeptical but old-fashioned study of Jesus'
birth, development and cultural background is the first part of a planned
two-volume work on the historical Jesus.

THE MIND OF GOD: The Scientific Basis for a Rational World. By Paul Davies.
(Simon & Schuster, $22.) In this personable and crisp metaphysical quest, a
physicist asks whether scientific inquiry can lead us to ultimate answers about
creation.

OPUS DEI: An Investigation Into the Secret Society Struggling for Power Within
the Roman Catholic Church. By Michael Walsh. (HarperSanFranciso, $18.95.) A
well-documented, critical look at Opus Dei, the 64-year-old elitist Roman
Catholic organization whose members are said to wear spiked belts under business
suits and whose founder, Msgr. Jose Maria Escriva de Balaguer y Albas, seems
well on his way to sainthood.

SANTIAGO: Saint of Two Worlds. By Joan Myers, Marc Simmons and Donna Pierce.
(University of New Mexico, cloth, $45; paper, $25.) Words and pictures (by Ms.
Myers) that explore the remarkable legend of St. James in Spain and America.

VIRGIN TIME. By Patricia Hampl. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $22.) A literary
account, by the author of "A Romantic Education," of a personal journey, through
pilgrimage and conventual life, into a Roman Catholic heritage she had thought
to be dead.

THE WORLD OF BIBLICAL LITERATURE. By Robert Alter. (Basic Books, $23.) These
addictive essays analyzing the Hebrew Bible as a literary work try to break down
the wall between modern readers and ancient texts.

 Science

 ANATOMY OF LOVE: The Natural History of Monogamy, Adultery, and Divorce. By
Helen E. Fisher. (Norton, $22.95.) A delightful, ambitious study of the animal
nature of human love and the evolutionary forces that influence our mating
behavior -- with an unapologetically female slant.

BRIGHT AIR, BRILLIANT FIRE: On the Matter of the Mind. By Gerald M. Edelman.
(Basic Books, $25.) In a brave attempt to elucidate his own theory of neural
Darwinism, a neuroscientist argues that the brain is not like a computer but
rather like the immune system, molding itself to the contours of the outside
world.

THE DIVERSITY OF LIFE. By Edward O. Wilson. (Belknap/Harvard University,
$29.95.) The distinguished scientist who made sociobiology famous warns humanity
that it has become far too powerful for its own good and will soon regret,
morally and economically, its devastation of nonhuman forms of life.

EARTH IN THE BALANCE: Ecology and the Human Spirit. By Al Gore. (Houghton
Mifflin, $22.95.) The Vice President-elect assesses the decay of the planet and
proposes an environmental Marshall Plan in this perspicacious, heartening book.

ECOCIDE IN THE USSR: Health and Nature Under Siege. By Murray Feshbach and
Alfred Friendly Jr. (Basic Books, $24.) A tour of doleful terrain -- the
environmental and public-health disasters that accompanied 74 years of Communist
misrule.

EXTINCTION: Bad Genes or Bad Luck? By David M. Raup. (Norton, $19.95.) In a
breezy tone, a biologist and statistical analyst says that mass extinctions,
triggered by meteorites, are likely to happen every 26 million years and we
should now be looking to ward off the next one.

GENIUS: The Life and Science of Richard Feynman. By James Gleick. (Pantheon,
$27.50.) Mr. Gleick, who knows how to portray scientists and dramatize emerging
ideas, takes on one of the greatest of physicists, the pioneer of quantum
electrodynamics.

IS ANYONE OUT THERE? The Scientific Search for Extraterrestrial Intelligence. By
Frank Drake and Dava Sobel. (Delacorte, $22.) A passionate argument that there
are aliens in the universe trying to get our attention.

MAPPING THE NEXT MILLENNIUM: The Discovery of New Geographies. By Stephen S.
Hall. (Random House, $30.) Mr. Hall's fascinating thesis is that the vast gobs
of data generated by modern scientific research yield the clearest and most
useful results when rendered in graphic form -- that is, as maps.

THE MIND'S SKY: Human Intelligence in a Cosmic Context. By Timothy Ferris.
(Bantam, $22.50.) An audacious, chatty book that explores the connection between
the universe of the mind and the universe of the stars.

THE MINER'S CANARY: Unraveling the Mysteries of Extinction. By Niles Eldredge.
(Prentice Hall, $20.) One of the world's leading evolutionary theorists argues
that the biggest threat to our species is posed not by meteorites but by
ourselves.

NIELS BOHR'S TIMES: In Physics, Philosophy and Polity. By Abraham Pais.
(Clarendon/ Oxford University, $35.) What did the 1922 Nobel laureate in physics
actually do to be so much admired? This first major biography of Bohr
illuminates his contributions.

ORIGINS RECONSIDERED: In Search of What Makes Us Human. By Richard Leakey and
Roger Lewin. (Doubleday, $25.) A paleoanthropological argument that such "human"
qualities as consciousness evolved before modern humans themselves.

PRISONER'S DILEMMA. By William Poundstone. (Doubleday, $22.50.) An open and
multifaceted work that explores how the premier paradox about choice and
conflict was formulated by the mathematicians Emile Borel and John von Neumann,
and how it came to be connected with nuclear strategy.

RUBBISH! The Archaeology of Garbage. By William Rathje and Cullen Murphy.
(HarperCollins, $23.) The findings of excavations in modern urban landfills,
which often tell more about ourselves and our habits than we are willing to
confess.

THE THIRD CHIMPANZEE: The Evolution and Future of the Human Animal. By Jared
Diamond. (HarperCollins, $25.) With great wit, a physiologist ponders what it is
that makes chimps and humans, who share 98 percent of their DNA, so different.

UNCERTAINTY: The Life and Science of Werner Heisenberg. By David C. Cassidy. (W.
H. Freeman, $29.95.) A fascinating, well-documented biography of the man who, in
his scientific life, concluded that quantum mechanics had destroyed the
determinism of classical mechanics and who, in his personal life, seemed to
sympathize with the Nazis.

WHY BUILDINGS FALL DOWN: How Structures Fail. By Matthys Levy and Mario
Salvadori. (Norton, $24.95.) Two wise, delightful structural engineers explain
what can go wrong in their trade.

Science Fiction

 ARISTOI. By Walter Jon Williams. (Tor/Tom Doherty, $22.95.) This story is set
so far in the future that human beings, having achieved almost godlike powers,
face no constraints on their desires except for those they create themselves.

CHINA MOUNTAIN ZHANG. By Maureen F. McHugh. (Tor/ Tom Doherty, $19.95.) A
beautifully realized first novel that portrays the 22d century as dominated by a
nominally socialist China.

DOOMSDAY BOOK. By Connie Willis. (Spectra/Bantam, $22.) A time-traveling
historian from the 21st century arrives in medieval England just in time for the
Black Death and comes to appreciate the people there on their own terms.

A FIRE UPON THE DEEP. By Vernor Vinge. (Tor/Tom Doherty, $21.95.) Thoughtful
space opera at its best, this book delivers everything it promises in terms of
galactic scope, audacious concepts and believable characters both human and
nonhuman.

MEETING IN INFINITY. By John Kessel. (Arkham House, $20.95.) These 14 stories
explore the slippery border between fantasy and memory and show how the best
"escapist" science fiction can liberate the mind.

TIME, LIKE AN EVER-ROLLING STREAM. By Judith Moffett. (St. Martin's, $21.95.)
Ms. Moffett continues the story of the Hefn, the stubborn, furry
extraterrestrials who come to save Earth, and the stubborn but likable
earthlings they touch in unpredictable ways.

 Spies & Thrillers

 THE BLOOD OF THE LAMB. By Thomas F. Monteleone. (Tor/ Tom Doherty, $21.95.)
This daring book, set just before the year 2000, concerns a charismatic priest
in Brooklyn who begins acting Messianic -- performing miracles, making fools of
television evangelists and terrifying the cardinals in the Vatican who plotted
his return.

A CALCULATED RISK. By Katherine Neville. (Ballantine, $20.) There isn't a dull
moment as Verity Banks, a senior executive at the Bank of the World, engineers a
complicated fiduciary revenge on the boss who ruined her chance for a position
at the Federal Reserve.

FATHERLAND. By Robert Harris. (Random House, $21.) The author of "Selling
Hitler: The Story of the Hitler Diaries" begins this bleak book with some bleak
premises: Germany won World War II, and by 1964 Joseph P. Kennedy Sr. is
President of the United States, Hitler is still alive, and everyone is spying on
everyone else.

FROST THE FIDDLER. By Janice Weber. (St. Martin's, $19.95.) Ms. Weber is an
American concert pianist who writes as well as she plays; her heroine, a sort of
female James Bond, is a famous violinist who doubles as a spy for a very secret
United States agency.

JADE LADY BURNING. By Martin Limon. (Soho, $19.95.) A compassionately written,
searingly intense story that centers on two soldiers from the Criminal
Investigation Division of the United States Army as they scour Seoul, South
Korea, to investigate the murder of a prostitute who was the lover of an
American G.I.

A LANDING ON THE SUN. By Michael Frayn. (Viking, $21.) A philosophical fable, a
satire on bureaucracies and finally a spy thriller that employs to fine effect
many of Mr. Frayn's numberless talents.

LET US PREY. By Bill Branon. (Black Seal Press, paper, $12.95.) In this raunchy,
cynical book about the inherent rottenness of big government, one man decides to
do something about the inequities of the Internal Revenue Service.

Travel, Nature & Adventure

 AFRICAN LAUGHTER: Four Visits to Zimbabwe. By Doris Lessing. (HarperCollins,
$25.) A piercing account of the distinguished novelist's visits to her
deteriorating homeland, a country that can never really be her home again.

BANDIT: Dossier of a Dangerous Dog. By Vicki Hearne. (Aaron Asher/HarperCollins,
$22.) Not just a baroque story about a dog who bit his master but an eccentric
lesson in justice, linguistics, racism and teleology.

BARCELONA. By Robert Hughes. (Knopf, $27.50.) An elegant, often witty, survey of
the history and culture of a great city that fate has made relatively
unfamiliar, by an art critic for Time magazine.

FORESTS: The Shadow of Civilization. By Robert Pogue Harrison. (University of
Chicago, $24.95.) An absorbing, sometimes eloquent exploration of the forest in
the Western imagination.

THE GREAT DEEP: The Sea and Its Thresholds. By James Hamilton-Paterson. (Random
House, $23.) An intricate, scholarly, painful survey of the oceans and their
imperilment by humanity.

THE HAPPY ISLES OF OCEANIA: Paddling the Pacific. By Paul Theroux. (Putnam,
$24.95.) In a folding, fabric-covered kayak, on the run from a ruined marriage,
and among the local inhabitants of 51 Pacific islands, Mr. Theroux discovers
that he is not a travel writer after all.

IMAGINED PLACES: Journeys Into Literary America. By Michael Pearson. (University
Press of Mississippi, $24.95.) In this unusual and sometimes dispiriting mix of
travel and autobiography, the author gathers up his best-loved books and tries
to find the worlds they evoked -- Ernest Hemingway's Key West, Mark Twain's
Missouri, Flannery O'Connor's South.

ITALIAN NEIGHBORS: Or, a Lapsed Anglo-Saxon in Verona. By Tim Parks. (Grove
Weidenfeld, $19.95.) Mr. Parks, a British novelist, splendidly characterizes the
villagers among whom he lives, but who accept him only when his wife becomes
pregnant.

LAND OF THE EAGLE: A Natural History of North America. By Robert McCracken Peck.
(Summit, $30.) The companion volume for a BBC television series portrays the
continent as it appeared to the first European explorers.

MEN AND WHALES. By Richard Ellis. (Knopf, $40.) An impressive, lavishly
illustrated history of one of our most significant and complex relationships
with nature, from neolithic whale hunts to the world ban on commercial whaling.

THE MOON BY WHALE LIGHT: And Other Adventures Among Bats, Penguins,
Crocodilians, and Whales. By Diane Ackerman. (Random House, $20.) These four
natural history pieces by an unsqueamish, hands-on reporter contain many gems of
description and an incredible amount of sensory detail.

NATIVE STRANGER: A Black American's Journey Into the Heart of Africa. By Eddy L.
Harris. (Simon & Schuster, $22.) A black American writer who has a gift for
opening himself up to strangers travels through Africa to see how African he
really is.

UNQUIET DAYS: At Home in Poland. By Thomas Swick. (Ticknor & Fields, $19.95.)
This engaged, intriguing memoir of an American living in Poland during the
Solidarity revolution and the declaration of martial law is also a literary
appreciation of the Polish people.

WHITEOUT: Lost in Aspen. By Ted Conover. (Random House, $20.) Mr. Conover spent
two years roaming the streets and slopes of Aspen, Colo., the trendiest place on
earth; he had a wonderful time, almost lost his soul, escaped and wrote a
fascinating book.

THE WORLD AND THE BO TREE. By Helen Bevington. (Duke University, cloth, $39.95;
paper, $15.95.) A poet and tireless tourist with a taste for comfortable hotels
records her travels and quotes voluminously from her reading.

LOAD-DATE: December 6, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: January 3, 1993, Sunday

CORRECTION:

The description of "Boneyards," by Robert Campbell, on Dec. 6 in The Book
Review's list of notable books of 1992 misstated the year in which Mayor Richard
J. Daley of Chicago died. It was 1976, not 1977.


TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              333 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 December 7, 1992, Monday, Late Edition - Final

MISSION TO SOMALIA;
A Few in Congress Advising Caution, or Vote, on Somalia

BYLINE: By CLIFFORD KRAUSS,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 13; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 849 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 6


In the chorus of Congressional support for military intervention in Somalia, a
few dissident voices are urging caution and, in some cases, suggesting that the
mission be formally put to a vote under the War Powers Act.

Many Democrats and some Republicans in Congress had been urging the Bush
Administration for months to step up its efforts to get food to starving people
in Somalia. But now that President Bush has acted, some lawmakers are troubled
that Congress, which is not in session now, is exerting so little influence as
the Administration begins a military operation.

Adding to their concern is an awareness that the deployment of combat troops to
Somalia is a new kind of intervention, in which American security interests are
not directly involved, and that it could set a precedent for military relief
operations in more dangerous places like Yugoslavia, Cambodia or Liberia.

The House Speaker, Thomas S. Foley, and other senior lawmakers expressed firm
support for the Administration's decision in a meeting on Friday with Mr. Bush
and with other Congressional leaders at the White House. Representative David R.
Obey, Democrat of Wisconsin, even expressed hope that the Somalia operation
could set a precedent for sending a United Nations peacekeeping force to Haiti
to help establish a constitutional government.

Quick Return Urged

But Representative John P. Murtha of Pennsylvania, the Democratic chairman of
the House Appropriations defense subcommittee, pressed for a commitment to bring
the troops back home quickly. "The danger is we won't be able to get them out,"
he said after the meeting.

So far, lawmakers' expressions of caution have varied in their emphasis and have
been largely uncoordinated.

Representative Lee H. Hamilton of Indiana, a senior Democrat on the Foreign
Affairs Committee, warned that Congress should not assume that American troops
will face no meaningful opposition from violent Somali gang members, but he has
stopped short of opposing the operation.

Senator Hank Brown of Colorado, a Republican member of the Foreign Relations
Committee who also attended the meeting at the White House on Friday, said he
could not support the troop deployment "without a clearly defined military
mission."

Mr. Brown also argued that troops performing what he views as "police functions"
in Somalia should have a deeper understanding of the Somalis' language or
religion or culture.

'Mistakes' Seen

"I think it's a mistake not to have Muslim troops take the lead in this," the
Senator, who served in Vietnam as a Navy officer, said after the White House
briefing.

Since the Vietnam War, Congress has been wary of allowing the President to act
unimpeded in setting foreign policy. Some members say that even if the operation
to feed Somalis is overwhelmingly popular, Congressional prerogatives
established by the War Powers Act must be exercised through a vote authorizing
the deployment of troops.

The War Powers Act was approved by Congress in 1973, overriding a veto by
President Nixon, in the wake of the Vietnam War. It requires the President to
report to Congress when he deploys troops in areas where they might face combat.
Once he declares that troops face "imminent" risk, the resolution is invoked and
the President is granted a 60-day limit to commit forces without Congressional
authorization.

"The widespread violence against non-government relief personnel, U.N. staff,
and occasionally even U.S. military personnel in the region suggests that the
dangers of such a deployment are real," Senator Paul D. Wellstone, Democrat of
Minnesota, wrote in a letter last week to Senator George J. Mitchell of Maine,
the majority leader. "It is my view that this is one of those situations where
the Congress should be accountable, whether the law requires us to cast a vote
or not."

Mr. Wellstone emphasized that he would support a "limited deployment of U.S.
troops to provide humanitarian aid" in Somalia.

Nature of Mission Cited

Mr. Mitchell maintains that there is no need to reconvene Congress under the
terms of the War Powers Act because the mission in Somalia is aimed at feeding
the starving rather than putting down a revolt or dislodging a government. In
any case, he has said, Congress can discuss the issue when it goes into session
in January, well within the 60-day limit set by the act for authorizing
deployment of American troops in a hostile situation.

In a letter to Congressional leaders on Friday, the American Civil Liberties
Union called on Congress to reconvene quickly to affirm its war powers by
authorizing the troop deployment.

"Even if the objective is to deliver food and medical supplies," said Kate
Martin, director of the organization's Center for National Security Studies,
"the Constitution simply forbids the President from deciding on his own to
authorize tens of thousands of U.S. troops to engage in force and military
combat."

In his meeting with the Congressional leaders on Friday, Mr. Bush repeated his
contention that the War Powers Act is unconstitutional.

LOAD-DATE: December 7, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              334 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 December 7, 1992, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Article Says Nixon Schemed To Tie Foe to Wallace Attack

BYLINE: By IRVIN MOLOTSKY,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 16; Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 820 words

DATELINE: ASHINGTON, Dec. 6


Secret White House tapes show that in an effort to embarrass the Democrats
President Richard M. Nixon tried to have George McGovern's Presidential campaign
literature planted in the apartment of the man who shot George Wallace in 1972,
according to an article in The New Yorker magazine.

The article, written by Seymour M. Hersh, says the tapes also suggest that Mr.
Nixon did not know about the Watergate break-in before it occurred, that he
encouraged the cartoonist Al Capp, the creator of Li'l Abner and other
outrageous residents of Dogpatch, to run against Senator Edward M. Kennedy of
Massachusetts, and that he and his aide H. R. Haldeman openly discussed the
"sale" of ambassadorships to political contributors.

Mr. Hersh declined in an interview today to say how he learned of the tapes'
contents.

Lawyers for Mr. Nixon said there would be no response from the former President
tonight. They expressed anger that Mr. Hersh had written an account of tapes not
yet approved for release by the National Archives.

"Hersh has obviously written this article based on what he heard from one or
more disgruntled archivists," said Herbert John Miller, one of Mr. Nixon's
lawyers.

4,000 Hours of Secret Taping

Mr. Miller said he had not heard of the tapes cited by Mr. Hersh and could
therefore not comment on them. But he said it was "outrageous" for Mr. Hersh to
have reported the tapes' contents before they had been examined by the National
Archives to remove personal conversations to protect the privacy of Mr. Nixon
and others.

The tapes that Mr. Hersh said served as the source of his material are among 950
reels that contain 4,000 hours of secretly recorded White House conversations
never released to the public.

The article in The New Yorker does not contain any direct quotations from the
tapes, and the reporting appears to have been based on interviews with people
who have heard them. Mr. Hersh declined to say today where he got the
information. "I'm not talking about sources," he said.

A Conspiratorial Environment

The conversations described by Mr. Hersh tend to support images suggested by
previously released tapes of a White House with a conspiratorial bent.

For example, he writes, the tapes show that when Mr. Nixon and Charles W.
Colson, his special counsel, heard that Mr. Wallace had been shot, they agreed
to send an agent to the Milwaukee home of the gunman, Arthur Bremer, and place
McGovern Presidential campaign material there.

The intention was to link Mr. Bremer with the Democrats, Mr. Hersh wrote, adding
that the agent picked for the mission was E. Howard Hunt, who later played a
role in the Watergate break-in.

Mr. Hersh writes, "Nixon is energized and excited by what seems to be the
ultimate political dirty trick: the F.B.I. and the Milwaukee police will be
convinced, and will tell the world, that the attempted assassination of Wallace
had its roots in left-wing Democratic politics.

"Late that evening, however, Colson reluctantly reports to the President that
Hunt is unable to make the trip, because the F.B.I. has moved too quickly.
Bremer's apartment has been sealed, and is under police guard. The President
berates Colson for not having slowed down the F.B.I. Subsequently, Nixon is
heard complaining about the missed opportunity to damage McGovern, and about the
F.B.I.'s sudden competence in sealing Bremer's apartment."

Mr. Colson's telephone number was not available tonight and he could not be
reached for comment. Mr. Hersh writes that Mr. Colson acknowledged to him that
the article's account of the tapes' contents was accurate.

Mr. Hersh, a freelance writer, won the Pulitzer Prize in 1970 for his coverage
of the My Lai massacre in Vietnam, and he later worked for The New York Times.
He has written critically of Mr. Nixon in the past but said today that fairness
compelled him to report that the tapes suggested the former President had been
unaware of the plans to break into the Democratic Party's headquarters at the
Watergate complex in 1972, the cover-up of which led to his resignation.

Mr. Hersh writes that the Capp candidacy was prompted by the cartoonist's speech
at a broadcasters' convention in which he attacked the three major television
networks and Tom Wicker, a columnist for The New York Times, for what Mr. Capp
said was their bias against Mr. Nixon. The candidacy, Mr. Hersh writes, died
when Mr. Capp changed his party affiliation from Democratic to Republican too
late to be put on the ballot.

Mr. Hersh writes that Mr. Nixon and Mr. Haldeman "openly discussed the sale of
ambassadorships."

"Nixon was insistent that those who wanted to serve in the more desirable
foreign posts be told that their initial contribution guaranteed them the
assignment for only a year: to stay longer would require more cash," Mr. Hersh
writes. "And he often told Haldeman just how much more would be needed."


NAME: Richard M. Nixon

LOAD-DATE: December 7, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              335 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 8, 1992, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

MISSION TO SOMALIA;
From Gulf to Somalia: General Marches On

BYLINE: By ERIC SCHMITT,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 18; Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 566 words

DATELINE: MOMBASA, Kenya, Dec. 5


Into the turmoil of Somalia enters Lieut. Gen. Robert B. Johnston, a meticulous
square-jawed believer in order and discipline.

He is expected to arrive in Mogadishu, the Somali capital, soon to lead 28,000
American troops and other allied forces armed with a United Nations mandate to
protect the delivery of relief supplies.

General Johnston is commander of the First Marine Expeditionary Force at Camp
Pendleton, Calif., which is supplying 16,000 troops to the United States force.

As Gen. H. Norman Schwarzkopf's Chief of Staff in the Persian Gulf war, General
Johnston directed 1,000 people in Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, providing information
for war planners and coordinating logistics and battle strategies among the
individual services.

Shortly after the start of the air war, when reporters questioned the adequacy
of daily military briefings by lower-level officers, General Schwarzkopf called
on General Johnston.

General Johnston, with his direct approach and immaculate appearance, injected
instant authority into the news conferences for much of the next two weeks
before returning to his regular job. After the war, however, he was often
tight-lipped, quietly bristling at questions from the press about issues like
the timing of ending the ground campaign.

Unlike the mercurial General Schwarzkopf, who is known to erupt at aides'
mistakes or to get teary eyed talking about soldiers killed in combat, General
Johnston is low key and reserved. An icy stare or curt reproach is his stiffest
reprimand, say aides who cannot remember his ever raising his voice in anger.

A physical fitness aficionado who played rugby as a youth, the compactly built
55-year-old general routinely finishes ahead of lieutenants half his age in a
five-mile run of 150 staff members he leads every Friday morning at Camp
Pendleton.

The general brings the same fastidiousness to his paperwork. Marines who know
him say he leaves his desk absolutely clear at the end of his 12-hour days.

Born on Oct. 6, 1937, in Edinburgh, Scotland, the son of a jam factory worker,
General Johnston grew up there during World War II, and spent long nights in a
spartan corrugated metal air-raid shelter, cringing at the sound of German
bombers.

"I lived for two or three years in an air-raid shelter every night," General
Johnston said in an interview during the gulf war. "It was kind of a routine:
the air sirens would go off when the air raids were expected. It was when dark
started."

General Johnston emigrated to the United States when he was 18. After graduating
from San Diego State College as an English major, he joined the Marines to
fulfill what he said was a "commitment to serve this country."

A veteran of two tours in Vietnam and a battalion commander of American forces
in Lebanon in the early 1980's, General Johnston spent three years as head of
the Marine Officer Candidate School, putting his stamp on many of the young
lieutenants who will serve under him in Somalia.

General Johnston is married and has two sons, one of whom served as a junior
officer in a Marine infantry battalion in the gulf war.

"He's an no-nonsense, serious fellow who never loses his cool" said Gen.  Robert
H. Barrow, a former Marine Corps Commandant. General Johnston twice served as
General Barrow's aide. "He's aggressive in his own way, but he will avoid the
temptation to shoot from the hip."

NAME: Robert B. Johnston

LOAD-DATE: December 8, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Lieut. Gen. Robert B. Johnston will lead 28,000 American troops
and other allied forces armed with a United Nations mandate to protect the
delivery of relief supplies. (Associated Press)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              336 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 8, 1992, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Oregon Now Wonders Who Is Real Packwood

BYLINE: By TIMOTHY EGAN,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 12; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1595 words

DATELINE: PORTLAND, Ore., Dec. 4


After a quarter-century, Oregonians are hearing about a Bob Packwood who is far
different from the man they have sent to the Senate for four terms.

What is equally disheartening to some in a state that likes to think that its
politics are different, a state stunned by the accusations of sexual misconduct,
is the newfound knowledge that some journalists and state leaders had long heard
rumors about another side of the 60-year-old Republican Senator but had never
let the voters in on them.

Even as the Senate Ethics Committee began a preliminary inquiry into an area of
conduct that is still nebulously defined, new accusations continued to surface.
In the last week, five women in Oregon have come forth with stories about
unwanted sexual advances by Senator Packwood, according to a women's group here.

This is in addition to the 10 women, five of whom have been named, who accused
the Senator of sexual misconduct in a Nov. 22 article in The Washington Post.

New Allegations Made

And another woman, Tiffany M. Work, an accountant and mother of four who lives
in Springfield, Ore., said in an interview that Mr. Packwood fondled her in 1973
when, as a 13-year-old working for a modeling agency, she was sent to a
political function to greet people and distribute brochures. She said she told
her chaperone, who dismissed the incident.

She has detailed her accusation in a letter sent this week to her Congressman,
Representative Peter A. DeFazio, a Democrat.

Senator Packwood's aides had no comment on Ms. Work's allegations.

The Senator's harshest critics here say his skillful delay of publication of the
article about his conduct deprived voters of information they needed in the Nov.
3 election. He delayed by denying the accusations and by raising suspicions
about his accusers.

In newspaper cartoons and conversations here in the last few days Mr. Packwood
has been portrayed as a man who came to the Senate in 1968 as its youngest
member and now, as one of the old lions, may bring the institution to shame. His
close friends and Mr. Packwood himself now suggest that alcohol may be
responsible for some of the conflicting images.

'A Partial Explanation'

Mr. Packwood, who spent about about a week in an alcohol treatment center for
evaluation, has refused to comment on the accusations. Days after the initial
disclosures he did say: "Whether alcohol was a factor in these incidents, I do
not know. In any event, alcohol at best can only be a partial explanation, not
an excuse."

Josie Martin, Senator Packwood's press secretary, said: "He deserves a fair
hearing before the Ethics Committee, and that's the appropriate forum to address
these allegations. He is not going to be hounded out of office."

Mr. Packwood's supporters, including several women who worked for or with him,
said the accusations were politically motivated at worst, or more likely a
simple misunderstanding of common human behavior.

To many people here the most telling disclosure of the last two weeks was a
front-page article on Tuesday in The Oregonian, which is published in Portland
and is the state's largest newspaper. In the article, a long and self-critical
explanation of why the newspaper did not disclose what it knew about Mr.
Packwood, the paper reported that Roberta Ulrich, one of its Washington
correspondent, was kissed on the lips last March by the Senator during an
after-hours chat in his office.

'Inappropriate and Improper'

Ms. Ulrich, who at 64 is four years older than Mr. Packwood, said in an
interview that she was embarrassed and thought that the kiss was "inappropriate
and improper" but that she did not feel there was anything sexual about it. She
said she told some of her editors, but William A. Hilliard, the editor of The
Oregonian, said he was not informed.

This came as the paper had begun an investigation into the rumors of sexual
misconduct on the part of Mr. Packwood -- an inquiry that was later dropped for
lack of evidence, it said.

But others in Oregon have read volumes into the report. "I don't know what is
more outrageous: the fact that he kissed her, making her feel a deep sense of
shame, or the fact that The Oregonian never reported this," said Holly Pruett,
the executive director of the Oregon Coalition against Domestic and Sexual
Violence.

Ms. Pruett's group forwarded a complaint to the Senate Ethics Committee this
week citing five more women who have reported "direct, personal experiences" of
sexual misconduct by Senator Packwood. These women were not among the 10 in The
Post's article, she said. She did not disclose their names, but said at least
three of them may identify themselves publicly.

The press here is accepting much of the blame for not reporting earlier what
journalists had been hearing off and on for years.

Mark L. Zusman, the editor of Willamette Week, an alternative weekly, said his
paper had also "failed to commit the resources to get at the heart of the
longstanding rumors about Packwood's abuse of women."

But if the press is contrite, many voters are furious.

"I've voted for Bob Packwood all my life and now I feel just totally deceived,
totally misled," said Kermit Gimre, whose family has owned a shoe store in
Astoria for 100 years. "Some of the fellows I've talked to are not so much upset
at what he may have done as they are that we had to vote for him without knowing
about any of this."

Among those doing the most soul-searching are feminist groups, which have long
counted Mr. Packwood as an advocate of abortion rights, equal pay and other
women's causes.

Office Incident Recalled

Mary Heffernan, a feminist leader in Oregon, said Mr. Packwood grabbed her
shoulders and forcefully kissed her in his office 10 years ago, when she was a
lobbyist for the National Abortion Rights Action League.

"I was a lobbyist on an issue I cared very deeply about and he had a great deal
of power," Ms. Heffernan said in explaining why she did not disclose the
incident until two weeks ago.

There was fierce debate this year among women's groups over whether to support
Senator Packwood or his opponent in last month's election, Representative Les
AuCoin, a Democrat who also had a solid track record on women's issues.
Ultimately, the National Abortion Rights Action League supported Mr. Packwood,
despite what may have happened to Ms. Heffernan.

Kate Michelman, president of the abortion lobbying group, said she had never
heard any rumors about Mr. Packwood. "I cannot reconcile these two views of
him," she said. "He was an absolute champion of the issues we cared about, and I
had never heard anything but that he was a very respectful, collegial person."

So the question for Oregon voters is, just who is Bob Packwood?

A native of Oregon, Mr. Packwood was one of two children born into a Portland
family that described itself as "Lincoln Republicans." His father was a lobbyist
in Salem, the state capital.  According to Mark Kirchmeier, the media relations
director at the University of Portland who has spent years researching a
biography of Mr. Packwood, his mother portrayed the family as dysfunctional.
Both of his parents are dead.

"When I first called up Mrs. Packwood and said I wanted to interview her about
her son, she said: 'I don't know anything about Bob Packwood. All I know is that
he was a bratty boy,' " Mr. Kirchmeier reported.

Mr. Packwood received a bachelor's degree from Willamette University in Salem in
1954 and a law degree from New York University in 1957, then returned to
Portland, where he began working his way up in the state Republican Party. He
was elected to the Oregon Legislature in 1962 and was known even then as an
early proponent of women's rights and civil rights.

In 1968, when he took on Wayne Morse, a four-term Senator and Oregon legend who
was known for his early opposition to the Vietnam War, Mr. Packwood was given
little chance of winning. He won by fewer than 3,000 votes in a race where more
than 800,000 were cast, and arrived in the Senate at the age of 36.

Opportunities for Women

In the Senate Mr. Packwood became an early proponent of abortion rights and
population control, and employed women as prominent members of his staff.

"He provided professional opportunities for women well before most other members
of Congress," said Carol T. Crawford, who worked as a legislative assistant to
Mr. Packwood from 1969 to 1975 and is now a member of the United States
International Trade Commission.

In all the time she worked for him, Ms. Crawford said, she never saw or heard of
any instances of sexual impropriety.

Less than a week before he narrowly won re-election last month, Mr. Packwood was
asked by Oregon reporters about rumors that The Washington Post was preparing a
story concerning accusations of his sexual misconduct. He dismissed it, saying
the rumorswere a political plant by Mr. AuCoin's aide, Rachel Gorlin.

Now a group of female leaders in Oregon, mostly Democrats, are calling for a
recall drive against Mr. Packwood. Moreover, the group, called Oregonians for
Ethical Representation, has urged the Senate to expel him if the accusations are
found to be true.

But they are bucking the tide of history. No one has ever been recalled from the
United Statees Senate, said Richard Baker, the Senate historian. And the last
time a member was expelled was in the Civil War.

"Bob Packwood wants to die in the Senate," Mr. Kirchmeier said. "He always
wanted to leave a legacy. Now it looks like he will, but it won't be the one he
wants."

NAME: Bob Packwood

LOAD-DATE: December 8, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: As the Senate Ethics Committee began a preliminary inquiry into
the accusations of sexual misconduct against Senator Bob Packwood of Oregon,
more accusations surfaced. Mr. Packwood arrived in Washington on Friday with
Elaine Franklin, his chief of staff. (Associated Press)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              337 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 8, 1992, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

Richard J. Hughes, Governor and Judge, Dies at 83

BYLINE: By JOSEPH F. SULLIVAN

SECTION: Section D; Page 22; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1487 words


Richard Joseph Hughes, who reshaped New Jersey's education system as Governor
and then offered a new direction for the national right-to-die debate after
becoming the state's Chief Justice, died yesterday. He was 83.

Mr. Hughes died about 2 A.M. at his vacation home in Boca Raton, Fla. He had
suffered a stroke earlier this fall and died of congestive heart failure,
according to a statement released by his stepson, W. Michael Murphy, the Morris
County Prosecutor.

Mr. Hughes was the only man to serve New Jersey as both Governor and Chief
Justice. In his two terms as chief executive, he expanded state services for the
handicapped, improved education and created the state's county college system.
Beyond the state's borders, his most-lasting legacy came in a much different
arena: The court that he headed handed down a landmark decision that allowed the
parents of Karen Ann Quinlan to remove their comatose daughter from a
respirator.

In all his actions as a public official, Mr. Hughes focused principally on their
impact upon people. Reflecting on his career, he once said, "Speaking about the
loss of tidelands didn't interest people, but talking about the loss of jelly
sandwiches for kids awakened the public's concern about the need for educational
funds."

'The Politics of Joy'

Gov. Jim Florio issued a statement saying that Governor Hughes practiced "the
politics of joy but also of determined hard work to bring about change."

In an interview yesterday, former Governor Thomas H. Kean described Mr. Hughes
as "my idea of what a governor should be."

"When I was Governor he would call and say, 'This is your friend, the do-gooder,
again,' " Mr. Kean said. "He was usually calling about someone who was sick or
whose pension was not being handled properly. He cared about people who did not
have a lot of other people to help them."

Although Mr. Hughes had been active for decades in Democratic politics in New
Jersey, when he became the party's candidate for governor in 1961 so little was
known about him that Time magazine ran a profile titled "Who's Hughes?"

That question was answered in an intense, barnstorming campaign that saw Mr.
Hughes make dozens of stops a day, charming groups large and small with his
stories about raising a family that, within months of his inauguration, would
include 10 children. The result was a 34,920-vote upset victory over James P.
Mitchell, a Republican who had been Secretary of Labor in the Eisenhower
Administration.

Mr. Hughes was born Aug. 10, 1909, in Florence, a town on the Delaware River a
few miles south of Trenton. His father, Richard P. Hughes, was at various times
the Mayor of Burlington, a state civil service commissioner and the warden of
Trenton State Prison -- where the family lived for a time.

Mr. Hughes graduated from St. Joseph's College in Philadelphia and the New
Jersey Law School, now a part of Rutgers University.

As a young lawyer, he worked for the election of Franklin D. Roosevelt in the
1930's and in the 1940's helped convert Mercer County from a Republican
stronghold to a safe Democratic county.

It was while he served as Mercer County Democratic chairman that Mr. Hughes
earned the nickname "Two Buckets." So skilled was he at mediating disputes that
it was said he could carry a bucket of water on each shoulder and never spill a
drop by leaning toward either side in the controversy.

From a job as an assistant United States Attorney for New Jersey, he moved to
Mercer County Court and later to Superior Court, where he headed a study that
led to revisions in the state's system for dealing with juvenile offenders. In
1957 he was appointed to the Appellate Division of Superior Court, the state's
second-highest tribunal, but he soon resigned to enter private practice and
support a growing family.

Mr. Hughes married Miriam McGrory in 1935, and the couple had four children.
Mrs. Hughes died in 1950. Four years later, Mr. Hughes met Elizabeth Sullivan
Murphy, a widow with three children, when they were both out accompanying their
children on a Halloween round of "trick or treat." They married in 1955 and had
three children. Elizabeth Hughes died in 1983.

In 1961, the coalition of Democratic county leaders that controlled the party
picked Mr. Hughes to run for governor after their first choice, Attorney General
Grover C. Richman, suffered a heart attack.

As the centerpiece of his campaign, Mr. Hughes focused on a litany of state
needs, although he deftly managed not to criticize his Democratic predecessor,
Robert B. Meyner, whose personal and public frugality was legendary.

When Mr. Hughes took office, New Jersey was one of only a handful of states that
had neither an income tax nor a sales tax. His first year in office was marked
by his first major political defeat when voters rejected a $750 million bond
issue in November 1962.Three months later, Mr. Hughes urged enactment of a
personal income tax, but legislative leaders made it clear there would be no
action until after the 1965 gubernatorial election -- a race that was expected
to be something of a referendum on taxation.

The tax debate was virtually pushed out of the campaign by an unexpected issue.
A Rutgers University teacher, Eugene Genovese, made headlines when he told his
students he would "welcome a North Vietnamese victory" in the Vietnam War. The
Republican candidate for governor, State Senator Wayne Dumont, called for the
dismissal of Mr. Genovese, and Mr. Hughes defended the teacher's right to his
opinions, although he deplored the statement.

Tax Bill Narrowly Defeated

After winning re-election by 350,000 votes, Mr. Hughes again turned his
attention to enactment of an income tax, looking for help from the Democratic
majorities in both chambers of the State House that he helped elect.  His tax
bill made it through the Assembly but fell one vote short in the Senate.

In its place, he agreed to sign a bill passed by the Legislature that instituted
a 3 percent sales tax, saying that to turn down any broad-based tax would
relegate the state to second-class status. Although he did not know it at the
time, he was to play a key role in the enactment of the income tax several years
later.

In 1973, three years after Mr. Hughes left the Governor's post, the New Jersey
Supreme Court ruled that the state's reliance on local property taxes to support
public education discriminated against poorer urban districts. After Mr. Hughes
was named Chief Justice by Gov. William T. Cahill in 1974, the court began
prodding the Legislature to find a way to eliminate the inequities.

After Gov. Brendan T. Byrne and the Legislature battled for months over Mr.
Byrne's proposal to enact an income tax, the Hughes-led court stepped into the
controversy. In June 1976, the court ordered the closing of New Jersey's public
schools until a new financing plan was approved. The decision broke the back of
the opposition to the income tax. It was enacted and the schools were reopened.

Earlier that year the court made history on a very different issue: the proper
role of medical technology in the preservation of life and health, an issue
often described as "the right to die." In a landmark opinion in the case of
Karen Ann Quinlan, the seven-member court unanimously asserted an individual's
right to refuse medical treatment and a guardian's power to exercise that right
in the event the patient is too ill to make his or her wishes known.

Right to Privacy

In an opinion written by Mr. Hughes, the court grounded its decision in a
constitutional right to privacy and held that as the medical techniques designed
to prolong life become more invasive, the state's interest in preserving life
declines and the patient's right to privacy grows.

The decision was followed by other similar rulings, in New Jersey and across the
country, that affirmed an individual's right to control the extent of medical
treatment in the face of expanding medical technology.

In 1982, three years after he left the bench, Mr. Hughes attended a ceremony
naming the state's new $93 million Justice Complex after him.
Characteristically, he had tried to deflect the honor by lobbying for a
predecessor, Woodrow Wilson. He said the former Governor and President was a man
"who stood for international peace through law, something the world needs
today." It was one of the few times he was overruled.

Besides his stepson Mr. Murphy, of Chatham, N.J., Mr. Hughes is survived by five
sons: Richard J., of Palm Coast, Fla.; Robert F., of Parsippany, N.J.; John J.,
of Trenton; Brian, of Princeton, N.J.; and Thomas M., of South Orange, N.J.; two
daughters, Mary, of Boca Raton, Fla., and Helen Calero of Lawrenceville, N.J.;
two other stepsons, Timothy J. Murphy of Washington, N.J., and Patrick Murphy of
Lawrenceville, N.J.; a brother, the Rev. Joseph R. Hughes of Jamesburg, N.J.;
and 11 grandchildren.


NAME: Richard Joseph Hughes

LOAD-DATE: December 8, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: December 9, 1992, Wednesday

CORRECTION:

An obituary yesterday about Richard J. Hughes, former Governor of New Jersey,
referred incorrectly to a statement by a Rutgers University professor that
became an issue in the 1965 governorship campaign. The professor, Eugene D.
Genovese, said he would welcome a victory in Vietnam by the Vietcong, not by
North Vietnam.


GRAPHIC: Photo: Richard J. Hughes discussing teen-age drinking problems with
students at Wagner College in 1962 when he was Governor of New Jersey. (Meyer
Liebowitz/The New York Times)

TYPE: Biography; Obituary (Obit)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              338 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 9, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

MISSION TO SOMALIA;
Live, and in Great Numbers: It's Somalia Tonight With Tom, Ted and Dan

BYLINE: By JAMES BARRON

SECTION: Section A; Page 17; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 903 words


The troops landing in Somalia yesterday jumped from their rubber boats and
headed into the dunes -- and into the glare of television lights.

More than 75 reporters and camera crews were waiting on the beach with
microphones on and videotape rolling. The pictures they beamed to American
viewers had the smoothly produced look of a made-for-television drama, with
everything from distant shots of soldiers clambering ashore to close-ups of
their camouflage uniforms as the troops made their way through the sand, and
through the horde of journalists.

A Tactical Cartoon

For at least two of the major television networks, the camera crews and
reporters on the beach were part of the news. Tom Brokaw, the anchor of the "NBC
Nightly News," said in his report from Mogadishu that the troops' night-vision
goggles had been affected by the television lights. "We're told they were not
amused," Mr. Brokaw remarked.

On ABC's "World News Tonight," Ted Koppel said the "most hostile force" the
troops encountered was the throng of journalists. "The most difficulty they had
to face all day," he said, "is having to face the cameras and the lights."

"Yes, the television cameras were there," said Dan Rather of CBS near the
beginning of his program, "a sort of Hollywood-ish, almost cartoonish situation
on the beach. All of this by plan. And if you're saying, well, this looks silly
-- in some ways it does, but remember, this is serious business for the U.S.
military people."

Who Needs Superstars?

Jon Katz, the media critic for Rolling Stone and a former executive producer of
the "CBS Morning News," said the pictures reflected a skillful attempt by the
Pentagon to redefine the public's image of the military in the post-cold-war
world.

"It's clear that since Vietnam, they have learned the lesson of television --
how to use television in a way that's helpful to them," he said. Alluding to
Navy commandos, he added, "The bottom line is, the heart of every 10-year-old in
the country has to beat a little faster when they see the Seals storming
ashore."

Still, Mr. Katz questioned the networks' need to send high-paid anchors like Mr.
Brokaw and Mr. Rather to Somalia. ABC's principal anchor, Peter Jennings, chose
to stay in New York.

"If it's truly a dangerous military operation," Mr. Katz asked, "why would you
have anchor people there?" Then, perhaps answering the question, he said,
"Without even meaning to, they give it an added element of drama, endorsement
and heroism."

Similarly, Marvin Kalb, a former television reporter who is director of the
Shorenstein Barone Center on Press and Politics at Harvard, suggested that the
anchors had focused national attention on the story of Somalia.

Pentagon's Special Touch

"The anchormen who are there force coverage and then coverage forces policy," he
said. "In this particular case, the decision to move a sizable American military
contingent into Somalia was probably the furthest thing from President Bush's
mind, but he had to act, because of the pictures on television, pictures that
are truly heartbreaking. Those people would be starving and dying if there were
TV cameras there or not."

But the cameras were there, and before the troops landed, the Pentagon seemed to
be walking the line between accommodating journalists and restricting their
access to prevent logistical problems or injuries.

At a briefing yesterday, Pete Williams, the Defense Department's chief
spokesman, made a special appeal to news organizations to stay clear of the
shore where the marines were to land. He offered to meet with representatives of
news organizations later to advise them where to set up their equipment.

"When you cover a football game," Mr. Williams said at his regular briefing
today, "you know you don't put your crews out there on the middle of the 50-yard
line, even though that might be the best place to watch. And there may be some
concern on the part of commanders that if the open arms of the Fourth Estate are
standing on the very beach, they may be in the way."

Apparently fearing that the call for cooperation might not be persuasive, the
Pentagon spokesman appealed to the networks' pocketbooks, painting a dire
picture of the harm that might befall their expensive equipment, including
satellite gear, if they were placed in the path of the Marine juggernaut.

"Some of these Blackhawk helicopters -- you've been around them -- they create
quite a backwash," Mr. Williams said. "And anybody trying to operate in that
area, their expensive up-link gizmos will be twisted in very exotic new ways."

Fate Worse Than Death

Then he raised the specter of an even worse catastrophe for the uncooperative.

"If your up-link gets knocked over, you're off the air," Mr. Williams said.

Such appeals, however, proved to be of no avail. The first Seals to go ashore
were greeted by television cameras, arousing Pentagon complaints.

Tonight Bob Hall, the deputy spokesman, noted that correspondents and camera
crews had been asked to watch the landing from the airport terminal, rather than
the beach, and not to use television lights.

He conceded that the Pentagon's appeal had been issued late, but said it was
preoccupied by concerns for operations security.

"I think the situation just caught out of control," he said, adding jokingly,
"We probably should have inserted the public affairs officers first."

LOAD-DATE: December 9, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              339 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 9, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

William Shawn, 85, Is Dead; New Yorker's Gentle Despot

BYLINE: By ERIC PACE

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 2947 words


William Shawn, the shy, strong-willed editor who ran The New Yorker for a third
of this century, died yesterday morning at the apartment on the Upper East Side
of Manhattan where he had lived since 1950. He was 85 years old.

He died of a heart attack, said his son Wallace Shawn, the actor.

After Mr. Shawn succeeded the magazine's founding editor, Harold Ross, in 1952,
he quietly but firmly presided over a shift from its original flippancy to a
more serious tone, which, he insisted, merely mirrored "a new awareness" among
writers and readers.

In his quiet, considerate, infinitely courteous way, Mr. Shawn remained the
virtual dictator of the magazine's editorial policies through his 35-year
tenure, which was unusually long for a chief editor in the hectic and turbulent
magazine industry.

A chief reason that Mr. Shawn stayed so long in his post -- one of the most
influential in American literature and journalism -- was the abiding support of
The New Yorker's owners, Raoul Fleischmann of Fleischmann's Yeast, who was a
co-founder of the magazine and became its chairman, and his son Peter F.
Fleischmann, also a longtime New Yorker executive.

But in 1985, while the younger Mr. Fleischmann was chairman and a major
stockholder, the magazine was sold for $142 million to Advance Publications, a
portion of the vast publishing empire of the Newhouse family.

At the time, S. I. Newhouse Jr. pledged not to tamper with The New Yorker's
special identity. In January 1987, however, Mr. Newhouse announced that Mr.
Shawn was retiring -- although in fact he was forced out -- and, being replaced
by Robert A. Gottlieb, then 55, who had been president and editor in chief at
Alfred A. Knopf, the book-publishing house that is another part of the Newhouse
empire. Five years later, in July 1992, Mr. Gottlieb was replaced by Tina Brown.

The New Yorker staff did not take happily to the prospect of Mr. Shawn's
departure. More than 150 of the magazine's writers, editors and cartoonists,
feeling that Mr. Shawn had been poorly treated by the new owners, signed a
letter calling on Mr. Gottlieb not to take the job. In due course, however, Mr.
Gottlieb took over Mr. Shawn's duties and turned out to be far more a protector
of Mr. Shawn's vision than a destroyer of it.

Later in 1987, Mr. Shawn became a consulting editor for another prestigious
book-publishing concern, the independently owned Farrar, Straus & Giroux, a
position he held at his death.

The Editor As Artist

In his decades of editing The New Yorker, Mr. Shawn worked with infinite
patience and painstaking attention to detail. A perfectionist, he once said
ruefully, "Falling short of perfection is a process that just never stops."

His mental rigor, applied to editing, won him repeated praise from New Yorker
writers. "He knows when to leave a strong piece alone," the author and critic
Renata Adler once said. "If there really are weak parts, though, he invariably
finds them; then of course you can fix them in your own way."

Mr. Shawn's quiet graciousness was so seductive that Brendan Gill once said the
typical New Yorker writer became convinced that any changes the editor demanded
"will cost Shawn as much pain as they do him -- indeed, that the corrections are
being made, at no matter what expense of spirit, only in order to bring a
masterpiece from near-perfection to perfection."

The short-story writer and novelist J. D. Salinger called Mr. Shawn the "most
unreasonably modest of born great artist-editors."

As the Shawn era progressed, The New Yorker earned new respect for what became a
continual outpouring of reports and commentaries on such matters as the
environment, poverty, racial strife, the Vietnam War and nuclear disarmament.

"Better than any other editor of our time, he has been able to measure the
distance of our national fall from grace," Mr. Gill once said, voicing the
admiration that generations of New Yorker writers felt for Mr. Shawn. But Mr.
Gill acknowledged wryly that "at times, one heard grumblings, in the corridors
of the magazine and out in the world," about the amount of gloom in the
magazine.

Helping to Shape Public Opinion

Under Mr. Shawn, The New Yorker's literary and reportorial styles continued to
exercise a powerful influence on writers around the country, as they had under
Mr. Ross. One much-cited example was Truman Capote's 1965 best seller, "In Cold
Blood," which came out first in The New Yorker and encouraged other writing that
straddled the line between fact and fiction.

But in Mr. Shawn's day, The New Yorker's nonfiction writing also came to help
shape public opinion and discussion about important issues. James Baldwin's
writing underscored the force of black grievances, for instance, and Rachel
Carson's lent urgency to concerns about the environment.

The New Yorker sent the political philosopher Dr. Hannah Arendt to attend the
1961 trial of Adolf Eichmann in Jerusalem, and her coverage added to the
continuing controversy about the Holocaust. A New Yorker review of Michael
Harrington's 1963 book, "The Other America," helped draw attention to the work
and thereby to the whole issue of poverty in the United States.

"Shawn changed The New Yorker from a smarty-pants parish tip sheet into a
journal that altered our experience instead of just posturing in front of it,"
John Leonard, a book critic for The New York Times, observed in 1975.

The Shawn era also had its disappointments. Mr. Shawn himself observed
regretfully in a 1979 interview that during his time as editor there had been
fewer "out-and-out humorists than in the 1920's."

The Shawn era also included some disappointments on The New Yorker's business
side -- from which Mr. Shawn stayed largely aloof. Average circulation per issue
climbed, for instance, from about 485,000 for 1974 to a peak of about 510,000
for 1983 but then dropped back toward 500,000 for 1984 -- the year before the
magazine was sold.

Somewhat similarly, the number of pages of advertising in The New Yorker rose in
the late 1970's and early 1980's to a peak of almost 4,500 pages for 1981 and
then sagged in the next three years to about 3,500 pages for 1984, And
advertising revenues fell from 1984 to 1985 and from that year to 1986 -- that
is, during Mr. Shawn's last two full years at the editorial helm.

Mr. Shawn's decades at the New Yorker also included an apparent permutation in
his own writing: it seemed to rise from humble spoofery to occasional heights of
Olympian solemnity. In 1936, three years after joining the magazine, he
contributed a fey piece of fantasy, "The Catastrophe," in which a meteor
"landed, nice and tidy, on all five boroughs of Greater New York."

"The only New Yorkers who escaped were those who chanced to be at Miami Beach,"
he wrote, "and there they remained, shaking their heads and trying to find
someone who would cash their checks."

Forty-three years later, in an introduction to "Janet Flanner's World," a
collection of articles by the correspondent known as Genet, he wrote this sober
analysis of the reporter's craft:

"New information resides nowhere until it has been identified, objectified,
assembled, and communicated by one or another kind of reporter; and every
reporter sets out on every quest more or less in the dark. At first, there is
little to go on except instinct; but at last, as fragment after fragment falls
into place, information materializes, and some light, with luck, is cast."

A Serious Man With Humor

Mr. Shawn made a sober impression himself, with his aldermanic good manners and
his dark suits. But he relished good humorous writing, he played jazz expertly
on the Steinway in his apartment -- and, among editors and writers, he was
sometimes the subject of anecdote and amusement.

That was because of his many mild eccentricities and his highly unlikely
credentials for running a magazine that in some ways was the embodiment of
upper-middle-class New York sophistication.

He disliked crowds, fast driving, air conditioning and self-service elevators.
(When the elevators at The New Yorker's offices at 25 West 43d Street were
automated, one was left in manual operation to accommodate him.) He was short
and physically unimposing, he generally avoided night life, and his idea of a
power lunch was orange juice and cereal in the Rose Room at the Algonquin Hotel.
He was a college dropout who cut his journalistic teeth on an obscure New Mexico
newspaper. And a certain unabashed flatness in his speech forever proclaimed his
upbringing in Chicago.

Yet while the chuckles continued, and while the editors came and went at other
magazines, Mr. Shawn's reign continued, more or less serenely and unchallenged,
until he had far exceeded Mr. Ross's 26-year tenure as editor.

Mr. Shawn's durability had several interrelated causes in addition to the
support of the Fleischmann family, which owned much of The New Yorker's stock;
Raoul Fleischmann left him $100,000 in his will. As an editor, Mr. Shawn was
enormously skillful; he was a gifted, though idiosyncratic, editorial
administrator; and the respect and affection that other editors and writers had
for him was unusually warm.

In his editing, Mr. Shawn had high standards: once, the story goes, he was
discussing an idea for some intellectually lofty writing by Dr. Arendt, and she
suggested that The New Yorker's readers would not be interested. But he replied
that he did not care: the writing would be good for them.

One of his strengths was his sternly logical mind, which never seemed to rest --
with the result, another story had it, that once, when he was learning to drive
a car, he complained to the instructor: "If one is disengaging the gears, one
ought to have to let the clutch out, instead of pushing it in. To me, 'in'
represents engagement and 'out' represents disengagement."

But there was criticism, too. The writer Dorothy Parker complained in the 1960's
that much of the writing appearing then seemed "to be about somebody's childhood
in Pakistan."

The personality pieces were sometimes called too long and lacking in
irreverence; its fiction was belittled by some as favoring fragile stylists.

In 1965, the essayist Tom Wolfe contended in the New York Herald Tribune that
Mr. Shawn had made The New Yorker "the most successful suburban women's magazine
in the country."

Discretion And Decorum

As an editorial administrator, Mr. Shawn played his cards close to his chest:
for years he avoided holding meetings, preferring to deal with his assistants
and writers one by one. He was so secretive that Mr. Fleischmann, when asked at
the 1974 New Yorker stockholders' meeting whether Mr. Shawn had a deputy, had to
reply cautiously: "I don't believe so." (Formally speaking, Mr. Shawn did not,
but when he was absent from the magazine, his place was taken by Gardner
Botsford, another editor.)

Mr. Shawn also had a strong sense of propriety. Mr. Gill reported in his memoirs
that once Mr. Shawn, finding himself in an elevator with a tipsy writer who was
talking loutishly in front of a woman, told the elevator operator, "Please stop.
I must get off at once."

Some New Yorker people have suggested that Mr. Shawn's notions of decorum might
stem partly from his bourgeois upbringing in Chicago, where he was born on Aug.
31, 1907, the son of Benjamin W. Chon, a well-to-do cutlery merchant of Central
European origin, and Anna Bransky Chon. (Mr. Shawn changed his name early in his
career.)

After schooling in Chicago, he spent two years at the University of Michigan,
then dropped out and set off for New Mexico because, he later said, "I thought
I'd like the climate."

In the central New Mexico town of Las Vegas, a health resort and livestock
trading center, he went to work as a $30-a-week reporter on a local newspaper,
The Las Vegas Optic. After several months, he returned to Chicago, where he
worked as an editor for a news service and married a news paperwoman, Cecille
Lyon.

The young couple spent a year or so in Europe; in Paris, by some accounts, Mr.
Shawn worked as a piano player. He tried his hand as a writer and as a composer
of music, largely for ballet.

Talk of the Town At $2 an Inch

Mr. Shawn had long been a fascinated reader of The New Yorker, and in time the
Shawns moved to New York. Once there, he began doing reporting assignments for
the magazine's Talk of the Town section.

"I was paid $2 an inch when the piece appeared," he later said. "It was
practically starvation. After a while they let me come into the office and
work."

As time passed, the boyish-looking reporter became known as a prodigy of
conscientiousness and organization. In 1935, he turned his hand to editing,
although he still wanted to write.

Mr. Shawn worked extremely hard in those days, but he also enjoyed relaxing.
"About once a month we'd have a party and about 30 or 40 people would show up,"
The New Yorker veteran E. J. Kahn Jr. wrote in his book "About the New Yorker
and Me." "Shawn was our star. He'd be our piano player."

He was also quite good as an editor in the '30's, but it was after the outbreak
of World War II, the New Yorker contributor James Thurber wrote in his memoir
"The Years With Ross," that Mr. Shawn really came to the fore. By Mr. Thurber's
account, St. Clair McKelway, who had had the title of managing editor and edited
nonfiction, left to join the armed forces, and another New Yorker executive, Ik
Shuman, suggested that Mr. Shawn replace him.

"What the hell makes you think he could handle the job?" Mr. Ross spluttered,
according to Mr. Thurber. "Dismiss it from your mind."

'A Creature Of the 30's'

But Mr. Shawn got the job, and he and Mr. Ross got on famously, although, as the
New Yorker writer E. B. White once put it, Mr. Ross "was a creature of the 20's,
when everyone was kicking up his heels." "Shawn was a creature of the 30's, when
men were peddling apples," he said.

The Ross-Shawn collaboration proved highly fruitful: Mr. Thurber's appraisal was
that "without Shawn's hard work and constant counsel, Ross would never have made
the distinguished record he did as editor during the war."

As the war went on, Mr. Gill recalled in his book "Here at The New Yorker,"
"Shawn worked something like 18 hours a day, seven days a week; he was a
phenomenon of apparently imperturbable industry."

He was also, as Mr. Ross once put it, "peerless as an idea man," and he managed
to sell Mr. Ross on the idea of devoting one whole New Yorker issue to
"Hiroshima," John Hersey's 31,347-word piece about the obliteration of that city
by the atomic bomb and the fate of its inhabitants.

The "Hiroshima" issue was a striking departure from The New Yorker's traditional
format and, as The Herald Tribune observed at the time, from "its usual content
of quip, cartoon and causticism." The issue was an enormous critical success.

In the postwar years, Mr. Shawn remained indispensable to Mr. Ross. One evening
in 1948, Mr. Thurber wrote in his memoirs, Mr. Ross mentioned Mr. Shawn so
often, during a conversation with H. L. Mencken and George Jean Nathan, that Mr.
Nathan asked "Who is Shawn? Who is Shawn?"

By 1951, when Mr. Ross's health was failing, he "had made it clear to some of us
that he wanted Bill Shawn to succeed him" and "devoutly hoped he would," Mr.
Thurber reported. And Mr. Gill wrote that "none of us supposed that there was a
chance of the editorship's going to anyone but Shawn," although, he said,
Gustave Lobrano, who was Mr. Ross's deputy in charge of fiction and also had the
title of managing editor, was disappointed not to get the job. The actual choice
was made by Raoul Fleischmann, who was then the magazine's publisher.

From the Magazine To Books

Mr. Shawn's longstanding ties to New Yorker writers continued after he stepped
down as editor in 1987 and began working with Farrar, Straus & Giroux, where he
brought in a number of books.

Jonathan Galassi, the editor in chief at Farrar, Straus, said one of the books
on which Mr. Shawn had done the most intensive editing for Farrar, Straus was
Charlayne Hunter-Gault's "In My Place," a memoir published last month, about her
life in the South from her birth to her becoming , in 1961, one of the first
black students to enter the University of Georgia.

It was Mr. Galassi who had brought Ms. Hunter-Gault to Farrar, Straus to publish
her first book, and he said she had asked to have the book edited by Mr. Shawn,
who had hired her to work at The New Yorker as a staff writer years earlier.

Mr. Shawn's son Wallace said yesterday that in his last years Mr. Shawn had
mainly been engaged in "doing his own writing." Asked what Mr. Shawn was
writing, Wallace Shawn said "We didn't ask him, really, but I think it was
fiction." He also said the family did not know where the manuscript was, and
added, "Unless he destroyed it, I'm sure it'll turn up."

Asked what Mr. Shawn thought of Tina Brown's first months as chief editor of the
New Yorker, Wallace Shawn said his father had never given any indication of his
views of the magazine's current direction. Then he paused a moment, and said of
his father, "You know, if he had lived for another couple of years, we might
well have had a discussion on the subject." And he added, "I learned today from
my mother that he was planning to have lunch with Tina Brown, and I know that he
still wished everyone at the magazine very, very well."

In addition to his wife of 64 years and his son Wallace, of Manhattan, Mr. Shawn
is survived by another son, Allen, of North Bennington, Vt., a composer who
teaches at Bennington College; a daughter, Mary Shawn of Langhorne, Pa., and two
grandchildren.


NAME: William Shawn

LOAD-DATE: December 9, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: William Shawn. (The New York Times, 1987) (pg. A1); William
Shawn in his office at The New Yorker in 1987. (Marilynn K. Yee/The New York
Times) (pg. B15)

TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              340 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 9, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Shawn's Colleagues Remember a Golden Age

BYLINE: By DEIRDRE CARMODY

SECTION: Section B; Page 15; Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 514 words


"I think those of us who knew him agreed that it was not the same as if it had
been in the old place," said Andy Logan, who was hired by William Shawn at The
New Yorker 50 years ago.

"You don't see him coming around the corner as you would have if we had still
been there," said Ms. Logan, who has been covering City Hall for The New Yorker
since Fiorello H. La Guardia was Mayor.

Indeed, when the news that Mr. Shawn had died began to filter through the
magazine's offices at 20 West 43d Street in mid-afternoon yesterday, the
mourning was very different, many writers said, than it would have been in the
famous bureaucratic squalor of the offices across 43d Street at 25 West where
Mr. Shawn presided as editor, taking over from Harold Ross in 1952 and reigning
until 1987.

Offices of Creative Clutter

The new quarters to which the magazine moved last year are gray and sleek, with
long efficient corridors that hide the crammed bookcases, overflowing desks and
writerly ambiance of the offices where writers and editors who knew Mr. Shawn
gathered quietly to share their grief.

"He was a very dear man and very important to so many of us," Ms. Logan said. "I
was the first woman Talk of the Town reporter. Ross was against it mainly on the
theory that women quarreled a lot, but Shawn was very staunch and very good
about hiring women."

Philip Hamburger, who went to work at the magazine in 1939 and knew Mr. Shawn
probably as well as anyone did, talked about "the enormous loss, obviously to
the magazine, but also to letters in America."

"He was a very great editor, there was no question," he said. "There was one
world -- the Gilded Age, the Jazz Age, Art Deco -- then we got World War II and
the hard facts of the postwar world. Shawn changed his magazine to broaden it
and deepen it, but always with style and monumental devotion to good writing and
good art."

Hendrik Hertzberg, who returned to the magazine earlier this year as executive
editor, worked at The New Yorker from 1969 to 1977 and then left to work for
President Carter. He was given a goodbye party at the magazine.

"Pauline Kael dragged Mr. Shawn down and he played the piano," Mr. Hertzberg
said. "To have everyone dancing at my going-away party with Mr. Shawn playing
the piano was a great thrill."

Martin Baron has been a fact checker at the magazine since 1974. He fact-checked
most of the articles by Jonathan Schell on the Vietnam War and on Watergate,
which were edited by Mr. Shawn.

"The overwhelming thing about Mr. Shawn was that he wanted as much as you could
give and the more you gave the more he loved you for it," Mr. Baron said. "He
would never say that by loading up your proof, you are just making my life more
difficult.

"He was very polite and very shy, but if he was challenged on something he
considered a point of established practice at the magazine he could be quite
formidable in maintaining his ground," he said. "He was capable of expressing in
his own restrained way a fair amount of anger on occasion. He could be quite
formidable in those respects."

NAME: William Shawn

LOAD-DATE: December 9, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              341 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 9, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Books of The Times;
Of Black Troops and a White Colonel

BYLINE: By HERBERT MITGANG

SECTION: Section C; Page 21; Column 1; Cultural Desk; Word and Image Page

LENGTH: 890 words


Blue-Eyed Child of Fortune
The Civil War Letters of Col. Robert Gould Shaw
Illustrated. Edited by Russell Duncan. 421 pages. University of Georgia Press.
$29.95.

Free at Last
A Documentary History of Slavery, Freedom and the Civil War
Illustrated. Edited by Ira Berlin, Barbara J. Fields, Steven F. Miller, Joseph
P. Reidy and Leslie S. Rowland. 571 pages. The New Press. $27.50.

Dedicating the sculpture by Augustus Saint-Gaudens that stands on Boston Common
to Col. Robert Gould Shaw and the black soldiers of the 54th Massachusetts
Infantry Regiment, William James said: "There they march, warm-blooded champions
of a better day for man. There on horseback among them, in his very habit as he
lived, sits the blue-eyed child of fortune." James Russell Lowell composed an
elegy for these black riflemen and their young white colonel, who died in battle
in 1863, and a century later another Lowell, Robert, wrote his poetic tribute,
"For the Union Dead."

Thanks in part to the film "Glory," Americans are a little more aware of what
their history books neglected to tell them: nearly 180,000 black soldiers served
in Union blue. Despite the initial distrust of the capabilities of these former
slaves -- in the North as well as the South -- the black soldiers acquitted
themselves bravely on the battlefield. Unshackled, they knew what they were
fighting for.

"Blue-Eyed Child of Fortune" shows Colonel Shaw's evolution in thinking about
blacks in peace and war. What began as indifference and even prejudice changed
to respect and comradeship. Some 200 of his letters, edited with a biographical
essay by Russell Duncan, an assistant professor of history at John Carroll
University in Cleveland, are included in this informative book. Readers
interested in the fate of free and emancipated blacks will find "Blue-Eyed Child
of Fortune" an unretouched contribution to military literature.

In his letters to family and friends, Colonel Shaw emerges more as a symbol than
as a wise commander.  At first he declined the honor and promotion from captain
to colonel. It was only to please his parents, both strong Abolitionists, that
he accepted the leadership of the first black regiment. When he died in an
ill-fated charge on Fort Wagner in South Carolina at the approach to Charleston
Harbor, his sense of duty turned him into a national legend. The Confederates
dumped his body and the bodies of a group of his men into a common grave. His
parents declared that their son had died in a noble cause and that he should
remain there with his fallen men, undisturbed.

The black soldiers in the 54th Massachusetts and later black regiments knew
something that many whites didn't realize or wouldn't recognize during the Civil
War: they were fighting not only to prove their manhood against a defiant
slavocracy on American soil but also for their future rights of citizenship.

"Free at Last" is a book with many voices that traces the black experience from
the beginning of the Civil War to the beginning of Reconstruction. It uses the
rich resources of the National Archives for first-hand accounts by liberated
slaves, defeated slaveholders, common soldiers and civilians. This invaluable
one-volume work, derived from current research by the Freedmen and Southern
Society Project, draws upon several volumes originally published by Cambridge
University Press under the title, "Freedom: A Documentary History of
Emancipation."

As perhaps no historian can, the documents convey the feelings of liberated
slaves in half-literate, heartfelt language: the elation of a fugitive slave
enlisting in the Union Army; the personal satisfaction of meeting a former
master on equal terms; the joy of a family reunion after years of forced
separation; the hope that freedom would bring a new life, and the fear that life
would be the same as before.

The documents show that the Confederate authorities refused to recognize armed
black men in Union uniforms as legitimate soldiers, regarding them as slaves in
insurrection and their white officers as instigators of rebellion. At first,
captured black soldiers and their officers were killed on the spot. Later, this
was changed to punishments ranging from re-enslavement or sale into slavery to
execution. Later, President Lincoln promised to retaliate against Confederate
prisoners if captured black soldiers were denied the rights of prisoners of war.
Northern recruiters enlisting black men made effective use of Lincoln's threat.

After the war, former slaveholders in the South despised black soldiers for the
same reason that former slaves welcomed them. Armed black men in positions of
authority embodied the world turned upside-down. Black soldiers stationed in the
South wrote to Washington officials pleading for the freedom they believed they
had gained by arms. Although "Free at Last" ends rather abruptly before
Reconstruction begins, its excellent bridging commentary by Ira Berlin and other
historians adds to our knowledge about the causes of the postwar troubles in the
Deep South.

During the Civil War and in both world wars, blacks fought in separate units; it
took the Vietnam War to bring about full integration of the armed forces. Few if
any people now question that blacks and whites belong in the same outfits,
dedicated to a common cause.

LOAD-DATE: December 9, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Ira Berlin (The New Press)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              342 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 9, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Corrections

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 54 words


An obituary yesterday about Richard J. Hughes, former Governor of New Jersey,
referred incorrectly to a statement by a Rutgers University professor that
became an issue in the 1965 governorship campaign. The professor, Eugene D.
Genovese, said he would welcome a victory in Vietnam by the Vietcong, not by
North Vietnam.

LOAD-DATE: December 9, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Correction

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              343 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 9, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Give Diplomacy a Chance to Revamp Somalia;
Clinton's Quagmire?

SECTION: Section A; Page 22; Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 210 words


To the Editor:

For President Bush, Somalia is a win-win situation. If he wraps it up in his
remaining lame-duck Administration, he has another Desert Storm illusionary
victory for the history books. If the incursion fails, Mr. Bush will have left
Bill Clinton in a quagmire that will stymie his domestic efforts just as
Republican cries in the 60's that Lyndon Johnson was soft on Communism kept him
preoccupied with Vietnam, undercutting his Great Society programs.

History will not judge Mr. Bush's decision at this late date to be a
humanitarian effort to save the starving Somalis but rather as an intentional
political move. After all, the situation has existed for more than a year and
nothing was done.

The people have elected a new President and the ball should be in Mr. Clinton's
court. Had not the Founding Fathers needed the months to count the popular vote
in the early colonies and to vote in the Electoral College, the time between the
general election and Inauguration Day wouldn't be two and a half months, which
in our technological society gives the outgoing President too much time to
create mischief for the incoming administration and thus dictate the new
President's agenda.

DANIEL SEGAL
Malibu, Calif., Dec. 4, 1992

LOAD-DATE: December 9, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              344 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 10, 1992, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

MISSION TO SOMALIA;
TV Army on the Beach Took U.S. by Surprise

BYLINE: By MICHAEL R. GORDON,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 18; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1208 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 9


For a military establishment acutely conscious of its vulnerability to
post-cold-war budget cutters, the landing at Mogadishu was the ultimate photo
opportunity.

But having finally secured an elusive spotlight, the marines discovered that
they had too much of a good thing. As Navy Seals and Marine reconnaissance teams
came shore under the glare of television lights, the spotlights and flash
attachments gave away their positions, interfered with their sophisticated
night-vision equipment and gave night blindness to commandos who wanted to have
their eyes fully adjusted to darkness in case they were attacked from the dunes
and scrub.

The dispute that took shape today was not over the rules for news coverage but
the absence of arrangements for covering the landing. The military seemed to
have planned for every possible contingency except for the teams of reporters on
the beaches.

Military Sought Coverage

All week the Pentagon had encouraged press coverage of the Marine landing.
Reporters were told when the landing would take place, and some television
network correspondents were quietly advised where the marines would arrive so
that they could set up their cameras.

But Lieut. Gen. Martin Brandtner, the chief operations officer on the Joint
Chiefs of Staff, said today that the military was under the impression that the
word had been passed to the journalists to stay off the beach and avoid the use
of television lights. He said the first time the military became aware that the
lights of television crews and photographers might be a problem for the
operation was when the Seals confronted the cameras.

"My immediate reaction was one of anger," Defense Secretary Dick Cheney said
today. "Fortunately, it didn't create any major problems for us and nobody was
hurt."

But network television correspondents said the Pentagon spokesman, Pete
Williams, did not ask them where they had put their cameras or ask them to move
them from the landing zones until early morning in Somalia, when the commandos
were already beginning to come ashore.

The Pentagon did not ask the networks to refrain from using their lights on the
beach until after the Seals had been photographed coming ashore and digging
their foxholes in the sand, the correspondents said.

Shift in Pentagon Tone

"They tried to make it the world's biggest photo op and got more than they
bargained for," said David Martin, the chief Pentagon correspondent for CBS
News.

By late evening, the Pentagon appeared to recognize that the responsibility for
the reporters on the beach was widely shared and began to play down the
problems.

Bob Hall, the deputy Pentagon spokesman, acknowledged Tuesday night that the
Pentagon appeal to news organizations to keep their representatives off the
beaches was issued late, but said that the Defense Department had been inhibited
from issuing an advisory earlier.

"I think the situation just got out of control," Mr. Hall said. Then, smiling,
he added, "We probably should have inserted the public affairs officers first."

The almost farcical scene of commandos coming ashore in camouflage paint and
being met by a welcoming committee of journalists was not the first time that
marines had been surprised by their reception.

When President Eisenhower sent the Marines into Beirut in 1958, the Marine
landing craft had to navigate around water-skiers. Vendors hawked ice cream to
the leathernecks as they came ashore.

The Greeting at Da Nang

When the Marines landed at Da Nang in South Vietnam, they came loaded for bear,
only to be met by high school girls, handing out flowers.

In the days leading up to the landing in Somalia, intelligence reports indicated
that it was unlikely that the Marines would face organized resistance, Rear Adm.
Michael W. Cramer, the chief intelligence official for the Joint Chiefs of
Staff, said today.

Many Somalis had welcomed the American decision to send troops. On Tuesday,
Ambassador Robert Oakley told clan leaders that the landing was going to take
place in the early morning. He asked them to keep their men away from the
airport and the beach, and the clan leaders said they would cooperate. Still,
the Marines say that it was only prudent to assume that there could be
resistance.

The Marines mounted a textbook operation, which began with well-armed Seals and
reconnaissance teams coming ashore to check the beach for mines and hostile
defenders, followed by an assault force.

The landing gave the Marines an opportunity to show off their amphibious skills,
something they were unable to do during the Persian Gulf war because of concern
over mines and casualties.

During his regular Tuesday noon briefing at the Pentagon, Mr. Williams, the
Pentagon spokesman, indicated that the press, particularly the television crews,
might be in the way.

"When you cover a football game,you know, you don't put your crews out there on
the middle of the 50-yard line, even though that might be the best place to
watch," Mr. Williams said. "You stay off the playing field."

"And there may be some concern on the part of commanders that if the open arms
of the fourth estate are standing on the very beach, they may be in the way," he
added.

Even so, Mr. Williams made the point in terms of safety, not in terms of
operational security. He did not ask the television cameramen or photographers
not to use television lights.

Around 4:30 P.M., Eastern time, Mr. Williams called Mr. Martin to his office.
Mr. Martin indicated to Mr. Williams where the CBS News camera positions were.

According to Mr. Martin, the Pentagon spokesmen replied, "You do not want to be
there." The crew had set up near one of the key landing areas.

Mr. Martin said he would pass along the Pentagon's concerns but could not
guarantee that they would move. But as he got on the phone to news executives in
New York, they told him that the CBS News crew in Somalia was photographing the
Seals coming ashore.

Faxes Came Too Late

Fred Francis, the Pentagon correspondent for NBC News, said that he had a
similar conversation with Mr. Williams minutes before the Seals reached the
beach and told him that it was too late "to turn the spigot off."

Around the same time, the Pentagon issued a press advisory asking correspondents
to stay off the beaches and began the time-consuming process of faxing them to
news organizations in the United States. In some cases the advisory was not
faxed to news organizations until 6 P.M., after the Seals landed. It was unclear
whether any effort was made to contact foreign news organizations.

After the live television pictures of the commandos were beamed back to
Washington, Mr. Williams arranged a conference call with network bureau chiefs
in Washington about 6 P.M., asking them to turn off their television lights
before the first wave of the assault force landed.

They agreed to pass the Pentagon's concerns on to their superiors in New York.
Some television operations, like CBS News and CNN, say that they did not use
lights. But many camera crews clearly benefited from those that did. And with
many foreign reporters on the beach, officials said it was difficult if not
impossible to control the situation from Washington.

LOAD-DATE: December 10, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: The swarm of journalists on hand to greet the landing at
Mogadishu was only the first hindrance awaiting the military. Marines found more
scenes of chaos yesterday when they went out in utility vehicles to patrol the
city and found the enemy to be the city's roads. (Lee Romero/The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              345 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 10, 1992, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Political Design? Well, Yes

BYLINE: By PATRICIA LEIGH BROWN

SECTION: Section C; Page 5; Column 1; Home Desk

LENGTH: 477 words


DESIGN is not exactly at the vortex of American politics. But as anyone who has
shopped for a car or a VCR knows, a product's design, or lack of it, often
determines whether a consumer chooses to buy.

The relationship between design and American economic competitiveness was the
subject of a roundtable discussion yesterday afternoon before members of
President-elect Bill Clinton's transition team in Little Rock, Ark. A group of
well-known designers and architects had been invited to Little Rock to share
their views with Christopher S. Hyland, a deputy political director of the team.

"The whole idea is to discuss design as an economic tool and ways to incorporate
it into a national economic strategy," said Mr. Hyland, who first met the
President-elect during Mr. Clinton's campaign for student body president at
Georgetown University, and who owns the Christopher Hyland fabric and wallpaper
showroom in the D & D Building in Manhattan, a place he acknowledged is far from
Little Rock.

Among the two dozen designers who were there to talk about "Design and
Management Initiatives Toward an Inclusive and Competitive America" (repeat that
five times) were the architect Maya Lin, who designed the Vietnam Veterans
Memorial in Washington; Tom Matano, vice president of design at Mazda North
America; Tucker Viemeister, a co-founder of Smart Design, a New York product
design company; Sheila Levrant de Bretteville, the chairman of the graphic
design department at Yale University; Jerry Hirshberg, the head of the design
studio at Nissan Design International; Max Bond, dean of architecture and
environmental studies at City College in New York; Michael Sorkin, a New York
architect and critic; Robin Lynch, the design director at Elektra Records;
Fernando Mateo, a New York-based entrepreneur and community activist, and Tom
Hardy, a former design director at International Business Machines.

The participants were chosen by Chee Pearlman, the editor of I.D., a magazine
that covers product, exhibition and graphic design. "To my knowledge," she said,
"this is the first time an incoming administration has ever wanted to speak to
designers."

The President-elect did not attend the meeting. Mr. Hyland said that a report on
the ideas presented would be given to Mr. Clinton and key members of his staff.
"Bill is a sponge when it comes to reading reports," he said.

The group also discussed how to adapt technology developed in "arcane government
laboratories" to broader uses, Ms. Pearlman said. Mr. Hyland said the group also
looked at design as a force for social change "whether it's urban or rural
land-use planning or how to design a neighborhood in a way that reinforces a
sense of community."

He added: "In tandem with many other things, design can help stimulate the
economy. This has nothing to do with fabric and wallpaper."

LOAD-DATE: December 10, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              346 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 10, 1992, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Home Video

BYLINE: By Peter M. Nichols

SECTION: Section C; Page 20; Column 1; Cultural Desk; Word and Image Page

LENGTH: 1272 words


For films worth preserving, television does part of the job but the details are
inevitably different.

Last week the Library of Congress added "Bonnie and Clyde," "Nashville," "Paths
of Glory" and 22 other movies to its National Film Registry, a list of notable
works, some dating to the 1920's, judged worthy of preservation. Of the 100
films named since the list was begun in 1989, perhaps 80 are or have been
available on videocassette. The registry has mixed feelings about that.

"The point is that the original material is deteriorating and eventually there
might be nothing left but video," said Eric Schwartz, the counsel for the
National Film Preservation Board, the group that selects the films for the
registry. "That's a severe problem."

The registry, which Congress created to find out what has to be done to preserve
old films, has nothing against video stores. "Access to and distribution of
these films is fine," Mr. Schwartz said. "We want as many people as possible to
see them, and for better or worse that will be on tape or laser disk."

The problem, he said, is that film and video producers are concerned only with
readying a film for commercial distribution, not with preserving the original.
The registry notes that 50 percent of the films made before 1950 have
disappeared and that more film is lost every year to fading and deterioration.

"The fact that something looks terrific on video says nothing about the
original," Mr. Schwartz said. Films altered for cassette are usually panned and
scanned, a step that adjusts the rectangular movie image to fit the square
television screen. Other alterations can include cutting or adding material, or
speeding or slowing playing time. In the registry's view, if producers are
allowed to make such changes, they should also help to insure the survival of
the original.

The registry chooses films based on their cultural, historic or technical
merits. In the past only feature films were selected, but this year
documentaries and animated films have been included as well as experimental work
like "Castro Street," a 10-minute film set in the rail yards of Richmond, Calif.
In future more of the titles picked might have to be altered for tape.

In 1989 the registry proposed labeling films modified for videocassette or other
formats. The question was what alterations were worth labeling. "We ran into
very strong differences of opinion," Mr. Schwartz said. Some directors wanted
labels for the slightest changes; some producers and distributors, he said,
resisted labeling even if a black-and-white film had been partly colored.

The registry finally decided to label films that had been colored, those that
had been shortened by more than 5 percent of their running times and those with
fundamental changes to their plot or character.

"Our guidelines pleased absolutely no one," Mr. Schwartz said. The labeling idea
was dropped.

NEW VIDEO RELEASES

Housesitter
1992. MCA/Universal. $94.98. Laser disk, $34.98. 1 hour 42 minutes. PG.

Off the Hollywood assembly line plops another romantic comedy that is both above
and below par for the make and model. To be sure, this one has Steve Martin and
Goldie Hawn, two pluses in any situation. As a love-smitten architect, Mr.
Martin builds a dream house in a post-card-pretty town for his pretty childhood
sweetheart (Dana Delany), who then jilts him. Into the pretty house, uninvited,
moves Ms. Hawn as an engaging squatter who, having learned about the structure
during a one-night stand with the architect, decides occupancy is her ticket to
the Norman Rockwell life style. Though individual lines are often funny, Frank
Oz's film rolls on unformed and unchecked with, Vincent Canby wrote in The New
York Times, "Ms. Hawn doggedly working to create some sense of oddball fun."

Beautiful Dreamers
1991. Hemdale. $89.95. LD, $39.95. 1:48. CC. PG-13.
 The young director of a Canadian mental hospital (Colm Feore) befriends Walt
Whitman (Rip Torn) and invites the poet to help him treat the patients in his
asylum. From that point, John Kent Harrison's unusual first feature film
explores the passionately involved intellectual relationship between Whitman and
the doctor. At stake is Whitman's belief that the mentally afflicted should be
treated with fun and games, a view that doesn't sit well with the rectitudinous
townsfolk of London, Ontario. Unfortunately this leads to a melodramatic
let's-show-'em cricket match between patients and the town team, which dilutes a
film that begins as a hard-headed look at Victorian narrow-mindedness "but
becomes progressively mellower as it goes along" (Stephen Holden).

American Dream
1990. HBO. $89.99. LD, $34.95. 1:40. PG-13.
 Barbara Kopple, who examined one labor dispute in her acclaimed 1977
documentary, "Harlan County, U.S.A.," this time scrutinizes a walkout at the
George A. Hormel Company meatpacking plant in Austin, Minn. In this case the
members of a small union local decide to defy both their employer and their own
international union. Not only does their resolve split them from their natural
allies but it also fractures their own ranks in a heartbreaking struggle that
loses them their jobs and destroys a way of life. "What hits home most
powerfully is the film maker's sense of how deep this damage ultimately runs"
(Janet Maslin).

Universal Soldier
1992. Carolco. $94.98. LD,$34.95. 1:42. Closed captioned. R.
 A couple of muscular and feuding Vietnam veterans kill each other off, are
preserved in ice and are brought back to life in a unit of automatons. Right off
they start fighting again. Jean-Claude Van Damme plays the good guy. Dolph
Lundgren is the bad one and perhaps "the only man in the universe who can make
Mr. Van Damme look like an actor" (Maslin).

FROM YEARS PAST

Some American Classics,
Federally Certified

Here are some of the 25 latest additions to the National Film Registry that are
available on tape:


 THE GOLD RUSH. Down on his luck in the Klondike, Charlie Chaplin is tweaked by
dance hall girls and gnaws on a shoe for Thanksgiving dinner. 1925. Various
distributors. 1:12. No rating.

THE BANK DICK. A soused bank guard (W. C. Fields) accidentally stumbles into a
little heroism. (Fields also wrote the film as Mahatma Kane Jeeves). 1940. MCA/
Universal. $29.95. LD, $34.98. 1:19. No rating.

LETTER FROM AN UNKNOWN WOMAN. Max Ophuls directs Louis Jourdan as a concert
pianist and Joan Fontaine as the infatuated woman who bears his child. 1948.
Republic. $19.95. LD, $34.98. 1:30. No rating.

ADAM'S RIB. Katharine Hepburn and Spencer Tracy are opposing lawyers as well as
husband and wife in the George Cukor film, with a screenplay by Ruth Gordon and
Garson Kanin. 1949. MGM/UA. $19.95. LD, $39.95. 1:41. No rating.

THE NIGHT OF THE HUNTER. Charles Laughton directs Robert Mitchum as a phony
minister who marries a convict's widow (Shelley Winters) to get at some loot,
only to have her children make off with it. 1955. MGM/UA. $19.95. LD, $39.95.
1:35. No rating.

PSYCHO. Alfred Hitchcock, Norman Bates and his wild mom still run rings around
most of today's horror films. 1960. MCA/Universal. $19.95. LD, $34.98. 1:49. R.

RIDE THE HIGH COUNTRY. Sam Peckinpah directs Joel McCrae and Randolph Scott as
aging former lawmen who ride shotgun for a load of gold and rescue a bride in
distress (Mariette Hartley). 1962. MGM/UA. $19.95. LD, $34.98. 1:34. No rating.

ANNIE HALL. Woody Allen's view of a neurotic relationship won Oscars for best
picture, director and actress (Diane Keaton). 1977. MGM/UA. $19.95. LD, $49.95.
1:34. PG.

LOAD-DATE: December 10, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Warren Beatty in a scene from "Bonnie and Clyde," one of the
latest additions to the National Film Registry. (Warner Brothers); Steve Martin
in "Housesitter." (Kerry Hayes/Universal)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              347 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 11, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Tan Bien Journal;
Hanoi to Show Tourists Hideout That Eluded U.S.

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHENON,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 4; Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 804 words

DATELINE: TAN BIEN, Vietnam


Deep in the steamy, malarial jungles of southwestern Vietnam, an army of
teen-age laborers too young to remember the Vietnam War are redigging collapsed
dirt tunnels and rebuilding the bamboo huts in which Communist rebels once
planned the overthrow of the South Vietnamese Government and the humiliation of
its American backers.

If there was an enemy outpost that American military commanders most wanted to
find and destroy during the war, this was it -- the secret headquarters of the
South Vietnamese Communists -- the Vietcong -- and a major terminus of the North
Vietnamese supply line known as the Ho Chi Minh Trail.

But while American bombers came close to their target here, they failed to
destroy it, and today the legendary garrison known as the Central Office for
South Vietnam is being restored and converted into a Government war museum. A
generation of acronym-loving Pentagon planners knew it best as COSVN.

A Commercial Emphasis

In a demonstration of how much has changed in Vietnam since the war, the museum
will be dedicated more to commerce than to Communism.

The Vietnamese Government, which has come to understand the value of
hard-currency tourism, intends to charge a visitor's fee and to turn a profit
from the museum, which will be a day trip from the old southern capital of
Saigon, now known officially as Ho Chi Minh City, about 75 miles southeast of
here.

"The entrance fee has not yet been determined, but whatever it is, we think
visitors from all over the world, including America, will want to come see this
place," said Capt. Nguyen Tan Khanh, a border policeman who is the local
military commander. "This will always be a place of victory, a symbol for all
Vietnamese to be proud of."

In the minds of many American commanders, COSVN was imagined to be a sort of
mini-Pentagon, with its own vast bureaucracy that worked in elaborate, heavily
fortified war rooms where the guerrilla war in the south was planned in
collaboration with the North Vietnamese Army.

If the restored structures look anything like the originals, the truth is that
the base was only a few small, open-air huts with packed-dirt floors that were
connected to one another by several hundred yards of cramped underground
tunnels. The tunnels were intentionally made narrow to prevent the possibility
that big-framed American soldiers might squeeze through.

"The tunnels were meant to protect our leaders from the bomb blasts," Captain
Khanh said. "The Americans did try to find this place." He pointed to a
weed-covered fish pond, perhaps 25 feet wide and a stone's throw from several
huts, that was created from the crater of an American bomb dropped here in the
late 1960's.

One hut served as the Vietcong's central command room and it was said to have
been furnished during the war with only a single long wooden table. The
Vietnamese discarded the historic table years ago "because it was in bad
condition and useless," Captain Khanh said.

The location is a densely wooded area in the Vietnamese province of Tay Ninh,
two miles from the border with Cambodia, a site that allowed the Vietcong
leaders to flee across the border to the relative safety of Cambodia when
American forces approached.

Captain Khanh, who serves as the museum's unofficial historian, said the
Vietcong used the compound from the mid-1960's to 1969, when they moved the base
to Cambodia in response to American bombing. In 1972, the Vietcong returned to
Tay Ninh and remained here until the fall of Saigon three years later, he said.

"It was a very secret place," Truong Quangson, a provincial official in Tay Ninh
who served with the Vietcong during the war. "We knew the headquarters were in
the province, but we did not know exactly where. There were only a few local
guides who knew the way through the jungle to here."

To prevent enemy soldiers stumbling on to the base and living to tell about it,
the huts were ringed by booby traps and dirt pits. At the bottom of the pits
were bamboo spikes designed to impale anyone who fell in.

Many of the Vietcong's leaders now serve in senior posts in the central
Vietnamese Government, including Prime Minister Vo Van Kiet. The hut that served
as his home and office here has been rebuilt, and Mr. Kiet has visited several
times and told young soldiers of the hardships of the war years.

"This was not a comfortable place to be, then or now," said Captain Khanh.

The Vietcong leaders, he said, were plagued by malaria and dysentery. They slept
in hammocks strung between bamboo poles in the huts, but that did not always
prevent poisonous jungle snakes from dropping down on victims from the thatched
roof. "And if the snake didn't kill you, you killed the snake," Captain Khanh
explained. "For the Vietcong soldiers, snake meat was a very important food."

LOAD-DATE: December 11, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: The war-time secret headquarters of the Vietcong is being
restored in southwestern Vietnam as a profit-making museum. Capt. Nguyen Tan
Khanh, the local military commander, inspected newly rebuilt tunnels. (Philip
Shenon/The New York Times)

Map of Vietnam showing location of Tan Bien.

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              348 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 11, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Review/Film;
Two Marines and Their Code on Trial

BYLINE: By VINCENT CANBY

SECTION: Section C; Page 20; Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1208 words


The role doesn't have to be big, but if it's good, and if the actor playing it
is great, the results can be magically transforming. Witness Jack Nicholson's
vicious, funny, superbly reptilian turn in Rob Reiner's entertaining "A Few Good
Men," adapted by Aaron Sorkin from his hit Broadway courtroom drama.

Mr. Nicholson doesn't steal the film, which would mean that he somehow separates
himself from everybody else in it. Rather, in the course of only a handful of
scenes, he seems to suffuse the entire production, giving it a weight, density
and point that might not otherwise be apparent.

The role, beautifully written, is made to Mr. Nicholson's order. It's that of
Col. Nathan R. Jessep of the United States Marine Corps, a tough, bigoted
Vietnam veteran, a career officer shaped by decades of cold-war politics. By
chance, Jessep is stationed in that last corner of the earth where the cold war
goes on as if there were no yesterday.

He's the commander of the marines stationed at the American naval base on the
southwestern coast of Cuba at Guantanamo Bay, on a small bit of arid real estate
protecting one of the best anchorages in the western Atlantic, a legacy of the
Spanish-American War. It's there that the United States and Cuba, separated by
barbed wire and command posts, have continued to co-exist through the Bay of
Pigs invasion, the great missile crisis and a continuing, crippling economic
embargo, in one of the strangest examples of symbiosis to be found in all of
international relations.

This geographic fact becomes a central image in the film adaptation, which
gracefully opens up the story of a military court-martial without allowing the
tension to evaporate. There are times when the movie seems to force-feed the
audience essential information, and when the audience might well wonder whether
the emotional crises of the defense lawyers really are of more interest than the
fates of the two men on trial.

Yet such things are built into the structure and nature of the drama, which is
less about the workings of the military than about the mechanics of this
particular inquiry. The story is this: in the course of what appears to be a
hazing incident at Guantanamo, a Marine private has died, apparently poisoned by
the rag stuffed into his throat before his mouth was taped. Two enlisted men are
charged with the murder. As often happens during proceedings of this sort, the
victim and the men on trial become less important than the politics surrounding
the case.

The Marine Corps would like to wrap it up as quickly and efficiently as
possible. To this end, a hot-shot young naval lawyer, Lieut. (j.g.) Daniel
Kaffee (Tom Cruise), is assigned to the defense with the understanding that
he'll persuade the defendants to accept a plea bargain. Also assigned to the
defense is Lieut. Comdr. JoAnne Galloway (Demi Moore), who acts as Kaffee's
conscience, eventually persuading him that there is a strong possibility that
the two enlisted men were, in fact, acting on orders from their officers.

The investigation, initially undertaken by Kaffee with some reluctance, uncovers
the fact that the victim, Pfc. William T. Santiago (Michael DeLorenzo), had for
some time been trying to transfer out of his unit.  Also, that he had ignored
both the Marine Corps code and its chain of command. He had written letters to
Washington offering to testify that he had witnessed an incident in which a
member of his unit had arbitrarily fired on a Cuban watchtower near the base.

As the investigation continues, Kaffee and Galloway, who clearly never go to the
movies, read a book or spend much time talking to career service personnel, are
surprised to discover a kind of military mind that, to them, seems prehistoric.
The two defendants at first behave like automatons.  Pfc. Louden Downey (James
Marshall) is so taciturn that he seems seriously retarded. His co-defendant and
spokesman, Lance Cpl. Harold W. Dawson (Wolfgang Bodison), refuses all offers of
help. He will stoically accept whatever punishment is meted out. The two men
simply parrot the Marines' code of fidelity to unit, corps, God and country.

On a fact-finding trip to Guantanamo, Kaffee, Galloway and their assistant
Lieut. Sam Weinberg (Kevin Pollak) have their first brush with Jessep at a scary
lunch, during which the colonel cheerfully lies through his teeth. For
Galloway's benefit, he also describes the special kind of high one can get when
having sex with a superior officer. According to Jessep, that's one of the few
benefits of an integrated service.

"A Few Good Men" doesn't pack the surprises of "Witness for the Prosecution,"
nor does it probe very deeply into the psyche of men who exercise the power of
dictators in a society that congratulates itself on its freedoms. It's no
"Full-Metal Jacket." "A Few Good Men" recalls something of "The Caine Mutiny
Court Martial," though it is most troubling not for the questions it raises, but
for the casual way it finally treats its two lost, utterly bewildered
defendants.

The screenplay is a good one, directed with care and acted, for the most part,
with terrific conviction.  Among the supporting players who do exceptional work
are Kiefer Sutherland, as a Marine officer who is a Jessep in the making; J. T.
Walsh, as an officer fatally flawed by conscience; Kevin Bacon, who appears as
the military prosecutor, and Mr. Bodison, a new young actor whose performance as
the more prominent defendant gives the film its melancholy shock value.

Mr. Cruise, Ms. Moore and Mr. Pollak are perfectly adequate in less flashy
roles, which, unlike the others, appear to have been constructed to keep the
plot moving right along. They have to play it comparatively straight, which must
be maddening when the actors around them are having such a colorful time.

Mr. Nicholson is in his own league. His Jessep is both a joy to watch because of
the actor's skill, and an explanation of why the United States base at
Guantanamo Bay, whatever its military value, continues to exist.  "A Few Good
Men" is a big commercial entertainment of unusually satisfying order.

"A Few Good Men," which has been rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent
or adult guardian), has a lot of vulgar language and some violence.




A Few Good Men



Directed by Rob Reiner; written by Aaron Sorkin, based on his play; director of
photography, Robert Richardson; edited by Robert Leighton; music by Marc
Shaiman; production designer, J. Michael Riva; produced by David Brown, Mr.
Reiner and Andrew Scheinman; released by Columbia Pictures and Castle Rock
Entertainment. Running time: 140 minutes. This film is rated R.

Lieut. (j.g.) Daniel Kaffee . . . Tom Cruise
Col. Nathan R. Jessep . . . Jack Nicholson
Lieut. Comdr. JoAnne Galloway . . . Demi Moore
Capt. Jack Ross . . . Kevin Bacon
Lieut. Jonathan Kendrick . . . Kiefer Sutherland
Lieut. Sam Weinberg . . . Kevin Pollak
Pfc. Louden Downey . . . James Marshall
Lieut. Col. Matthew Markinson . . . J. T. Walsh
Dr. Stone . . . Christopher Guest
Judge Randolph . . . J. A. Preston
Lieut. Dave Spradling . . . Matt Craven
Lance Cpl. Harold W. Dawson
Wolfgang Bodison
Pfc. William T. Santiago . . . Michael DeLorenzo

LOAD-DATE: December 11, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Tom Cruise (Sidney Baldwin)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              349 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 13, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

FILM VIEW;
What's Under The Tree? Stiffs And Hoods

BYLINE: By Caryn James

SECTION: Section 2; Page 20; Column 5; Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 829 words


Two years ago, the big movie that opened on Christmas Day was a cheerful
extravaganza, "The Godfather, Part III." Well, it was about a family. And the
Corleones are always sitting around eating a lot, so maybe it wasn't such an odd
holiday choice, except for the back-stabbing and shooting and dead people.

Last year's holiday season brought that lovable gangster in "Bugsy." And the
tradition goes on. This year you're getting Jimmy Hoffa for Christmas. Coming up
are movies filled with bloodshed, betrayal and music -- something for everyone,
from the tiniest incipient Mafioso to the most corrupt patriarch.

Movie makers will tell you there are valid commercial reasons for this. The
holiday season is a major filmgoing period, and the end of the year is the
cutoff date for Oscar contention. On the theory that the typical Academy Award
voter has the memory of a flea, the best, most dramatic movies are usually
released at Christmastime.

What's a softhearted viewer to do? Why not rise to the occasion and put your own
holiday spin on the story of a presumably-dead teamster? Here are some viewing
tips, ways to turn this year's Christmas films into holiday fun.

"Hoffa"
(Opening Christmas Day)

Think of Jack Nicholson's Jimmy Hoffa as Santa, bringing cheer to thousands of
little teamsters. Don't ask about his mob connections. Instead, focus on Danny
DeVito as Hoffa's helpful elf and sidekick, Bobby, always ready to do Santa's
bidding -- sending threatening messages, lending Santa his gun. Off-season,
Santa and Bobby go to the joint instead of the North Pole, but that's just
geography.

Watch for the film's tender family scenes. In one, Hoffa's granddaughter waves
bye-bye as gramps goes off to prison. In another, Hoffa visits Robert Kennedy
and tells him what he can do with his brother.

If you look carefully, holiday trappings are everywhere: in the snowy scenery
(convenient for an arsonist who rolls in the snow after getting too close to his
work); in the gift-wrapped package that Bobby delivers for Hoffa. (Don't worry.
Santa won't send you dismembered body parts.)

"Trespass"
(Opening Christmas Day)

This story of an inner-city gang and corrupt firemen is such a perfect holiday
movie that it was actually saved for Christmas. Originally called "The Looters,"
it was scheduled to open over the summer, but that seemed like an incendiary
idea after the Los Angeles riots. Then it was pushed ahead to February 1993,
before someone recognized its holiday spirit.

The rappers Ice Cube and Ice-T star as gang members in East St. Louis, Ill. When
two firemen from Arkansas arrive in search of hidden gold (think frankincense
and myrrh, too), they cross the gang members and are trapped in a burned-out
factory. Directed by Walter Hill, known for slick adventures like "48 Hours,"
the movie promises a gigantic special-effects finale in which the factory
explodes.

But don't ignore the story's deeper meaning. Press material for the film calls
it "a contemporary retelling
of man's age-old quest for riches." Well, who hasn't thought, at one time or
another, "Christmas is about loot"? Just make sure to lock up the presents
before you head for the theater.

"Damage"
(Opening Dec. 23)

This almost became the first Christmas movie rated NC-17 (no one under 17
admitted), which would have made it tough to think of as an outing for the tots.
The director, Louis Malle, trimmed a few steamy seconds to qualify for an R
rating, but there is still plenty of family activity on screen, as Jeremy Irons
falls into an obsessive sexual relationship with his son's fiancee. In one
family-dinner scene, knowing glances pass between Mr. Irons's character, Stephen
Fleming, and the young woman, played by Juliette Binoche. Think of the Christmas
surprise in store for Stephen's son and wife.

"Indochine"
(Opening Dec. 24)

Here is a family story much like "Damage," but from the mom's point of view and
with guerrilla insurrection thrown in for good measure. Against the backdrop of
French colonial Indochina, Catherine Deneueve and her adopted daughter fall in
love with the same man. When it's time to sit down to the Christmas goose,
"Indochine" might lead to one of those sentimental dinner-time discussions every
family loves: What were the French doing in Indochina? How did that lead to the
United States involvement in the Vietnam War? Has Catherine Deneuve had a
facelift?

There is alternative Christmas programming, too. Some good-guy films are
sneaking into town this week, a step ahead of the holiday-movie thugs. In "Leap
of Faith," Steve Martin experiences a miracle. In "Forever Young," Mel Gibson
wakes up after being frozen for 50 years and finds true love. With their
inspirational themes, these films seem hopelessly out of sync with the season's
movie spirit. But if it helps make the mood more Christmasy, think of Steve
Martin as a crime boss who experiences a miracle.

LOAD-DATE: December 13, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Catherine Deneuve and Lin Dan Pham in "Indochine" -- For the
holidays, guerrilla insurrection and a family feud. (Sony Pictures Classics);
Jack Nicholson, center, and Danny DeVito, right, in "Hoffa" -- A tender domestic
bye-bye scene when gramps goes to the slammer. (Francois Duhamel/20th Century
Fox)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              350 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 13, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

POP VIEW;
Rap After the Riot: Smoldering Rage And No Apologies

BYLINE: By Jon Pareles

SECTION: Section 2; Page 27; Column 1; Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1466 words


Ice Cube does some gloating on his new album, "The Predator." "Anything you
wanted to know about the riot was in the records before the riot," he says in an
interview-style interlude. "All you had to do was go to the Ice Cube library and
pick a record."

He's right: "Death Certificate," released on Halloween in 1991, not only
articulated the rage surrounding the beating of Rodney King, but showed exactly
where the flashpoint would be in the April riots in Los Angeles. The album
included "Black Korea," which revealed the deep resentment between Korean
shopkeepers (whom Ice Cube, in one ignorant flourish, described as
"chop-suey-eatin' ") and blacks, who felt they were being treated more like
potential criminals than customers; when the riots came, Korean businesses
became targets.

The album was vengeful and divisive, airing deep-seated prejudices and treating
ethnic groups as if they were warring gangs that could never share turf. But it
was also prophetic, which may be one reason "The Predator" shot to No. 1 on
Billboard's album chart upon release at the end of November. In the wake of the
riot, people had been waiting for rap's next bulletin from the front.

Before South-Central Los Angeles went up in a billion dollars' worth of flames,
the only voices from the area that most Americans had heard were the swaggering
storytellers of gangster rap. Taking violence for granted, flaunting ugly
attitudes toward women and homosexuals, savoring gory details, gangster rappers
weren't documentarians or responsible spokesmen; they were pulp auteurs,
exploiting America's appetite for violent entertainment while dropping enough
local details or "reality" to sound credible.

When Los Angeles burned, the reality dwarfed gangster rap's tales of drive-by
shootings and petty but deadly feuds. Yet amid the violence, the rappers
suddenly seemed like experts. And as the immediacy of the riots faded, rappers
are again the voices most likely to be heard outside the ghetto. They are not
diplomatic or conciliatory with the outside world; they have little to say about
the riot victims or about rebuilding burned-out areas. That's for politicians
and community leaders to take care of. Rappers talk about how they feel.

Hip-hop is by far the most topical zone of popular music, so it was inevitable
that the riots would make their way into rap's fall releases. For the most part,
Los Angeles rappers have preferred to stay with their usual postures and
material, with increasingly redundant tales of crime, sex and battling machismo.
Although explicit post-riot raps are greatly outnumbered by more typical
gangster material, they have been emerging on new recordings over the last
month. They suggest that the acquittal of the police officers who beat Rodney
King has left enduring anger and that racial and ethnic polarization has only
increased.

There are no apologies, just a few second thoughts. On recent releases, gangster
rappers like Ice Cube vent rage and vow retribution, while noting with approval
the post-riot truce between the two most entrenched Los Angeles gangs, the Crips
and the Bloods. More politically inclined rappers, like Paris (from Oakland,
Calif.), ricochet between fantasizing about terrorism and trying to draw broader
lessons from the carnage.

The usually outspoken Public Enemy (from New York) plays defense. In "Tie Goes
to the Runner" on the new album "Greatest Misses," Chuck D says he's "not
suprised at all about the riots," but his only word about the situation is to
insist that raps like "Black Korea" didn't create the problems: "This was
predicted, not self-inflicted/ By the rap out of the 'hood that kicked it good."
Sound bites from news coverage of the riots also appear as signs of authenticity
on efforts like "Whut? Thee Album" by Redman, a performer from Newark who starts
the album by placing himself in a "psycho" ward, talking out his sociopathic
fantasies. The album includes "News Break," in which a fictitious interviewer
asks Redman about reaction to the riots. "Yeah, they still mad," he says, and
threatens the interviewer.

As with the rest of hip-hop, pluralism reigns. But the sentiment they share is
that it took an all-out insurrection to get the attention of a white power
structure.

Ice Cube, the best-known voice of South-Central, is involved not just on "The
Predator" but on a forthcoming album by a rapper called Kam, due in February,
and on an all-star post-riot single called "Get the Fist," which Mercury Records
released but made little effort to promote. Sales of the single, a sequence of
snippets by Ice Cube, Yo-Yo, Cypress Hill, Kam and others, benefit the
Brotherhood Movement, which was formed in the aftermath of the 1965 Watts riots
and is currently working to rebuild South-Central. But it's obvious why Mercury
didn't try to turn it into another "We Are the World"; "Get the Fist" is
probably the most belligerent charity single ever made.

It starts with on-the-spot defiance -- "I'm black and I'm proud to be lootin' in
your face" -- and moves on to calls for black unity against the police and
whites: "Not black on black/ The other color gets beat." "Get the Fist" also
includes part of Ice Cube's riot commentary from "The Predator," "We Had to Tear
This -- Up." In the complete song, between news bulletins about the verdict and
the riots, Ice Cube raps about looting ("Now I got a laptop computer") and
fantasizes about killing the policemen who beat Mr. King and the jury members
who acquitted them. His conclusion is that the riots were necessary for blacks
"to get some respect."

Kam's single "Peace Treaty," due in January, praises the gang truce but starts
out discussing the riots: "It wasn't just the blacks, everybody was looting and
had each other's backs. . . . We all had a hand in the cookie jar and took it
far enough to make a statement."

Paris echoes that sentiment on his second album, "Sleeping With the Enemy":
"Don't be tellin' me to get the nonviolent spirit/ When I'm violent is the only
time you devils hear it." Those lines are part of "Bush Killa," Paris's vision
of assassinating the President, a calculated provocation to draw attention to
what he sees as genocide against American blacks ("I hope he thinks of how he
done us when he's laid to waste/ From guns given to my people for my own kind").

Talking about the riots themselves, in a simulated telephone conversation that
opens "Long Hot Summer," Paris and a friend dismiss those who are looting
sneaker stores as "tired" and worries that in the aftermath of the riots, blacks
will benefit as little as they did after the Watts riots. "If we don't think
about things that we need to do for ourselves," he says, "this is just going to
happen again and again and again and again." But in the rap that follows, he
plays a gun-toting guerrilla stalking cops, with a chorus of "rat-a-tat-tat from
my gat."

In cities where pistols are used to settle schoolyard arguments, it's pointless
to wish for gun control in rap lyrics. And while no one should take such songs
literally, they do reflect a pathology born of all-American myths and of
smoldering frustrations. Weaned on the image of the frontier gunslinger who can
single-handedly clean up a town, or the Rambo who can refight and win the
Vietnam War without a shirt, rappers aren't the only ones who long for decisive
action backed by armed force.

Rappers have all sorts of motives, ethical and unethical, to remind the outside
world about their frustration, and in the commercial realm of popular culture,
no motives are entirely unmixed. A rapper can identify with his or her
community, hoping to shock listeners into paying attention to real troubles, and
simultaneously realize that contention and notoriety and sensationalism will
publicize and sell recordings. For rappers who portray their characters as
gunslingers and guerrillas, there's also a large component of machismo, the
determination to convince the archetypal street-level listener that the
performer is as "hard" as the competition.

Post-riot raps don't offer practical solutions to urban unemployment, declining
education, drugs and crime, any more than governmental bodies have. Instead,
they shout and snarl about an escalating desperation that makes all sides seek
scapegoats, raising friction and shutting off the possibility of dialogue.

Amid the gunplay and vengeance fantasies, the raps make one thing clear. While
April's flames may have been quenched, the hostility that ignited them has not
gone away. "I do want the white community to understand our community more," Ice
Cube says on "The Predator." "I've given so many warnings on what's gonna happen
if we don't get these things straight in our lives." His conclusion: "Armageddon
is near."

LOAD-DATE: December 13, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Paris on a rooftop in Oakland, Calif. -- Fantasizing about
terrorism while trying to draw broader lessons. (Jim Wilson/The New York Times);
Ice Cube -- His "Predator" is the latest bulletin from the front. (Darcy
Padilla)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              351 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 13, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

MOST LIKELY TO SUCCEED

SECTION: Section 6; Page 14; Column 3; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 168 words


Alessandra Stanley's article "Most Likely to Succeed" (Nov. 22), about Frank
Aller, Bill Clinton and, by extension, all of us in the Clinton generation, is a
remarkable piece of writing -- not in the least because it recalls and feels
like the life of the time it describes.

Ironically, "The Big Chill," in its script form, focused on a death very much
like Aller's. But Hollywood cut it, opting, instead, for a film about suitcases
and the icons of avoidance we pack in them.

Those of us who, like Aller, made the mistake of taking the seriousness of our
time to bed with us at night will have to be grateful for the occasional
appearance of truth, such as we find in Stanley's article -- as well as for the
possibility that power has once and for all passed to our generation with the
election of Bill Clinton.

The Frank Allers of our time were the true heroes. May Bill Clinton keep the
picture of himself standing with Frank Aller forever on his wall.

RICHARD LEES
Los Angeles

LOAD-DATE: December 13, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              352 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 13, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

MOST LIKELY TO SUCCEED

SECTION: Section 6; Page 14; Column 3; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 210 words


The article about Frank Aller was sad and disturbing. He seems to have been
adept at hiding his pain; it is unfortunate that, among his highly educated and
sophisticated friends, so few had any notion of his suffering until it was too
late. The friend who wondered why Aller couldn't just "check out of the
intensity of those times" as "most people" did might as well have been asking
why he couldn't just make up his mind to swim the Pacific Ocean. A depressed
person does not have the freedom to decide to give up his particular
"intensity"; he has difficulty getting from one day to the next, let alone
making decisions. It is a marvel of human resilience that Aller was able to
accomplish as much as he did.

The word "depression" is used too often today to have any clear meaning. Real
clinical depression is another order of magnitude from the depressed moods we
sometimes have. Those who have not experienced it, even caring and empathetic
people, as Aller's friends were, cannot begin to understand its debilitating
weight and the pervasiveness of the despair and pain.

If Aller had felt that it was acceptable to be something less than his idea of
perfect, he might still be here.

KITTY CHEN
New York, N.Y.
<ILS>Photo: Frank Allers

LOAD-DATE: December 13, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              353 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 13, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

MOST LIKELY TO SUCCEED

SECTION: Section 6; Page 14; Column 4; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 96 words


When Bill Clinton and Frank Aller "agonized" over their respective decisions
regarding the draft, one was toughing it out morally while the other was
engaging in complicated career calculations.

For better or for worse, we are governed by the Clintons of this world, not the
Allers. Explaining to my college students how a man like Frank Aller could have
committed suicide isn't the tough part for me. I wish it were as easy to explain
how I could have voted for a man who was essentially a sophisticated, successful
draft dodger.

NICHOLAS STIX
Brooklyn

LOAD-DATE: December 13, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              354 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 13, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

MOST LIKELY TO SUCCEED

SECTION: Section 6; Page 14; Column 4; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 134 words


No offense to Alessandra Stanley, or to Frank Aller, who sounds as if he must
have been quite special, but if contacts weren't everything in America, he'd be
just another suicide case, remembered by only those who loved him. As it turns
out, though, Frank Aller has become a front-page "star."

The idea that Aller was "a casualty of the war" seems unlikely, in light of the
many factors that must play a part in the decision to end one's life. What about
lack of support or possible pressure from family? What about physical or
emotional problems that are unique to an individual? What about genetic makeup
or the possible effects of drugs? If anyone could have known what prompted Aller
to commit suicide, chances are he'd still be alive today.

DIANE MENZEL
Port Washington, L.I.

LOAD-DATE: December 13, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              355 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 13, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

MOST LIKELY TO SUCCEED

SECTION: Section 6; Page 14; Column 5; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 140 words


In reading the article on Frank Aller, I noted several references to his
marijuana and alcohol use. Yet, among the speculations offered for his suicide,
no one suggested that heavy use of these substances -- which can cause
depression, cloud judgment and lower impulse control -- may have played a role.
In fact, research has found significant associations between alcohol use and
suicide, particularly with those acts involving a firearm. Although I would not
want to draw any conclusions based on this information alone, I finished the
article wondering whether Aller might have been a casualty of his time in
another way -- a victim of the glamorization of drugs. (In fact, "discovering
pubs, wine shops" is the first evidence given in the article of the "polish"
Aller acquired at Oxford.)

NAIMAH WEINBERG, M.D.
Baltimore

LOAD-DATE: December 13, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              356 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 13, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

MOST LIKELY TO SUCCEED

SECTION: Section 6; Page 14; Column 5; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 116 words


Your article reports that Bill Clinton attributed Frank Aller's draft resistance
to "the old Martin Luther King thing . . .  'I'm doing this because I can't do
anything else.' "

I believe that Clinton may have intended to refer to King's namesake, Martin
Luther, who, upon his refusal to acknowledge the error of his ways to the
Imperial Diet at Worms, said: "Here I stand; I cannot do otherwise."

Whether the words were, in fact, uttered by Luther, by King or by Aller is of
little moment. What matters is the courage, magnificence, sorrow and loss that
have resulted from principled resistance to the wrongful and damaging exercise
of power.

DAVID MILLER
New York, N.Y.

LOAD-DATE: December 13, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              357 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 13, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

TRAVEL ADVISORY;
Lindblad to Lead Antarctic Cruises

SECTION: Section 5; Page 3; Column 4; Travel Desk

LENGTH: 256 words


Lars-Eric Lindblad, a pioneer of Antarctic cruises and a tour operator who went
bankrupt following a dispute with the United States Government about Vietnam
programs, will lead groups of 400 travelers to Antarctica starting late next
year aboard a refurbished ship for a new company.

The ship, the Marco Polo -- the former Aleksandr Pushkin, an 850-passenger
Soviet cruise ship -- is undergoing a $60 million renovation in Europe for
Orient Lines, which has offices in Fort Lauderdale, Fla. The company's founder,
Gerry Herrod, is a British shipping magnate and former owner of Ocean Cruise
Lines, which also operates Antarctic cruises. In May 1990 Mr. Herrod sold Ocean
and its subsidiary, Pearl Cruises, to Paquet French Cruises and agreed not to
compete with Paquet before next February.

Citing the agreement, a spokesman said he could not comment on Orient's plans
until February. But Orient Lines officials announced the plans for the Antarctic
trips at the recent Asia Pacific Cruise Convention in Singapore. Orient is not
advertising its cruises or taking reservations before Feb. 1. Earlier this year
Mr. Herrod said the Marco Polo would sail from Greece to India next October,
make two Indian Ocean cruises and then begin a series of cruises to Antarctica.

Mr. Lindblad has led trips to Antarctica since the mid-1960's.

In 1989, as president of Lindblad Travel, Mr. Lindblad filed for bankruptcy,
citing fines and legal fees from a two-year fight over the Government's halting
his company's trips to Vietnam.

LOAD-DATE: December 13, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              358 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 13, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

In the Fight to Save Lives, Copters Save Precious Time

BYLINE: By ALAN ZALE

SECTION: Section 13WC; Page 33; Column 1; Westchester Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1296 words

DATELINE: VALHALLA


LAURIE ROCHE, a flight nurse, opened the left rear door of the helicopter for
her first time at 200 feet above the Westchester County Fire Training Center.
She slowly slid her right foot out on the skid and began to check the pilot's
blind spot as he descended for his landing.

Ms. Roche is a new member of the County Medical Center's Stabilization Treatment
and Transportation team and was undergoing what is known as "hanging out"
training on a recent Saturday morning. The skill is one of the most important
ones a flight nurse must learn. Ms. Roche had to watch that the rotor blades
would be clear of a street lamp, a building and fire escape on the left side of
the helicopter while the pilot watched for a fence and a sign on the right.

Training began five months ago for 12 additional nurses as STAT Flight became
the first 24-hour medical helicopter service in Westchester County on Dec. 1.
STAT Flight had been operating with only 11 flight nurses for 12 hours a day
from 7 A.M. to 7 P.M. since March 1. Before that Aeromed operated at the County
Medical Center here from March 1991 through February of this year during the
same hours of operation. Unlike Aeromed, a service of the New York
Hospital-Cornell Medical Center in Manhattan, STAT Flight will be operated by
the county.

Influence of Vietnam War

The use of helicopters as air ambulances began with the Korean War and greatly
increased with the Vietnam War. The first hospital-based use of helicopters as
air ambulances was in 1972 at St. Anthony's Hospital in Denver. Now more than
190 hospitals in the United States use helicopter transports.

The aircraft is leased to the county by Rocky Mountain Helicopter of Provo,
Utah, the largest aeromedical supplier in the country. They also supply four
pilots and one full-time mechanic. The helicopter -- is an American Eurocopter
BK117 twin engine medically configured aircraft. The center only has one, but
Rocky Mountain Helicopter will lease another if the current helicopter needs
repairs.

The inside where the medical team works is just over 4 feet high, 4 feet wide
and 10 feet long. It takes only four to six minutes to get the flight team
together and the helicopter airborne. Traveling at a speed of 128 knots, or 150
miles per hour, it can respond to an emergency anywhere in the county in one to
eight minutes.

STAT Flight provides rapid access to the County Medical Center, a Level 1 trauma
center, which offers the highest level of care to seriously injured patients.
The center and the flight team serve a seven-county region in the lower Hudson
Valley. They have also assisted in special emergency cases in nearby locations
in Connecticut and New Jersey. The chief flight nurse, Judy Flagg, explains that
they are looking to transport critical patients quickly and with the greatest
level of expertise. "We are an extension of the emergency room," Mrs. Flagg
said.

A Pilot and Two Nurses

The flight team is made up of a pilot and two flight nurses. In addition to
regular nursing experience, the flight nurses have a minimum of three to five
years' critical care or emergency room experience, although some nurses have
come from the neonatal unit.

The training to become a flight nurse takes about five months and includes many
skills not normally practiced by a registered nurse. First, to work on an
ambulance -- in this case the helicopter -- in New York State, a flight nurse
must become an emergency medical technician.

A flight nurse is also trained in intubation, which is the insertion of a tube
into the lungs to assist breathing, starting intravenous lines, taking arterial
blood gases and, with contact with the doctor at the Medical Center, can perform
other advance life-support skills. They are more independent than regular
nurses, Mrs. Flagg said.

Army-Trained Pilots

In addition to "hanging out," when the nurse sitting on the left assists the
pilot in landing, flight nurses are also responsible for safety around the
helicopter, map reading, navigation, radio communication, weight balance and
looking out for other aircraft.

Now that STAT Flight has gone to 24-hour service, two more pilots have been
added to the program. All four are Army trained, and the experience of the lead
pilot, Charlie Robinson, includes a tour of duty serving as a Medevac pilot with
the First Cavalry in Vietnam.

One in three requests is for a "scene call," after a car accident or an incident
resulting in serious injuries. The rest of the transports are for critical-care
cases, like a newborn baby who has to be taken to a hospital offering special
services.

In a scene call, the helicopter would be requested by emergency service
personnel at the scene after determining the patient is in need of Level 1
trauma care. On Dec. 4, for example, the Yorktown Volunteer Ambulance Corps made
such a request.

On Standby for a Car Accident

While responding to a serious automobile accident on Route 129 and Underhill
Road in Yorktown, the ambulance corps requested that STAT Flight be put on
standby. The corps' decision was based on the probable seriousness of the
injuries and that the Fire Department was being dispatched to free the injured
person.

The flight team was paged at the County Medical Center at 4:59 P.M., which sent
the flight crew running to the helicopter, where they would sit and wait for an
update. During this time, Mr. Robinson, the pilot, was getting distance and map
bearings from Westchester County Fire Control to plot a course.

Once the ambulance corps arrived at the scene and saw that a 51-year-old woman
-- the driver and the car's only passenger -- was still trapped in the car, they
requested, at 5:06 P.M, that the helicopter be dispatched to the scene. As
rescue personnel worked to free the woman, the flight team received the code for
liftoff. Three minutes later it was airborne. When the helicopter landed at the
accident site at 5:17 P.M., the woman was just being freed from the car.

A flight nurse, Dianne Murphy, sitting in the front with Mr. Robinson, left the
aircraft to assess the scene and stabilize the patient. Ms. Roche, sitting in
the patient compartment, grabbed the medical bags and joined Ms. Murphy.

Once the patient was stabilized and secured to a backboard, rescue workers --
under the direction of the flight nurses who were monitoring the patient and
helicopter safety (both the main and tail rotors are running) -- lifted the
patient into the rear of the helicopter, which can carry two patients if
necessary.

A Seven-Minute Trip

The helicopter lifted off at 5:31 P.M. and arrived back at the Medical Center
seven minutes later. The trip to the center by a regular ambulance would have
taken 17 minutes, more than twice as long.

Another important aspect of the program is patient follow-up through
hospitalization and discharge. A flight nurse, Dianne Murphy, said it provides a
learning experience where you get to see the full picture. "It ties up the loose
ends," she added. "You've seen them at their worst; now you get to see them when
they are better. It closes the storybook."

With the special skills the flight nurses have learned, their work is not always
limited to cases involving flight transport. On a recent Sunday afternoon the
flight team nurses were called in to help the Emergency Room staff take care of
a National Guard sergeant injured when an Army vehicle collided with another on
Route 9A.

Now that the flight program is 24 hours, Mrs. Flagg said she expects to see an
increase in the number of scene calls because statistically more serious
accidents happen at night. Mrs. Flagg said, "The availability of the helicopter
backup to the first responder will not be limited to 12 hours."

LOAD-DATE: December 13, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Helicopter flight nurses taking a 90-year-old man hit by a car
in Yonkers into the County Medical Center in Valhalla. (Alan Zale for The New
York Times)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              359 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 13, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

IDEAS & TRENDS;
How a 'Rainbow Curriculum' Turned Into Fighting Words

BYLINE: By STEVEN LEE MYERS

SECTION: Section 4; Page 6; Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1000 words


THREE years ago, not long after the killing of a young black man in a white
neighborhood in Bensonhurst, a group of teachers and administrators in New York
City began writing a curriculum to teach first graders to respect the city's
myriad racial and ethnic groups.

The result, called "Children of the Rainbow," offers teachers games, songs and
other lessons to teach racial harmony among their 6-year-old charges -- from
Irish ballads to the Mexican hat dance, the recipe for Greek New Year's Day
bread to the Japanese version of rock, scissors, paper.

But among its 443 pages are three, in a section on families, that urge teachers
to include references to gay men and lesbians. That recommendation has
infuriated many parents, clergy and school board members, and the fear and
misunderstanding it provoked have only increased since the guide landed in the
city's schools 13 months ago.

On Dec. 1, Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez suspended the school board in District
24 in Queens for refusing to adopt "Children of the Rainbow" -- only to have the
Board of Education rebuff him and reinstate the local board last week.

While the central board's president, H. Carl McCall, called the reversal "an
attempt to bring all parties together," an aide to Mr. Fernandez said it would
"cause severe problems for New York City in the years to come."

And thus, a curriculum intended to foster tolerance has deeply divided the city
and provoked vicious expressions of intolerance, including two threats on the
Chancellor's life.

"I am truly saddened that we have had to come to this," Mr. Fernandez said as he
suspended the local board, "saddened by the irony that teaching children the
fourth 'R' -- respect for their neighbors and themselves -- has brought on the
hateful condemnations that I have heard and read."

The controversy has become so furious that it has obscured what is actually in
the curriculum.

Most of the curriculum offers such unexceptional lessons as pinning cutouts of
exotic fruits and vegetables on a world map. While it includes no lessons about
homosexuality, the curriculum's critics have focused on the few short passages
that urge teachers to tell their students that some people are gay and should be
respected like anyone else.

Bothered by Books

The president of District 24's board, Mary A. Cummins, has called the guide
"dangerously misleading lesbian/homosexual propaganda," citing those passages as
well as three books -- "Heather Has Two Mommies," "Daddy's Roommate" and "Gloria
Goes to Gay Pride" (a parade) -- from a list of hundreds of recommended but not
required readings. And she accused the Chancellor of perpetrating "as big a lie
as any concocted by Hitler or Stalin."

Mr. Fernandez and his supporters maintain that critics have deliberately
distorted the curriculum to alarm parents, while gay rights advocates say the
attacks fit into an increasingly familiar pattern of harassment and prejudice
around the country.

"The basic lesson of this curriculum is to teach children to love thy neighbor
-- at the earliest possible age," said Richard Burns, executive director of the
Lesbian and Gay Community Services Center in Manhattan. "But it has been framed
by the right as a larger political issue."

Some on both sides of the dispute agreed that it raised a valid question: Are
first graders who still believe in Santa Claus, as one parent in Queens put it,
too young to comprehend the complexities of family life?

Each side, of course, has a different answer. Whatever the answer, though, the
invective has drowned out reasonable debate. Once opponents had transformed Mr.
Fernandez into a Hitler and the curriculum's lessons about families into the
ABC's of sodomy, it no longer really mattered what the curriculum actually said.
There was no persuading some alarmed parents that it was anything less than what
Mrs. Cummins and others described.

" 'Children of the Rainbow' is a cute phrase like 'protective destruction' in
Vietnam," Frank Skala, president of the Bayside Parents Association, said at a
recent board meeting in District 26 in Queens. "It's not multicultural. It's not
education. It's gay rights, and it's wrong."

Some blame for misconceptions lies with television and newspapers, which
sensationalized the issue or condensed it into headlines that most often
included the word "gay," leaving an impression that the curriculum talked about
nothing else.

Frances Kunreuther, executive director of the Hetrick-Martin Institute, a
nonprofit organization in Manhattan that operates a public schoolfor gay
students, said that opponents had succeeded in changing the terrain of the
public debate.

"It's tremendously frustrating," said Ms. Kunreuther, whose staff has advised
those writing the curriculum. "We're debating the truth of the document itself
rather than whether or not we should use it. They'll tell you it's riddled with
refences to sodomy and anal sex. It's simply untrue, but if people believe it,
how do you then have a discussion about it?"

The anger has not been lost on the Chancellor. He has allowed school boards to
delay the controversial lessons to a later grade, usually fifth or sixth, and
most have done so. His staff has also drafted a revision of the curriculum that
rephrases or deletes some passages, including one that read, "Classes should
include references to lesbians and gays in all curricular areas." Mr. Fernandez
acknowledged that some passages had been badly worded, but he vowed not to
retreat on the basic theme.

The entire dispute has bewildered Evelyn Castro, who, as the district's Director
of Early Childhood, helped write the curriculum three years ago. "I thought the
time had come for this in the environment of diversity the city has," said Dr.
Castro, who now heads the city's laboratory school at Hunter College. "I didn't
think it would be like this; people have become so polarized. I don't know what
they're upset about. I keep looking, but I can't find it."

LOAD-DATE: December 13, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Opponents of a teachers' curriculum guide that urges tolerance
for gay people demonstrating last month outside the Board of Education
headquarters in Brooklyn. (Donna Binder/Impact Visuals)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              360 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 13, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THE WORLD;
Clinton Inherits Conflicts That Don't Follow Rules

BYLINE: By THOMAS L. FRIEDMAN

SECTION: Section 4; Page 3; Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1124 words

DATELINE: LITTLE ROCK, Ark.


THERE is a story making the rounds at the Pentagon about the moment the Marines
landed in Somalia last week. Evidently one leatherneck asked his commander as
they waded ashore to this starving land: "How do we tell the good guys from the
bad guys?"

"The bad guys are the fat guys," his officer answered, "and the good guys are
the thin guys."

Such is foreign affairs at this remarkable hinge of history when Bill Clinton is
inheriting the world -- a moment when allies and enemies can no longer be
defined by their status in the cold war, or by their preferences for Washington
or Moscow, but rather by all sorts of bizarre tribal, clan and weight
designations that we must learn.

Somalia is a symbol not only of these new challenges, but also of the loose ends
of diplomacy that the Bush Administration is leaving for the Clinton
Administration. Partly by design, partly by accident, and partly under the sheer
pressure of events, President Bush is leaving Mr. Clinton a combination of
unfinished business of the cold war and undefined business of the post-cold war.

There is the unraveling nuclear arms control agreement with Russia, the
unfinished international trade talks, the stalled Arab-Israeli peace
negotiations, and the question of what to do about Bosnia -- to name but a few
of the diplomatic dangling participles.

Somalia, too, is an orphan of the cold war. Under its last real government,
Somalia played off the United States and the Soviet Union, who were competing
for use of its harbors and airfields astride the oil shipping lanes. Somalia
milked both sides as best it could, but when the Soviet Union collapsed and the
money stopped flowing in, Somalia collapsed too. It is now trapped between a
cold war world that it could at least live off the margins of and a post-cold
war world in which it is utterly marginalized.

Chester Crocker, the former Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs,
once said of superpower politics in Africa: When the elephants fight, the grass
suffers. When the elephants mate, the grass suffers. But when the elephants just
go away and no longer fertilize the grass, it withers.

Such is the predicament of Somalia, and of India, Zaire, Angola, Liberia,
Nicaragua, El Salvador, Bosnia, and many of the former Soviet republics. Having
been abandoned by the elephants of power politics, they are being left to the
tender mercies of their own histories -- and in most cases it is not a pretty
sight.

In effect, we now live a tripolar world. The old cold war world, divided in half
by a struggle between communism and capitalism, seems to be giving way to a new
world divided in thirds: those states that achieved or are striving toward some
form of democracy and free markets, those that will settle instead for some form
of authoritarianism, and those that will simply collapse in anarchy, like
Liberia or Somalia, and become wards of the international community.

CNN in the Soviets' Role

"The challenge for Clinton," said the historian Ronald Steel, "will be
establishing guidelines for which one of these problems we try to solve, and
which ones we can't. He is going to have to redefine what are American interests
abroad. He cannot let television do that."

Indeed, without a Soviet Union to compel and define American engagement abroad,
CNN in some ways is taking its place. Does anyone believe, had the American
networks not beamed a steady stream of pictures of starving children back to
Washington, that President Bush would have been moved to intervene in Somalia,
and win the support of the American public? The main reason many Americans are
now calling for a similar intervention in Bosnia but not the Sudan, where
murderous tribal infighting and starvation is also rampant, is that the cameras
have gotten into Sarajevo and not Khartoum.

In a world where every American household will soon have access to cable
television, Ted Turner could be the new de facto Secretary of State. It
certainly seemed that way last week, as American troops landed on the beaches of
Somalia. Under the network klieg lights, the Marines secured Mogadishu. Before
the latest commercial interruption, they were waiting to head for the town of
Baidoa, which they hope to wrest from various armed bandits.

The luck or the misery of the television draw, though, cannot be allowed to
substitute for policy. There are two ways Mr. Clinton can avoid this. One is
pre-emptive diplomacy, addressing problems before they reach the
intervention-demanding stage -- something that could have made a difference in
Somalia and Bosnia. Last week Mr. Clinton asked for time to do just that.

"On balance," he said, "let's make one thing clear: It is a wonderful thing that
the cold war is over. But let's also admit that the end of the bipolar world has
made it possible to peel a layer off human aggression and made it possible in
some parts of the world for people to be starved, brutalized and killed with
much greater abandon.

"I have two choices. We can either focus on these problems, come up with a
decent policy and aggressively pursue it, or wait for it to explode. Then the
problems will swarm us and I might have to spend all my time on foreign policy."

But some problems will be resistant to American pre-emptive diplomacy, and here
the challenge for Mr. Clinton will be deciding which to take on, which to ignore
and which to leave for others. It will be crucial for him to explain what he
does, and what he doesn't. That means articulating the differences between
Somalia and Kurdistan, Kurdistan and Mozambique, Mozambique and Haiti, to avoid
getting trapped in a moral domino theory in which intervention in one place
seems to automatically compel intervention in another. In some ways, Somalia,
the country where American troops intervened for the first time purely for
non-strategic "humanitarian" reasons, is an easier case than the others. It is a
rare combination of an unspeakable tragedy and a relatively cost-free rescue.

"Some say Bush's gulf war exorcised the ghosts of Vietnam and now Somalia has
exorcised the ghosts of Beirut," said the Middle East scholar Fouad Ajami. "But
I would argue that Somalia tells us nothing. Intervention there was an issue
beyond diplomacy. It was not a test of the limits of our diplomacy, but the
limits of our mercy."

In some ways the real test of the limits of post-cold war American foreign
policy will be Bosnia, not Somalia. Bosnia demands not just a humanitarian call,
but also a political and strategic judgment. It is difficult to make a
difference there without risking American lives in a potentially open-ended
conflict, where there are only bad guys and bystanders, and the bad guys come in
all shapes and sizes.

LOAD-DATE: December 13, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: A New Kind of Mission: The first Navy Seals to land were
quickly surrounded by photographers, top; in Mogadishu, crowds watched the
marines unload, left; on Friday, two Somali warlords signed an armistice, but a
day later, U.S. helicopters destroyed three vehicles. Starvation and fighting
persisted in outlying areas, but food convoys stayed in town. (Agence
France-Presse)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              361 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 13, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

New York Lifers Groups Argue for Early Parole for Good Behavior

BYLINE: By FRANCIS X. CLINES,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 49; Column 2; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1413 words

DATELINE: WOODBOURNE, N,Y., Dec. 9


Among the ways of retribution inside the wine-red walls of the state prison
here, none is felt as dearly as the simple breezes from the outside world that
regularly tease John Massey, dean of the lifers, as he attends to his duties
near the exit of the departure center and says goodbye to fellow convicts whose
prison time is done.

"I'm looking at that door and I'm getting that breeze every time the door is
opened," says Mr. Massey, a 48-year-old convicted murderer, kidnapper and robber
now in the third decade of a sentence of 25 years to life.

"And there I am, with the door constantly being shut in my face," he says,
talking evenly, patiently with eight other long-term convicts about surviving
atop the glacier of time they have amassed for themselves.

Mindful of how indulging rage and ennui can simply compound the experience of
prison, the nine men have organized as the long-termers committee at the
Woodbourne Correctional Facility. They busily search for the best ways of
fulfilling their sentences and convincing authorities that despite current
sentencing and parole practices, they deserve a fresh chance sooner rather than
later.

A Hope-Hungry Fraternity

The men are part of a lifers' network scattered across the 67-prison state
system, a hope-hungry fraternity of some of society's more horrific criminals
who nevertheless, prison officials say, are probably the most
rehabilitation-minded convicts and the strongest leaders. "I find in my
experience murderers are the best bet," the state Commissioner of Corrections,
Thomas A. Coughlin 3d, flatly attests, supporting a legislative proposal he and
others have made. It would allow such prisoners time off for good behavior,
giving them a chance of parole before they finish serving their minimum
sentences.

The proposal might not go down easily in a society more inclined to crack down
on violent criminals. It is intended to provide prisoners, particularly those
with terms of 15 years and more, with some outside, reliable incentive for early
rehabilitation, and to create a distinction between the prisoner who advances in
education and behavior and the one who lounges at the television set or card
table.

"A lot of time, people don't want to hear this sort of talk about murderers,"
said Commissioner Coughlin. His good-behavior proposal would essentially restore
an approach that had been in effect until 1965 when tighter power was accorded
to parole officials. Twenty-five other states have similar plans.

'Not Going to Kill Again'

"After they get their head together, these people are not going to kill again,"
said Mr. Coughlin. "It's interesting: in the first seven or eight years inside
they can be the biggest pains of all, but then they're no trouble. They become
introspective, go to college, join organizations and from maybe years 12 to 25,
they are very productive. They're the ones, if I got a problem inside, I talk to
them."

Even so, the proposal for mercy would seem to have little chance before a
Legislature well committed to increased incarceration as the chief method of
meeting the modern wave of violent crime. That method, which includes making it
harder to be paroled, has seen the prison population triple to more than 60,000
in the last 20 years.

The proposal would let prisoners who behave well become eligible for their first
parole hearing up to one-third sooner -- after 10 years for the 15-years-to life
prisoner and after 16 years and eight months for the 25-years-to-lifer.

"It's time to inject a healthy dose of realism into our sentencing policies,"
declared State Senator Joseph L. Galiber, the Bronx Democrat who is a chief
proponent of the change. "Some prisoners are incorrigible, but it is equally
true that others are able to turn their lives around." One reason for change, he
argues, is that the prison budget is excessively swollen by a crackdown strategy
and has begun eating up scarce state money for education and other needs.

Snows and Sugarplum Dreams

Such a proposal is the stuff of sugarplum dreams for lifers here inside
Woodbourne prison, where holiday snows in the Catskills can be contemplated from
the barred windows, dusting the cow pastures that stretch toward the open
horizon. The prisoners have their hopes up, as well, for a shift in the criminal
justice mood once President-elect Bill Clinton takes office.

They speculate that since Mr. Clinton supported capital punishment as Governor
of Arkansas and thereby avoided being labeled as "soft on crime," he might be
freer to speak up now for other prison revisions.

This would reverse what prisoners and some professionals say is New York's
paradox: Gov. Mario M. Cuomo is known for staunchly opposing capital punishment
but also for avoiding executive clemency and for upholding rigorous life
sentences as his demonstrated alternative to the death penalty.

As spokesman for the long-termers, Mr. Massey was recently let out for a few
hours to testify at Sing Sing prison at an unusual legislative hearing held by
Mr Galiber. There, lifers and several wardens and prison administrators from
around the state complained of the open-ended vagueness of current procedures
that allow parole officials to simply extend sentences indefinitely in two-year
intervals once the lifers have passed 15- or 25-year minimums. Raul Russi,
chairman of the state Board of Parale, has said that officials must heed the
"vibes of the community" in focusing more on the original crime than on a
prisoner's progress in rehabilitation.

'Man Can Change if He Wants'

The hearing drew an objection from Bob Lawson, a spokesman for one of the
state's law-enforcement unions, Council 82 of the American Federation of State,
County and Municipal Employees. He said that convicts -- "people who have
savaged people" -- were allowed the unusual hearing inside an infamous prison
where, he stressed, most crime victims might fear to venture to express
opposition. But Mr. Lawson opposed only the venue and took no position on the
proposal, or on prisoner complaints that years of good conduct can be discounted
under present parole practices.

"It's like being accused and judged and sentenced all over again," said Jose
Velazquez, a 42-year-old prisoner in his 23d year inside. He was rebuffed in his
first two hearings after serving the 20-year minimum of a life sentence for a
drug-related murder. "A man can change if he wants," he said. Prison officials
concede he and many other long-termers have used self-improvement programs well.
"I am no longer the same person," he insisted, yet was firmly pessimistic in
advance of his next parole hearing in 1993.

Mr. Massey says that in dealing with the vast time and uncertainty of long
sentences, most prisoners pondering their might-have-beens must sooner or later
confront honest memories of the crime and an understanding of society's fears
and insistence on punishment.

"The crime," he underlines, "the reason we're here, becomes a historic part of
our lives, whether we say we were framed or not. We can't forget the crime or
its victims. And while the nature of that crime never changes, an individual in
prison can focus on the path that led him to it and he can begin the change."

Few prison ideas may remain as contentious to the crime-weary outside world as
such claims of genuine rehabilitation. But Michael Marathon, a three-time loser
at age 50 who is 13 years into a 15-to-life sentence for armed robbery, insists
rehabilitation happened despite himself.

Says Quakers Turned Him

"I was always a very cold-blooded individual," said the eye-weary prisoner whose
rebel's pigtail is graying after almost half his life behind bars. "The world
owed me a living, I figured. But I got involved with the Quakers and that turned
me." He has since founded Vietnam veteran prison chapters and become a prison
regular in a half dozen activities, including focus groups on violence and
Jaycees leadership training.

"Nobody owed me anything, it turns out," he concluded. "So now I'm trying to
make all this time work for me, keep busy so I don't think too much of my family
and what I'm missing out there."

Fellow lifers nodded in endorsement of the idea of fighting long time with busy
time. "But still I'll probably get a two-year hit," Mr. Marathon estimated,
darkly anticipating that his next hope, his first parole hearing in 1994, will
only produce a two-year extension of his long life in prison.

LOAD-DATE: December 13, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Nine men serving life sentences at the Woodbourne Correctional
Facility in upstate New York have organized to find the best ways to fulfill
their sentences. Three members were, from left, Larry Monroe, Michael Marathon
and John Massey. (Joyce Dopkeen/The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              362 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 13, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

IN SHORT: NONFICTION

BYLINE: By Kenneth J. Uva

SECTION: Section 7; Page 18; Column 3; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 286 words



THE TWILIGHT OF SOVEREIGNTY
How the Information Revolution
Is Transforming Our World.
By Walter B. Wriston.
Scribners, $25.

The "information revolution," according to Walter B. Wriston, the former
chairman of Citicorp, means more than merely that more information is available
in a faster manner than ever before. The instant availability of data and images
through computers, fax machines, videotape and satellites has changed the world
by making intellectual resources, rather than natural resources, the prime
commodity. Politics and business are profoundly affected by this revolution. One
reason for the breakup of the Communist bloc, Mr. Wriston writes in "The
Twilight of Sovereignty," was the inability of the old regime to continue its
control over the dissemination of information. New technology has made national
borders obsolete as barriers to ideas. In the United States, Mr. Wriston writes,
we have long recognized the role television played in turning the public against
the Vietnam War. For business, the new technology has changed the way products
are developed and marketed. In addition, whole new industries have developed to
exploit this technology. The economic strength of a corporation or a nation is
measured by its ability to use its intellectual resources. As a former banker,
Mr. Wriston is at his best when explaining the impact of the information
revolution on international trade and finance. The speed and efficiency with
which information moves has caused a shift in power from governments to those
institutions that possess and communicate this information. Mr. Wriston's book
is a thoughtful and incisive analysis of a phenomenon that has enormous
implications.

LOAD-DATE: December 13, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              363 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 14, 1992, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Abroad at Home;
Maurice The Waiter?

BYLINE: By ANTHONY LEWIS

SECTION: Section A; Page 17; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 690 words

DATELINE: BOSTON


A friend writes, as The New Yorker used to say. An old friend: Stanley Karnow,
longtime foreign correspondent and author of superb books on Mao's China,
Vietnam and the Philippines.

"Years ago when I was in Indo-China," Mr. Karnow writes, "I knew a C.I.A. man in
Laos. I saw him again later, and he told me this story. After we first met, he
requested authorization from headquarters to continue seeing me, since I might
have some useful information. O.K., he was told, but be careful of Karnow.

"Out of curiosity he looked at my file when he was home on a visit. He found,
among other negatives, that I had once gone to a bullfight in Arles with
Picasso, a dangerous Communist.

"I was flabbergasted when he told me, but then I remembered that I had indeed
gone to a bullfight in Arles, and that Picasso was there -- on the other side of
the arena. How did this get into the C.I.A. file?

"What probably happened is that I returned to Paris [where Mr. Karnow lived for
a time], and over drinks one evening at the Cafe Select or the Deux Magots I
jokingly boasted to someone that I'd been to a bullfight with Picasso. That
information was promptly reported, but by whom? Maurice the waiter at the
Select? Brendan Behan, who sometimes hung out in Montparnasse?"

It is a droll tale as Stanley Karnow tells it. But the real point is not funny.
It is that for years agencies of the United States Government collected
political information on private American citizens, much of it distorted and
false. It was kept in secret files, and there it still is.

Since Soviet Communism collapsed, we have read with horrified fascination about
the extent of spying on individuals in that totalitarian society. Accounts of
the Stasi, the East German secret police, make it seem as if every third citizen
was spying and reporting on others.

What most Americans have not sufficiently understood is that our Government,
too, collected masses of information on citizens. For years it reflected the
obsessions of the F.B.I. Director, J. Edgar Hoover, with the sex lives of
prominent Americans and with any political opinions to the left of Genghis Khan.

Thinking about these things is not just idle historical reflection, or should
not be. For with the end of the cold war, we should end the abuses of secret
information-collecting by the United States Government.

President-elect Clinton, soon after he takes office, should address the twin
problems of dubious material already in F.B.I., C.I.A. and other files, and the
improper surveillance activities that still occur on occasion. A good way to do
it would be to appoint a commission that included historians as well as lawyers.
Its work could lead to proposals like these:

1. Prohibit, by law, the investigation of Americans because of their beliefs or
associations or activities protected by the First Amendment.

2. Require a reasonable suspicion of criminal activity before any Government
agency engages in surveillance of private citizens.

3. Change the executive order on classified documents to reduce the amount of
secrecy greatly. And make it easier to challenge particular classifications on
the ground -- usually true -- that they are designed not to protect national
security but to protect officials from embarrassment.

4. Establish a system to advise Americans that there are secret files on them
and give them an opportunity to see the files. Make Government agencies provide
the files promptly, with no withholding of information except on indisputable
grounds of current state security.

5. Seal all personal files from the period of cold war hysteria after affected
citizens have had a reasonable time to ask for them, say three years. Seal
rather than destroy them, for in time the files could be valuable historical
evidence of how power was abused.

The K.G.B. and the Stasi are opening their secret files now. In our society it
is time to return to the openness that is the premise of our constitutional
system. It is time to turn away from the obsession with secrets that we have
developed in the last years. It is time to end the cold war at home.

LOAD-DATE: December 14, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              364 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 15, 1992, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Embargo Is Eased After Hanoi's Help on M.I.A.'s

BYLINE: By STEVEN A. HOLMES,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 3; Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 718 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 14


Significantly easing the 17-year-old trade embargo against Vietnam, the Bush
Administration said today that it would permit American companies to sign
contracts to do business there.

The move is a response to what the Administration sees as greater Vietnamese
cooperation in the search for the 2,264 American servicemen still listed as
missing from the Vietnam War and makes renewed diplomatic ties increasingly
likely.

"I don't think there is any question that we are moving towards normalization of
relations," said Larry Rivers, executive director of the Washington office of
the Veterans of Foreign Wars. "It's now only a question of when that occurs."

May Be Just a First Step

So far, the Bush Administration has not said whether it would end the trade
embargo or normalize relations before it leaves office on Jan. 20, though some
experts who would like to see increased trade believe further steps in that
direction are possible.

Like Mr. Bush, President-elect Bill Clinton has said he would not establish
diplomatic relations with Vietnam as long as he believes Hanoi is withholding
information on missing Americans. Aides to Mr. Clinton said they were not
informed of Mr. Bush's announcement in advance.

The Administration's announcement does not mean a complete rapprochement.
American companies can only sign contracts, open offices and hire staff in
preparation for conducting business in Vietnam if the embargo is removed. At
present, the broad prohibition against most trade with Vietnam remains.

A Strong Signal

Still, today's action signals a clear warming toward Vietnam after decades of
bitterness and distrust.

"This is a clear indication that the United States Government is sincere about
economic and diplomatic normalization," said Virginia Foote, director of the
United States-Vietnam Trade Council, which has lobbied for an easing of policy.
"We are beginning to let the war pass and build a new relationship with Vietnam.
"

Pressure on the Bush Administration has mounted in recent months as Hanoi has
become more cooperative in investigations into the fate of the missing
servicemen.

Welcomed by Key Senator

A number of people involved in the issue, including Senator John F. Kerry,
chairman of the Select Committee on P.O.W.-M.I.A. Affairs, have urged the
Administration to reciprocate.

Senator Kerry, Democrat of Massachusetts, issued a statement saying he hoped the
announcement "leads to further progress in obtaining additional answers about
the fate of Americans still listed as missing."

Senator Kerry and Senator Bob Smith, a New Hampshire Republican and the
committee's vice chairman, are to leave Tuesday for another trip to press Hanoi
for more information.

Worried About the Competition

Last month Japan extended a $380 million development loan to Hanoi; Japan and
France have offered to repay Vietnam's loans from the International Monetary
Fund. United States companies are concerned that increased economic ties between
Tokyo and Hanoi might mean that they will lose out to Japanese companies in the
Vietnam market.

"A lot of people believe that there is more money to be made in Vietnam in the
next 10 years" than in China because of Vietnam's "affinity with the West, the
country's crushing needs and its highly educated populace," said Gerald Warburg,
spokesman for the Multinational Business Development Coalition, a group of
corporations that, like many business and trade organizations has lobbied for a
relaxation in Washington's policy.

Veterans' organizations are split, however: the V.F.W. supports the move; the
American Legion says Hanoi has not done enough to warrant easing the embargo.

"I first went to Vietnam in July of 1991," said Mr. Rivers, of the V.F.W. "I
went back last month, and what was going on in '91 compared to what is going on
in '92 is light-years away. The Vietnamese have a new sense of urgency. They
have made a conscious decision to try to get this issue resolved."

But John Sommer, executive director of the American Legion, said he was not
impressed.

"We're just totally disappointed and outraged at the President's announcement,"
he said. "We don't believe that Vietnam's cooperation on the P.O.W.-M.I.A. issue
has been as substantive as it has been cracked up to be."


LOAD-DATE: December 15, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              365 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 15, 1992, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 993 words



International A3-18

YELTSIN REPLACES PREMIER
Outmaneuvered by Russian lawmakers, President Yeltsin surrendered Yegor Gaidar,
the architect of his economic program. In his stead he named Viktor S.
Chernomyrdin, a veteran manager of the state oil industry, to head the Cabinet.
A1

The new Prime Minister is a seasoned administrator.  A16



Russia's Foreign Minister delivers a startling anti-Western speech.  A16

SEOUL'S ECONOMIC QUEST
South Korea remains one of the economic success stories, but growth has slowed
and it is fretting about new competition. Economists say it should break up its
vast state industries and focus on high technology instead of simple goods.  A1

U.S. PERMITS BUSINESS WITH HANOI
Easing a 17-year embargo, the Bush Administration said it would let American
companies sign contracts to do business in Vietnam.  A3

SERBIAN PATRIARCH BACKS CHANGE
President Dobrica Cosic of Yugoslavia endorsed Prime Minister Milan Panic in his
bid to oust the President of Serbia, Slobodan Milosevic. Mr. Milosevic is widely
blamed for the war in the Balkans.  A3

TO DISARM OR DISSUADE SOMALIS?
The issue of disarmament has become a touchy subject in the American-led
intervention in Somalia. It is not only risky, officers say, but may violate
Somalis' rights.  A8

Logistical troops will be needed in Somalia for quite some time.  A9

Directing traffic in Somalia's darkened, anarchic capital.  A8

NO WORD ON ABDUCTED ISRAELI
Israel sealed itself off from its occupied territories as the army hunted
unsuccessfully for the Arab kidnappers of a border policeman.  A7

Syria had been denying exit permits to Jews for eight weeks.  A10

SAUDI KING REMOVES CLERICS
Confronting Muslim fundamentalists, King Fahd of Saudi Arabia has quietly
removed seven religious figures who failed to support him against the religious
right.  A14

Salvadoran rebels rush to demobilize in time for a ceremony.  A6

The Burmese military threatens to try a renowned dissident.  A5
Plenty of memorials to -- and doubts about -- Romania's heroes.  A4

National A20, B10-14

CLINTON'S ECONOMIC MEETING
President-elect Bill Clinton led a seminar with some of the nation's most
prominent economists and executives, who said the economy is badly crippled and
in danger of becoming much worse.  A1

MASTER'S MODERATING TIPS
Larry King, the radio and television host, offered his critique of Bill
Clinton's first nationally televised economics talk show.  B11

CLINTON PICKS ARKANSAN
Mr. Clinton chose Dr. Jocelyn Elders, a black Little Rock pediatrician and the
Arkansas Health Director, to be the new surgeon general, a transition official
said.  B11

GORE SHOWS HIS POWER
Transition aides say Vice President-elect Al Gore has already had unusual
influence on a range of appointments and has supervised the development of new
policies.  B11

EFFORT TO LIMIT DRUG PRICES
Officials of the Clinton transition team have told the nation's drug industry
that the new Administration intends to limit increases in prescription drug
prices.  B12

The Electoral College gathered to vote for President.  B12

CONCESSIONS BY THE U.A.W.
The United Automobile Workers union, signaling that it recognized the gravity of
the problems confronting the General Motors Corporation, agreed to the most
sweeping early retirement incentives for hourly workers in two years.  A1

COURT TO HEAR NEW BIAS CASE
The Supreme Court agreed to decide whether the Constitution permits increasing
the sentences for ordinary crimes like assault or vandalism if the victim was
selected because of race, religion, sex or the like.  A1

MANAGING DIVERSITY AT WORK
As employers seek help in managing their increasingly diverse work forces, a new
consulting industry is growing up. But for some companies and consultants,
diversity is just a public relations challenge.  A1

VOICE OF HISPANIC AMERICANS
A large majority of the nation's Hispanic population says there is too much
immigration, according to a new public opinion survey.  A20

DOCTOR FREED IN AGENT'S CASE
A judge dismissed charges against a Mexican doctor who was kidnapped from his
country more than two years ago to stand trial here in the torture and murder of
an American drug agent.  A20

TOWN SEES LESSION IN JUDGE
David Lanier, a prominent Tennessee judge is on trial for charges that he used
his position to sexually prey on women. And some people many in his hometown see
a cautionary tale about the abuse of power.  B14

Metro Digest B1

ADDING UP THE DAMAGE
The violent storms that swept through the New York region damaged or destroyed
more than 12,000 homes, the Red Cross estimated. And insurance industry
officials said that many if not most of the properties were probably not insured
for flood damage.  A1

Business Digest D1

Science Times C1-15

A new suspect in the largest mass extinction: Siberian eruptions.  C1

Another benefit of companionship is a healthy immune system.  C1

The historic evidence for impact of carbon dioxide on climate.  C1

Neediest Cases B9

Fashion Page B16

Obituaries B14-15

Ellis G. Arnall, former Governor of Georgia.  B15

Arts/Entertainment C16-22

Music: The Philharmonic's first Children's Promenade.  C17

Dance: Alvin Ailey troupe.  C17

Sports B18-23

Basketball: Knicks romp over Nuggets.  B19

Boxing: Bowe relinquishes the W.B.C. belt.  B19

Editorials/Op-Ed A22-23

Editorials

The last cold war President.

Don't raid the bench for talent.

A storm to remember.

Needed: a fair deal on transit.

Letters

A. M. Rosenthal: The special interests.

Russell Baker: Dream and memory.

David M. Kotz: No more radical reform.

Teller: Warning! This is not a recipe.

LOAD-DATE: December 15, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              366 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 16, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

BUSINESS DIGEST

SECTION: Section D; Page 1; Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 597 words



Companies

I.B.M. will shed another 25,000 jobs next year and trim its manufacturing
capacity at a cost of $6 billion. It will also probably impose its first
dividend cut and its first formal layoffs next year. The company's stock fell
$6.75, to a 10-year low. [Page A1.] I.B.M.'s plan to cut its development budget
by $1 billion brings into focus the fact that it already frequently responds
slowly to the significant technological forces reshaping the industry. [A1.]

Donald Trump is reportedly seeking refinancing of the debt of the Trump Plaza
Hotel and Casino. The prospective deal is said to call for the sale of as much
as $335 million in new bonds. [D1.]

Investors went wild over Snapple, a leader in New Age beverages. In one of
year's hottest new stock offerings, Snapple's stock soared as high as 68 percent
above its initial selling price. [D1.]

American Cyanamid has agreed to merge its Lederle Laboratories unit with
Immunex. American Cyanamid will also contribute $350 million and own 53.5
percent of the new company. [D3.]

The Channel Tunnel may be further delayed by a dispute over about $2 billion
that building companies say they are owed. [D3.]

Gerber cut its earnings projections, citing stiff competition and a lower birth
rate. Its shares fell $5.25, to a low for the year. [D3.]

International Lease Finance ordered 82 new jets from Boeing, Airbus and
McDonnell Douglas. [D3.]

Ronald C. Whitaker will be chairman of Colt's Manufacturing besides being
president and chief executive. [D3.]

The Economy

Bill Clinton's economic conference produced a consensus on the need to spur
growth and reduce the deficit, but provided contradictory advice on how to
achieve these goals. [A1.] Many of the business executives at the conference
seemed heartened by Mr. Clinton's grasp of economic problems. [A27.]

Sales of domestically produced vehicles surged 17.9 percent in early December,
led by the light-truck category. [D1.]

Business inventories fell 0.3 percent in October, the steepest decline in nine
months. Sales were unchanged, remaining at the highest level since July. [D2.]

International

The debts and assets of Yugoslavia have been inherited by five successor
republics, the I.M.F. declared. [D9.]

Russia's Government is about to reopen talks on rescheduling $18 billion in debt
that should have been repaid this year. [A14.]

Markets

Blue-chip stocks ended lower. The Dow Jones industrial average eased 7.84, to
3,284.36. Volume was 227.8 million shares. [D6.]

I.B.M. bonds were hit hard after the company announced its retrenchment.
Treasury bond prices rose and yields fell. [D13.]

Wheat futures fell amid dimming export prospects. [D15.]

The dollar settled mixed in light trading. [D15.]

Business Technology

A new TV technology uses microwaves at high electromagnetic frequencies. It is
the product of an alliance between a Boston-area inventor and two New Jersey
real estate developers. [D1.]

Bell Atlantic and a small partner will provide 60 TV channels over new
high-capacity lines carrying both telephone and video services to 38,000 homes
in Dover Township, N.J. [D1.]

Today's Columns

Wall Street is wondering how far I.B.M. can fall after a decline that has
already wiped out all of its gains since mid-1982. Kurt Eichenwald: Market
Place. [D6.]

Many agencies have commissioned studies on Vietnam, visited there and begun to
establish ties with firms there in anticipation of an easing of the United
States trade embargo. Advertising. [D17.]

LOAD-DATE: December 16, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              367 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 16, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Inquiry on Clinton File Seeks Baker Interview

BYLINE: By ROBERT PEAR,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 20; Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 926 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 15


Congressional investigators have asked for an interview with James A. Baker 3d,
the White House chief of staff, and his top aides to try to determine if he
authorized or approved the search of Bill Clinton's passport files during the
Presidential election campaign.

The investigators have also asked the White House for copies of any telephone
logs, phone message slips, appointment calendars, computer records, memorandums
or other documents that mention the search for damaging information on Mr.
Clinton. The request was made in a letter to the White House from the General
Accounting Office, a copy of which was obtained today.

In addition, the accounting office, the investigative arm of Congress, is
seeking interviews with two of Mr. Baker's top aides, Margaret D. Tutwiler and
Janet G. Mullins. The inspector general of the State Department, Sherman M.
Funk, concluded last month that Mr. Baker and Ms. Mullins knew of the search
about the time it occurred, on Sept. 30 and Oct. 1, and he said that Ms.
Tutwiler, too, had probably been aware of it then.

But, the inspector general reported, none of the three White House officials did
anything to stop the search. If the officials refuse to be interviewed, Congress
could try to force them to testify by issuing subpoenas.

Warning About Law

On Monday, Representative Howard L. Berman, chairman of a House subcommittee
that monitors the work of the State Department, sent a letter to the White House
expressing support for the request by the accounting office. He warned the White
House that it might be violating Federal law if it destroys any records sought
by investigators. Under the law, a person convicted of obstructing a
Congressional inquiry may be fined up to $5,000 and imprisoned up to five years.

The letter from Mr. Berman, a California Democrat, suggests that he and other
lawmakers will pursue the investigation after Mr. Clinton becomes President on
Jan. 20.

Judy Smith, deputy press secretary for President Bush, said today that the White
House would cooperate with the Congressional investigation, but she refused to
say what that pledge means. She refused to say whether Mr. Baker would agree to
an interview by the investigators. And she refused to say whether the White
House would look for the records requested.

The G.A.O. request for White House documents was disclosed today by The Los
Angeles Times. A White House lawyer said the White House was considering whether
to assert executive privilege to block disclosure of some of the records.

Mr. Baker told the inspector general that he learned of the search through Mr.
Clinton's files on Sept. 30 or Oct. 1. He said he had been told of the search by
Ms. Mullins. He has never said whether he informed the President of the search.

On Nov. 10, Mr. Bush ordered the dismissal of Elizabeth M. Tamposi, an Assistant
Secretary of State who supervised the search through Mr. Clinton's files.
Friends of Ms. Tamposi say she believes she has been treated as a scapegoat,
blamed unjustly for actions carried out with the knowledge of White House
officials.

The accounting office is conducting the inquiry at the request of three
Congressional panels: the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, the House Foreign
Affairs Committee and the House Committee on Post Office and Civil Service. The
chairman of the Post Office Committee, William L. Clay of Missouri, has
expressed concern about possible violations of the Hatch Act, a 1939 law that
limits the political activities of Federal employees.

In a letter to the White House, the accounting office said it wanted to identify
everyone who "may have been directly or indirectly involved in the State
Department's search" of Mr. Clinton's files. The auditors also asked for records
of all contacts between staff of the White House and the State Department from
Sept. 15 to Nov. 19.

No Evidence Found

In the Presidential campaign, Mr. Bush continually raised questions about Mr.
Clinton's character and a trip he made to Soviet Union in 1969, when he was a
student in Britain. State Department officials looked through the passport files
for evidence that Mr. Clinton considered renouncing United States citizenship to
avoid military service in Vietnam. They found no such evidence.

Congressional investigators, Clinton transition aides, historians and at least
one Federal judge have expressed concern about the possible destruction of
Government documents as Mr. Bush leaves the White House.

The White House counsel, C. Boyden Gray, has told White House officials that
they are free to dispose of telephone and visitor logs and informal notes of
meetings. In memorandums issued Nov. 5 and Dec. 3, Mr. Gray said such documents
did not necessarily meet the statutory definition of Presidential records, which
are required to be saved.

But in the later memorandum, Mr. Gray warned White House employees that they
should not destroy documents requested by Congress.

In a lawsuit pending in Federal District Court here, Administration officials
have told Judge Charles R. Richey that they should not be required to preserve
records generated by White House offices "whose sole responsibility is to advise
the President."

Sheryl L. Walter, general counsel of the National Security Archive, a private
research institute that collects Government documents, said, "If the
Administration's arguments are accepted, records of the National Security
Council, the Office of Management and Budget, and many other White House offices
could be destroyed."


LOAD-DATE: December 16, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              368 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 16, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

THE TRANSITION;
Aspin Is Called Likely Choice as Pentagon's Chief

BYLINE: By GWEN IFILL,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 28; Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 892 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 15


Representatice Les Aspin, the chairman of the House Armed Services Committee,
has emerged as the leading candidate for Secretary of Defense in the Clinton
Administration, transition and Congressional officials said today.

The Wisconsin Democrat is the likely choice on what had been an extremely short
list of candidates to head the Department of Defense, and several people
familiar with the process said a formal announcement was expected soon.

Like President-elect Bill Clinton, the 54-year-old Mr. Aspin is considered a
moderate Democrat, opposed the war in Vietnam and studied at Oxford University.
But he supported financing for the MX missile and aid to the Nicaraguan contras
and is not considered by Republicans to be a proponent of major cuts in the
military budget.

Representative Dave McCurdy of Oklahoma, a 42-year-old Democrat who is an
influential member of the House Armed Services Committee, has also been
considered a possible nominee for Secretary of Defense.

Mr. Clinton is also expected this week to name Representative Mike Espy, a
Mississippi Democrat, as Secretary of Agriculture, transition aides and
Congressional officials said. Mr. Espy, 39, would be the first black to hold the
Agriculture post. He was elected to Congress in 1987 and represents a largely
rural district.

In turning again to Congress for top-level appointments to his Administration,
Mr. Clinton would be demonstrating anew that the Washington bureaucracy he once
derided is a fertile source of expertise for a party that has been out of power
for 12 years.

Mr. Aspin's nomination would rob the House of another senior Democrat committee
chairman and set up a struggle for control of the House Armed Services
Committee, where Representatives Ronald V. Dellums of California and Patricia
Schroeder of Colorado are in the immediate line of succession.

G.O.P. Signals Approval

But one senior Congressional Republican called Mr. Aspin "clearly an excellent
choice," and signaled that the appointment would be generally well received on
Capitol Hill.

Mr. Espy serves on the House Agriculture Committee with Representative Jill L.
Long of Indiana, who had also been considered for the Cabinet post. A former
Assistant Secretary of State in Mississippi, Mr. Espy represents the poor Delta
area of Mississippi, which shares a border with a similar region of neighboring
Arkansas.

Mr. Espy was an early supporter of Mr. Clinton and was one of several black
politicians who defended him against charges that he was distancing himself from
black voters by alienating the Rev. Jesse Jackson.

Mr. Espy lobbied his friend, the President-elect, for the post after meeting
with him in Washington last week. At a black-tie dinner they attended here last
week, the Mississippi Democrat sent Mr. Clinton a note describing why he would
make a good Agriculture Secretary.

And in a coordinated effort to defuse criticism of Mr. Espy's environmental
record, six environmental organizations sent a letter of support on behalf of
Mr. Espy's nomination to Mr. Clinton this week.

Mr. Clinton has already turned to friends and political acquaintances on several
occasions to fill senior positions in his new Administrations. Several aides
close to the process said they expected him to continue on that track by naming
David Wilhelm, a political strategist from Chicago who managed his campaign, as
his chief political liaison.

Mr. Wilhelm, 37, would head a revamped White House political operation, either
as the Democratic national chairman or as White House political director,
transition aides said. Acting in much the same role as he did in the campaign,
Mr. Wilhelm would serve as the linchpin between the White House and state party
operations.

As Mr. Clinton continued to work with transition planners against a Christmas
deadline for completing his major Cabinet announcements, two other likely
candidates for high-level jobs also repositioned themselves.

Judge Patricia Wald of the Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia
Circuit, a leading candidate for Attorney General, has taken herself out of
consideration, transition officials said. Judge Wald informed Clinton aides that
she did not want to be considered for the post.

The transition team has been focusing on a group of female lawyers to head the
Justice Department.

Three Other Candidaters

Besides Judge Wald, the other candidates are Brooksley E. Born, a Washington
lawyer active in the American Bar Association and public interest groups; Judge
Judith M. Kaye of the New York Court of Appeals, the state's highest court, and
Judge Amalya Lyle Kearse of the United States Court of Appeals for the Second
Circuit, in New York.

Judge Wald, who is 64, has told friends that she enjoys her current job. In
addition, she faced the loss of a lucrative judicial pension if she left the
bench.

Former Mayor Henry G. Cisneros of San Antonio had been mentioned as a possible
successor to Senator Lloyd Bentsen of Texas, chosen last week to be Treasury
Secretary, but he told reporters this week that he would not seek the Senate
seat, which will become vacant if Mr. Bentsen is confirmed.

By taking himself out of the race for the Senate seat, Mr. Cisneros appears to
be firmly in line for an Administration post, probably as Secretary of Housing
and Urban Development.


LOAD-DATE: December 16, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Vernon E. Jordan, right, the transition chairman, speaking
yesterday with George Stephanopoulos, the communications director for
President-elect Bill Clinton, at the economic conference in Little Rock, Ark.
(Reuters)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              369 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 16, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

THE MEDIA BUSINESS: ADVERTISING;
American Agencies Are Lining Up for Vietnam's Business

BYLINE: By Adam Bryant

SECTION: Section D; Page 17; Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 642 words


GOOD morning, Vietnam.

That may best sum up the optimism this week at many worldwide advertising
agencies after the Bush Administration signaled it might ease the trade embargo
with Vietnam and allow American companies to take the first steps to compete
there.

Anticipating the move, many agencies, including Backer Spielvogel Bates; Dentsu,
Young & Rubicam Partnerships and J. Walter Thompson have commissioned studies on
the market, visited Vietnam and begun work to establish ties with agencies
there.

By many measures, any long-term investment of time and money is probably well
placed in the Asia Pacific region, which, with the exception of Japan and its
sluggish economy, is the world's fastest-growing media market. Advertising
spending there is expected to grow 8.2 percent a year in real terms between 1993
and 1995, according to London-based Zenith Media Worldwide, which shared its
forecasts last week at the annual Paine Webber media conference.

Even so, advertising executives familiar with the Vietnamese market caution that
the going is slow and tricky for reasons that stretch from Government policies
to quirks of the local culture.

"The currency is a problem, the media is a problem, the market is still very
difficult," said Gary Burandt, chief executive of Dentsu, Young & Rubicam
Partnerships.

Carl Spielvogel, chairman and chief executive of Backer Spielvogel Bates
Worldwide, learned this first hand during a B.S.B. regional managers' meeting in
Ho Chi Minh City in November, an event that took three months to arrange with
the Vietnamese Government.

The agency's regional clients include Heineken and British American Tobacco,
although B.S.B. is currently not doing business in Vietnam.

Mr. Spielvogel said he was struck by, among other things, the prevalence of
outdoor advertising. Because the Government allows only products manufactured in
Vietnam to be advertised on television, billboards are the most popular way to
introduce Vietnamese consumers to the foreign products and brand names they seem
to crave. Information, product shots and company logos are most important for
making an impression; romance and ambience are unnecessary. "Eye it, try it, buy
it," is how Mr. Spielvogel described the dominant marketing strategy there.

With few advertising outlets, large companies often turn to such basic marketing
techniques as hawking their wares at trade fairs and exhibitions with product
displays that typically attract long lines, said Alex Hamill, B.S.B.'s director
in the Asia Pacific region.

The Vietnamese Government also screened and censored advertising that B.S.B.
brought into Vietnam for its October meeting. All advertising for broadcast must
be approved by the Government.

One reel that did not pass customs contained pro bono commercials by B.S.B. for
the Advertising Council that prod Americans to vote by showing the result if
they don't: an American flag sheds its stars and stripes. The problem: "It was
not their propaganda," he said. "The tape is now in the Marxist maw."

Advertisers and companies see in Vietnam what many believe is a great
opportunity that they do not want to concede to other countries. To help make
the case that the American Government should thaw relations, they point to a
recent $380 million loan from Japan to Hanoi, as well as an offer by Japan and
France to repay Vietnam's loans from the International Monetary Fund.

Credible statistics about Vietnam are hard to come by. But the country's
attributes include a literacy rate close to 90 percent, and a youthful populace
with few memories of the Vietnam War that is eager to embrace Western culture.
Mr. Spielvogel said a 24-year-old Vietnamese graduate student serving as his
party's guide pointed out the Hanoi Hilton and said to him in fluent English,
"In the old days, this was a prison."

LOAD-DATE: December 16, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              370 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 17, 1992, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

CLINTON TO NAME 2 MORE TO CABINET

BYLINE: By THOMAS L. FRIEDMAN,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 20; Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 873 words

DATELINE: LITTLE ROCK, Ark., Dec. 16


President-elect Bill Clinton has decided to name former Mayor Henry G. Cisneros
of San Antonio to be Secretary of Housing and Urban Development, and Jesse
Brown, a disabled Vietnam War veteran, as Secretary of Veterans Affairs,
transition aides said today.

Mr. Clinton spent the day at the Governor's mansion here mulling over his final
Cabinet choices, and aides said he would announce the appointments of Mr.
Cisneros and Mr. Brown at a news conference on Thursday, with others to follow
later in the week.

The appointment of Mr. Cisneros, a 45-year-old Hispanic politician, would
represent a political rebirth of sorts for the former Mayor. He was once widely
considered to represent the leading edge of a generation of urban leaders, but
he decided against seeking re-election in 1989 after confirming rumors of an
extramarital affair with a former political fund-raiser.

He has since run his own management firm. Earlier this week Mr. Cisneros said he
would not be a candidate for the Senate seat that would be vacated by Lloyd
Bentsen of Texas if his nomination as Secretary of the Treasury is confirmed.

Former Marine in Vietnam

Mr. Brown, 48, who survived a gunshot wound in the right arm while serving as a
marine in Vietnam, is executive director of the Diasabled American Veterans
Association.

Transition officials said Mr. Clinton, who so far has named only one woman to
his Cabinet, Donna E. Shalala as Secretary of Health and Human Services, still
wants to name a woman as Attorney General. To that end, the officials said, he
has added Shirley M. Hufstedler, a former Federal appellate court judge from Los
Angeles, to his list of candidates for that job.

Ms. Hufstedler, who served as the first Secretary of Education -- in the Carter
Administration -- is now a lawyer in private practice. She was added to the list
after Judge Patricia M. Wald, a Federal appellate court judge in Washington,
removed herself from consideration.

The other top candidates are Brooksley E. Born, a Washington lawyer who is
active in the American Bar Association; Judge Amalya L. Kearse of the United
States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit, in New York, and Judge Judith M.
Kaye of the New York Court of Appeals, the state's highest court.

In other areas Richard Riley, a former Governor of South Carolina and the
personnel director for Mr. Clinton's transition operation, has emerged as the
top candidate for Secretary of Education. William Daley, a Chicago banker who is
the son of former Mayor Richard J. Daley of Chicago and the brother of the
current Mayor, Richard M. Daley, is said to be a leading prospect for Secretary
of Transportation, along with former Gov. James Blanchard of Michigan.

Tightly Held Decisions

Mr. Clinton has been keeping his decisions on his Cabinet choices very tightly
held. And because many of his aides themselves still do not have jobs, they are
often even more reluctant to talk for fear of taking themselves out of the
running for high-level posts.

At the same time Mr. Clinton is constantly shuffling choices between different
posts in an effort to get the right mix of women, minorities and personalities
who can work together. This game of political musical chairs also adds to the
uncertainty of who is getting what.

And one of his choices drew the ire of the person currently holding the job.
The Surgeon General, Antonia Novello, whose term does not expire until March
1994, made it clear that she did not take kindly to reading that her job had
already been given to someone else without her being consulted.

The law allows for certain political appointees, like the Surgeon General and
the Chairman of the Federal Reserve Board, to serve multiyear terms spanning
administrations. Dr. Novello, a pediatrician, is part of the Commissioned Corps,
a cross between the military forces and the Civil Service, and cannot simply be
dismissed. The Surgeon General serves a four-year term and, unlike other
political appointees, does not automatically resign at the end of an
Administration.

Nonpartisan Medical Adviser

The Surgeon General is supposed to be a nonpartisan medical adviser. Aides to
Dr. Novello say that Mr. Clinton can only replace her if she chooses to resign,
and she would probably only do that if she was given another job of equal status
within the Commissioned Corps; Dr. Novello, who is 48, is still five years from
retirement.

Last Saturday Mr. Clinton asked Dr. Joycelyn Elders, director of the Arkansas
State Health Department, to be the Surgeon General, and she accepted -- a fact
now widely reported.

"I don't think Mr. Clinton was aware of the difference between political
appointees and term appointees," said an official in the Surgeon General's
office. "The first we heard about this was when it was on the radio Tuesday
morning."

When Mr. Clinton's communications director, George Stephanopoulos, was asked
whether Dr. Novello, 48, was being removed from her job to accommodate Dr.
Elders, he said the President-elect had made "no formal decisions" on such
matters.

A top transition official said that a "few details" had to be worked out with
Dr. Novello before Mr. Clinton would make any announcement on Dr. Elders.

LOAD-DATE: December 17, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              371 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 18, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Brooklyn Principal Shot to Death While Looking for Missing Pupil

BYLINE: By ROBERT D. McFADDEN

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1549 words


The principal of a grade school in one of Brooklyn's toughest neighborhoods, a
dedicated, gentle man who often took children by the hand through streets ruled
by violence, was shot and killed yesterday as he searched for a missing pupil in
a crime-ridden housing project. The authorities said they believed he was caught
in a crossfire between drug gangs.

The victim, Patrick Daly, the 48-year-old principal of Public School 15 at 71
Sullivan Street in the notorious Red Hook waterfront district, whose quiet
26-year struggle on behalf of his pupils had been featured in news articles and
on national television, was out looking for a fourth-grade boy who had left
school in tears earlier after a fight with another 9-year-old.

Mr. Daly was walking on a rain-slickened mall of barren concrete and grassy
plots, surrounded by the dreary, red-brick sprawl of the Red Hook Houses, when
the gunfire crackled shortly before noon, the authorities said. He fell to the
pavement, shot once in the chest by a 9-millimeter slug.

'He Said, "Thank You" '

In a neighborhood that saw 20 murders, 10 rapes, 526 robberies and 364 assaults
last year, the sound of gunfire was not extraordinary. The killers -- two or
three men, probably on a drug-related vendetta -- fled. Some residents heard
eight or nine shots, and Edgardo Torres, 31, a former Marine and police officer,
ran out and tried to give mouth-to-mouth resuscitation.

Mr. Daly was bleeding profusely, and Mr. Torres tore off his own T-shirt and
stuck it in the wound on the right side of Mr. Daly's chest. But it was
hopeless.

"I asked him not to give up," Mr. Torres said. "I told him he had to breathe,
and he said, 'Thank you,' before he passed away."

Someone called an ambulance and Mr. Daly was taken to Long Island College
Hospital. Doctors tried to revive him, but he was pronounced dead at 12:10 P.M.

'Man Who Loved the Children'

The slaying, in a neighborhood where only the brave or the foolish stand up to
the overwhelming odds of drugs, guns and misery, brought expressions of outrage
from city, education and teachers' union officials and sent tremors through the
school and the community where Mr. Daly spent his whole career and was widely
admired.

"I remember a kind man who loved the children of the community, who loved the
families and never feared the elements here in Red Hook," said Lillian Lopez,
whose two children attended P.S. 15. "He would often walk children home from
school if the child wasn't feeling well or there was no phone at home."

Distraught children, teachers and other staff members at P.S. 15 yesterday
mingled sobs with praise for a principal who had not only raised the academic
sights and achievements of the 685 pupils from pre-kindergarten through the
sixth grade, but had also raised the self-esteem of thousands of children.

"He was nice to us," said Andrea Dowing, a third grader. "He wanted me to do
things, I would do it. I would type for him when he wanted me to."

'Inner Peace'

Andrea's grandmother, Armaza Dowing, said: "She used to say: 'Hurry, Grandma. I
want to go to school and be with Mr. Daly."

Others recalled a principal who knew every pupil in his school, who eschewed
public speeches for quiet conversations, who was the first to arrive and last to
leave each day, who could soothe injured feelings and dispel hopelessness, and
whose often-stated goal was to help children find "inner peace."

In an interview with NBC News last year, Mr. Daly told of the challenges and of
his vision. "We're dealing with some kids that don't have that inner peace, kids
who fight wars within themselves, and they come to school and they don't know
how to direct that anger," he said. But he added that he had seen some of them
go on to college. "They're coming from Red Hook and they're overcoming the
odds."

Mayor David N. Dinkins, who went to the hospital with police and education
officials, praised Mr. Daly. "He recognized that this youngster needed attention
and he went to give it," the Mayor said. "And tragedy of tragedies, he got
caught in the crossfire."

Joseph A. Fernandez, Chancellor of the New York City school system, called Mr.
Daly "one of those principals who went the extra mile for everybody" and said,
"Everyone who knew him really admired him, respected him and loved him."

Like Mayor Dinkins, who noted that the police confiscate 19,000 guns every year,
Mr. Fernandez said it was one more reason to get guns off the streets.

In a separate statement, Sandra Feldman, president of the United Federation of
Teachers, said that little more than three months into the school year there had
been 29 gun incidents in and around public schools, and in 9 of them, a total of
12 people had been shot, including Mr. Daly.

"The use of guns in and around schools is becoming a national plague," Ms.
Feldman said. She said that President-elect Bill Clinton "is deeply concerned
about such violence around schools," and that the American Federation of
Teachers would "seek Federal help that will protect our schoolchildren and our
faculties."

'A Model Principal'

James S. Vlasto, a spokesman for the Board of Education, responding to Ms.
Feldman, noted that Mr. Daly was caught in a crossfire several blocks from his
school. "It was a tragedy, but it was not on school grounds, not an incident
that should be considered when we are talking about school safety," he said.

Donald Singer, president of the Council of Supervisors and Administrators, the
union to which Mr. Daly belonged, called the victim "a model principal" who,
with his school, had recently been chosen to work with James Comer, a nationally
known psychiatrist and Yale University expert on school reform, in a program to
raise community involvement.

Mr. Daly, a slender man with a salt-and-pepper beard, lived on Staten Island,
was married and had two daughters and a son. He spent his career at P.S. 15,
starting as an assistant teacher in 1966 and becoming a teacher in 1968,
assistant principal in 1974 and principal in January 1986. He was not a
deskbound man.

"He was known by everyone, by generations of people in Red Hook," said William
Casey, the superintendent of District 15, which includes P.S. 15. "The irony of
all this is that Pat was frequently seen in the streets of Red Hook, concerned
about the safety of these youngsters."

The events that led to his death, those who knew him said, were typical of his
concern for the safety of his pupils. Police Commissioner Raymond W. Kelly said
there had been a fight yesterday morning between two fourth graders at the
school. One of the boys left the school in the late morning.

Mr. Daly, whose policy was to never let a pupil leave unescorted, even if that
meant personally taking youngsters home when there was no one to pick them up,
learned of the fight and of the boy's departure and went to find him.

Victoria Carter, 33, a secretary at the South Brooklyn Health Center, a clinic
nearby, who knew Mr. Daly as her teacher years ago and as a familiar figure in
the area, saw him headed east on Sullivan Street. "He was walking with that
spring in his step that he always had," she said.

He walked three blocks to the boy's home in the Red Hook Houses.

Home to 8,000 People

It is a hard place to grow up: a collection of red-brick buildings, home to
8,000 people, the city's largest public housing project, the nation's second
largest. But it looks more like a prison, with buildings of 4 to 12 stories
jutting up around a mall of concrete and hard-packed grass a few blocks from the
waterfront.

Mr. Daly, the police said, did not find the boy at home and went out onto the
grounds to search for him.

The police, residents and social service officials told yesterday of a drug war
that has plagued the Red Hook Houses recently. "Every night you hear shooting,"
said Hassan Alaur. "It's like Vietnam here." .

It happened at 11:45 A.M.

"First I heard shots, then I saw two guys running, both of them shooting," said
Ty McNair, a 20-year-old resident. She thought they were drug dealers. "Then I
heard somebody say somebody got hit. I saw an old man lying on the ground with
blood on his stomach. Another man was there, giving him mouth-to-mouth."

The police said that 9-millimeter shell casings were found on the project
grounds and that their positions appeared to indicate they they had been fired
by at least two different people across the spot where Mr. Daly was hit. The
police said they were searching for two or three suspects. Nine-millimeter
handguns, which fire up to 15 rounds rapidly, are often the weapon of choice for
drug dealers.

As word spread through the neighborhood that Mr. Daly had been killed, William
Green, an administrator at the South Brooklyn Health Center, and some of his
friends took a walk through the projects.

"You could feel the grief," he said. "People were breaking down and crying,
losing control."

A crisis intervention team was sent to the school to help children and their
families cope with the loss. Standing outside the school in a steady rain, one
of the teachers, Kathleen Leonard, spoke of a neighborhood's grief. "There is
total horror, unbelief, shock and sadness," she said.

But she added, there was also joy in having known Mr. Daly.

NAME: Patrick Daly

LOAD-DATE: December 18, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Police officers at the housing project in Red Hook where Mr.
Daly was slain in an apparent crossfire. (Edward Keating/The New York Times);
Patrick Daly, principal of Public School 15 in Brooklyn, at back of a school
assembly videotaped last year for a television news profile. (NBC News) (pg.
A1); Wanda Heglar crying as she picked up her son Dantee at Public School 15 in
the Red Hook section of Brooklyn after hearing of the shooting death of the
school's principal, Patrick Daly. (Associated Press) (pg. B12)

Graphs: "CRIME: Red Hook Shooting" shows the total number of incidents and the
total number of felonies from 1990-1992 in the Red Hook housing project in
Brooklyn. (Source: New York Police Department) (pg. B12)

Map of Brooklyn showing the site of slaying in the Red Hook housing project.
(pg. B12)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              372 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 18, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1031 words



International A3-15

ISRAELIS EXPEL ARABS
Buses filled with nearly 400 bound and blindfolded Palestinians crossed the
border into Lebanon as Israeli troops carried out mass expulsions ordered by the
Government and sanctioned by Israel's Supreme Court after a day of legal
arguments and acrimony.  A1

U.S. opposes the deportations as violations of international law.  A12

Clinton suggested that Israel's action may imperil peace talks.  A13

GUNMEN RETURN TO STREETS
A week after the U.S. military were deployed in Mogadishu, Somali gunmen
reappeared in large numbers on the streets, apparently after deciding that the
foreign troops will make no effort to disarm them.  A1

GERMAN SOLDIERS FOR SOMALIA
Chancellor Helmut Kohl announced that he wanted to send up to 1,500 German
soldiers to Somalia early next year to help the international relief effort, the
first time since World War II that their forces would be sent outside NATO
territory.  A3

Heat is the enemy of U.S. soldiers in Somalia.  A10

U.N. BACKS NEW CURBS ON SERB
The United Nations Security Council has all but agreed on a series of new
measures, some involving the use of military force if necessary, to compel
President Slobodan Milosevic and his Serbian allies in Bosnia to obey its orders
and curb aggression against Croats and Muslims.  A14

NATIONALIST SYMBOLS FOR CROATIA
Nearly 18 months have passed since Croatia declared its independence from
Yugoslavia, and the signs of self-conscious nationalism are everywhere. This
involves reaching back across history for flags and emblems and ceremonial
uniforms to a time when Croatia was an outpost of the Austro-Hungarian empire.
A14

WAITING FOR SERBIAN ELECTION
In the Serbian heartland, voters were divided as they await the opening of polls
on Sunday for what may be the most important election ever held in Yugoslavia,
the election for the Serbian President.  A14

YELTSIN ON CHINA VISIT
 President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia arrived in Beijing for a three-day visit
that is intended to cement economic ties with China.  A3

The Hungarian Parliament voted to codify its laws on abortion.  A5

Polish coal miners went on strike, protesting low wages.A6

National A16-34

PROSECUTOR IN PASSPORT CASE
Attorney General William P. Barr has appointed an independent prosecutor to
conduct a criminal investigation of the State Department's search of Bill
Clinton's passport files, officials say.  A1

MORE CABINET SELECTIONS
President-elect Bill Clinton has chosen Representative Les Aspin, chairman of
the House Armed Services Committee, as Secretary of Defense and former Gov.
Richard Riley of South Carolina as Secretary of Education, officials say.  A1

A SPOKESMAN FOR VETERANS
Jesse Brown, Bill Clinton's choice to head the Department of Veterans Affairs,
has long been a defender of veterans' rights.  A32

REBUILDING A POLITICAL CAREER
Since leaving the San Antonio mayor's office in 1989, Henry G. Cisneros has
worked to resuscitate his personal and professional prospects. He succeeded.
Bill Clinton chose him to be the next Housing Secretary.  A32

PENALTY FOR RADIO REMARKS
Federal regulators will impose a $600,000 fine on the company that employs
Howard Stern, the New York radio host known for his sexually explicit remarks.
But the company will not be blocked from buying three big radio stations.  A1

NEW GOVERNOR, OLD PROBLEMS
Puerto Ricans elected a governor last month who promised to be "a new leader for
a new beginning." But Pedro Rossello will have to grapple with many of the
problems that have bedeviled his predecessors.  A16

ROBB TESTIFIES TO GRAND JURY
Senator Charles S. Robb appeared before a Federal grand jury in Norfolk, Va.,
and later indicated that he expected to be indicted for what prosecutors call
his role in eavesdropping on his political rival, Gov. L. Douglas Wilder.  A16

NEW YOSEMITE PARK OPERATORS
The National Park Service awarded the Delaware North Companies the concession
contract for Yosemite National Park, the biggest concession in the park system.
A22

RULING ON WORKER PARTICIPATION
In a decision that may affect employee participation initiatives like
management-worker teams at companies across the nation, the National Labor
Relations Board ruled that one such program violates the Federal labor law.  A23


ADVANCE IN AIDS RESEARCH
An experimental vaccine developed from a genetically altered virus has protected
monkeys against an AIDS-like disease for more than three years, scientists said.
A30

A nuclear panel responds to radiation deaths.  A27

An inquiry finds hurricane repairs in Florida are often shoddy.  A28

Alexandria Journal: A rare unifying force for Somalis.  A16

Metro Digest B1

BROOKLYN PRINCIPAL IS SLAIN
The principal of a grade school in one of Brooklyn's toughest neighborhoods, a
man who often took children by the hand through streets ruled by drug gangs and
violence, was slain as he searched for a missing pupil in a crime-ridden housing
project.  A1

EMPIRE BLUE CROSS INVESTIGATED
A Congressional panel has begun a wide-ranging investigation of Empire Blue
Cross and Blue Shield to see whether mismanagement at the big New York insurance
company contributed to its huge financial losses in the last two years.  A1

Business Digest D1

Weekend C1-38

Film: "Toys." C1

"Leap of Faith." C14

Law B14

A furor in Cincinnati after a ruling on displays of religious symbols.

Sports B15-20

Basketball: Petrovic 3-point play wins for Nets. B15

Obituaries B13

Morton Stavis, founder of the Center for Constitutional Rights.

Editorials/Op-Ed A38-39

Editorials

Don't orphan the peace process.

Real responses to Crown Heights.

Bush's last chance on Vietnam.

Topics: A Russian democrat.

Letters

A. M. Rosenthal: Toys or torture.

Anthony Lewis: Pressure on Serbia.

John C. Fager: School custodians' dirty tricks.

Ruth Behar: A bridge to Cuba.

Neediest Cases B10

LOAD-DATE: December 18, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              373 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 18, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

THE TRANSITION: Clinton Selects Ex-Mayor for H.U.D. and an Ex-Marine for
Veterans Affairs;
Defender of the Rights of Veterans Masters Thickets of Regulations

BYLINE: By FELICITY BARRINGER,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 32; Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 914 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 17


Had Jesse Brown been a lawyer, he would have been a defense attorney, not a
prosecutor. In the world of veterans' affairs, defenders of veterans' rights
have survived and flourished; people raising questions about those rights have
not.

Bill Clinton's choice of Jesse Brown, the executive director of the Disabled
Veterans of America, to head the Department of Veterans Affairs serves to
underscore that point.

Mr. Brown left the free-fire zones of Vietnam a marine with a Purple Heart and a
partly paralyzed arm and went to work helping other veterans make the case that
they were eligible for the health, educational, job-training and disability
benefits that the agency -- one of Washington's largest, with 220,000 employees
-- allocates among the nation's 27 million veterans.

"He was the consummate professional," said Joe Guido, who knew Mr. Brown when
both were young national service officers helping veterans negotiate the maze of
rules that determines if a veteran's disability is "service-connected."

Wounds and Percentages

These advocates for veterans, who receive professional certification in their
specialty, help persuade skeptical rating boards that the shrapnel-scarred ankle
or the ringing ears render their clients 20 percent disabled, or 40 percent, or
100 percent -- and that the Government must grant benefits commensurate with
their injuries.

Mr. Guido, currently assistant supervisor in the Chicago office of the Disabled
American Veterans, added that his longtime colleague "really knew the V.A.
rating schedule," the arcane medical-legal compilation of injuries and their
presumed effect on a person's activity. "He knew it very well. He applied that
knowledge.

"For instance, you can get special monthly compensation in some cases," he said.
"If you have bilateral amputations, you can be more than 100 percent disabled
and get the compensation. Or a combination of hearing loss and visual impairment
-- those things together bring about disability levels above 100 percent. He was
very good at getting that status for people."

Knowing the Arcane

Mr. Guido added that he was also very good at establishing secondary
disabilities, like proving that back injuries in a 55-year-old veteran resulted
from 35 years of walking around on a leg shortened by a combat wound.

Mr. Brown's days in Chicago, where he worked as a service officer from 1967
through 1973, gave him his first impressions of what veterans were due and how
the Government should provide it.

His days in Washington, according to members of the Disabled American Veterans,
the Veterans Administration and some Congressional observers, gave him polish
and command in a different arena, an "iron triangle" made up of the Veterans
Administration, the veterans' chief lobbying groups and the Congressional
committees specializing in veterans' affairs.

Prominent figures in that group, from the chairman of the House Veterans'
Affairs Committee, G. V. (Sonny) Montgomery of Mississippi, to the commander in
chief of the 2.2-million-member Veterans of Foreign Wars, John M. Carney, hailed
him as one of their own.

Mr. Montgomery said in astatement: "We've known Jesse and worked with him for a
number of year. He has an excellent grasp of the concerns of veterans and their
families."

Mr. Carney said: "The Department of Veterans Affairs needs at its helm someone
fighting for the veteran. Mr. Brown certainly fits that bill."

Described as Moderate

In the internal wars that characterized the veterans' world in the 1970's and
1980's, Mr. Brown was described by colleagues as a moderate. As a Vietnam
veteran he was a member of the generation that brought terms like "post
traumatic stress disorder" and "Agent Orange" into the language and into the
statute books.

Irwin Pernick, who is currently counselor in the Department of Veterans Affairs,
said Mr. Brown is particularly interested in devising programs to help homeless
and drug-dependent veterans.

The warmth with which veterans' groups and old hands in Congress welcomed Mr.
Brown stands in sharp contrast to the anger that led to the departure of Edward
J. Derwinski, President Bush's last appointment to this Cabinet post earlier
this year. Mr. Derwinski, who had angered groups by offering to open
under-utilized rural veterans' hospitals to non-veterans, was characterized by
one Congressional observer, who requested anonymity, as "one of the first
players who tried to attack the iron triangle."

The hospital system, which costs the Government $13.8 billion annually and
employs 200,000 people, is seen by most observers as Mr. Brown's biggest
challenge. With some major urban hospitals struggling for resources and some
rural ones partly empty, the system has been plagued with reports of poor or
negligent health care.

In any highly charged discussion, observers interviewed today said, Mr. Brown's
open style could be a benefit. "He's a very impressive guy who in meetings does
not just come in with his agenda, put it on the table and shut his ears to
anyone else," said Mr. Pernick. "He listens. He knows the issues, and he's
always prepared."

Mr. Brown's organization, the Disabled American Veterans, is among those pushing
for a total rewriting and consolidating of eligibility requirements.

"I can't presume to speak for Jesse Brown now," said Rick Heilman, legislative
director for the disabled veterans. "But up till today he was a strong advocate
voicing D.A.V.'s position."

NAME: Jesse Brown

LOAD-DATE: December 18, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              374 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 18, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Review/Film;
Chaos in the Fantasy Factory

BYLINE: By VINCENT CANBY

SECTION: Section C; Page 1; Column 4; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1277 words


BARRY LEVINSON'S "Toys" is a magnificent mess, a chaotic fantasy set in a
brilliantly vivid, Surreal landscape that recalls the paintings of Magritte and
the pop-up illustrations in children's books. Dada is also evoked, though less
consistently. "Toys" dazzles the eye even as the mind goes numb attending to the
narrative, which is about the apocalyptic battle for control of Zevo Toys, where
whimsy is said to be a tradition but is more like a curse.

Here is a nonmusical "Babes in Toyland" crossed with "Dr. Strangelove," a
danceless "Nutcracker" that suggests "Paradise Lost," yet plays as if it were
the nightmare of a child of 4. "Toys" is supposed to be spontaneous and fun, but
it has a drearily self-important message stolen from a bumper sticker: War is
hazardous to children and other living things.

It's impossible to tell for whom this movie was made.

Very young children would seem to be the target audience, though they won't have
a clue as to what's going on. Their adult companions will be driven to dreamless
slumber. Masochistic film students may possibly respond. The confusions of
"Toys" are so many that they appear intentional, as if arcane truths were to be
discovered somewhere within.

Just before ailing old Kenneth Zevo (Donald O'Connor) dies, he entrusts the
family toy company to his brother, the mad General Zevo (Michael Gambon), whose
life has been without purpose since the end of the cold war. Thus passed over
are Leslie (Robin Williams) and Alsatia Zevo (Joan Cusack), Kenneth's children,
both of whom acknowledge that they are too innocent to run the factory that is
their world.

Leslie spends his days moving happily around the assembly lines where smiling
workers put together dolls, stuffed animals and the kinds of harmless toys that
kids drop out of car windows. He is especially fond of novelties made for joke
stores: water glasses that drip, fake deviled eggs and blobs of plastic in the
shape of what the movie genteelly calls dog poop. At one point he demonstrates a
spectacular smoking jacket, which is a jacket that emits smoke.

Alsatia is more interested in paper dolls, and wears clothes that are fixed to
her body as if they were paper-doll outfits. At the end of the day, Leslie and
Alsatia go home to their pretty pop-up Victorian mansion, set among a series of
vast green, treeless hills, where Alsatia sleeps in what looks to be a golden
sarcophagus shaped like a duck.

Meanwhile, the general sets about to turn Zevo Toys into a high-tech armaments
plant. His inspiration: the cool reflexes displayed by little boys playing the
kinds of video war games that Zevo has firmly refused to manufacture. The
general's idea is to revolutionize war by the development of miniature,
nuclear-equipped airplanes, rockets and whatnot that any child could operate by
remote control.

It takes Leslie and Alsatia some time to realize that things aren't what they
used to be at Zevo Toys. Trusted employees are being let go, including the lady
who used to paint lips on alligators. The general hires storm troopers to
protect his private laboratories. His curiosity piqued, Leslie sneaks into the
general's workshop one day to discover the awful truth: a huge collection of
vile video games and war toys. Leslie's reaction: "My God, F. A. O.
Schwarzkopf!"

War soon erupts at Zevo Toys as the forces of heaven, led by Leslie and Alsatia,
take on those of hell, the general's mechanized, computerized toys, which
initially massacre the teddy bears, dolls and novelties that Leslie throws into
the struggle. It's just one of the many contradictions of "Toys" that the film,
which is antiwar, comes to life only in this spectacular if muddled
confrontation.  In the context of a movie that makes such a big thing of
innocence, the mayhem of the battle is pretty strong stuff, especially when a
principal character is decapitated.

There are, in fact, a number of wars going on in this antiwar movie.  The most
apparent is the struggle between the brilliant imagination of Ferdinando
Scarfiotti, the production designer, and the banal, fake-innocent conceits of
Mr. Levinson, who directed the movie and wrote the screenplay with Valerie
Curtin.  Though Mr. Scarfiotti is reported to have used Dada as an inspiration
for the film's look, nothing in the script has much to do with Dada's resolute
antipathy to reason. "Toys" doesn't exalt randomness. It is the victim of it.
The film has no consistent vision.  Even worse, it's not very funny. Leslie,
Alsatia and their friends laugh more often than the audience does.

Mr. Williams seems peculiarly subdued. His monologues in "Good Morning, Vietnam"
have far more to do with the exuberant iconoclasm of Dada than does anything in
"Toys." He has the occasional rude line, but he spends most of the film behaving
with immense politeness, which is apparently to be equated with innocence.

There's also something fatally wrongheaded about the film's attempts to equate
Leslie's humane impulses with the sorts of toys that for perfectly good reason,
would bore most children today. No adult of a certain age can have forgotten how
quickly the windup toy always ran down. Though war toys aren't great, "Toys"
sometimes gives the impression that it would like to disinvent everything that's
battery-operated and remote-controlled.

While "Toys" means to celebrate the benign paternalism of Zevo Toys before the
maniacal general takes over, it presents a far scarier picture of assembly-line
labor than anything in "Modern Times." Beneath giant plaster heads of
pastel-colored animals, the Zevo workers go about their tasks with the blank
expressions of people who have been lobotomized and then had smiles surgically
fixed to their faces.

It takes time to get the full measure of the film's failure. Not since "The
Cabinet of Dr. Caligari" has there been a movie set in such a stylish,
hermetically sealed environment, calling up a world where absolutely nothing is
real. The effect is sort of pleasant for a while, like being in a weightless
state. Eventually, though, whimsy takes over, nausea threatens and patience runs
out.

Mr. Gambon ("The Singing Detective") has fun as the mad general, but it's a role
that Mr. Williams might have done equally well, and with some of the mania that
"Toys" so desperately lacks. The only two performers who come out of this film
unscathed are Robin Wright, who plays Leslie's sweetly dippy girlfriend, and LL
Cool J, the rap performer, who appears as the white general's black son. The
screenplay offers no explanation for this color difference, which becomes one of
its few good jokes.

Mr. Levinson reportedly hoped to direct "Toys" years ago as his first film, but
good fortune kept getting in the way as he went on to direct "Diner," "Tin Men,
"Good Morning, Vietnam," "Rain Man" and "Bugsy," among other hits.

His luck finally ran out.

"Toys" is rated PG-13 (Parents strongly cautioned). It includes some vulgar
language and simulated violence.

Toys

Directed by Barry Levinson; written by Valerie Curtin and Mr. Levinson; director
of photography, Adam Greenberg; edited by Stu Linder; music by Hans Zimmer and
Trevor Horn; production designer, Ferdinando Scarfiotti; produced by Mr.
Levinson, Mark Johnson, Charles Newirth and Peter Giuliano; released by 20th
Century Fox. Running time: 110 minutes. This film is rated PG-13.

Leslie Zevo . . . Robin Williams
General Zevo . . . Michael Gambon
Alsatia Zevo . . . Joan Cusack
Gwen Tyler . . . Robin Wright
Patrick Zevo . . . LL Cool J
Kenneth Zevo . . . Donald O'Connor
Owen Owens . . . Arthur Malet
Old General Zevo . . . Jack Warden

LOAD-DATE: December 18, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Robin Williams. (Arthur Grace)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              375 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 18, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Books of The Times;
The Way the West Was Won, and Reinvented

BYLINE: By MICHIKO KAKUTANI

SECTION: Section C; Page 34; Column 3; Weekend Desk; Word and Image Page

LENGTH: 1147 words



Gunfighter Nation
The Myth of the Frontier in 20th-Century America
By Richard Slotkin
850 pages. Atheneum. $40

Since 1893, when Frederick Jackson Turner delivered his epoch-making address on
the crisis America faced in the closing of its geographic frontier, historians
have been busy debating the winning and losing of the West. The latest study to
tackle this widely written-about subject is the scholar Richard Slotkin's
stirring new book, "Gunfighter Nation: The Myth of the Frontier in 20th-Century
America," the concluding volume in an ambitious trilogy tracing the evolution of
the myth of the American frontier.

"Gunfighter Nation" builds on ideas laid out in the trilogy's first two volumes,
"Regeneration Through Violence" (1973) and "The Fatal Environment" (1985). It
often echoes the work of other scholars as well, most notably, Henry Nash
Smith's influential "Virgin Land: The American West as Symbol and Myth" (1950)
and "The West of the Imagination" (1989) by William H. and William N. Goetzmann.
At the same time, the book breaks new ground in its careful explication of the
continuing dynamic between politics and myth, myth and popular culture.

Writing in clear, sure-footed prose, Mr. Slotkin methodically illustrates the
ways in which the myth of the frontier has both informed American foreign policy
-- from Presidents Theodore Roosevelt through Ronald Reagan -- and shaped
popular thinking through books and movies. If his book's relentless
determination to look at American history through this single, narrow lens
results in some oversimplifications -- the country's idealism and taste for
isolationalism are both consistently underplayed -- it nonetheless succeeds in
making the reader re-examine the underpinnings of American political and
cultural ideology and reassess a century of remarkable change.

According to the myth of the frontier, says Mr. Slotkin, "the conquest of the
wilderness and the subjugation or displacement of the Native Americans who
originally inhabited it have been the means to our achievement of a national
identity, a democratic polity, an ever-expanding economy and a phenomenally
dynamic and 'progressive' civilization." Central to this myth was the belief
that "violence is an essential and necessary part of the process through which
American society was established and through which its democratic values are
defended and enforced."

Whereas the early settlers achieved progress (and, Mr. Slotkin implies, a sense
of spiritual regeneration) through the continual annexation of new lands,
Americans were forced to look for new sorts of conquests when the Western
frontier closed in the 1890's. With the Spanish-American War and American
involvement in the Philippines, Theodore Roosevelt extrapolated the frontier
myth to the world of foreign affairs. For Americans to renew their virility,
Roosevelt suggested, they must take up the challenge of empire and bring
civilization "to the red wastes where the barbarian peoples of the world hold
sway."

Later administrations, says Mr. Slotkin, would invoke the frontier myth to
justify the use of counterinsurgency measures in the cold war and to rationalize
America's growing involvement in Vietnam. In each case, Mr. Slotkin argues, the
enemy was portrayed in terms similar to those once used to depict Indians, as
ruthless, savage adversaries, whom the "side of progress and civilization" must
fight "without quarter and even without scruple."

At the same time, adds Mr. Slotkin, American movies were reinforcing -- and in
some instances, subverting -- these premises through the vehicle of the western,
a genre used by film makers "to allegorize a wide range of difficult or taboo
subjects." While westerns like "High Noon" and "Shane" asserted "the entitlement
of representatives of the 'better' or 'decent' classes to a privileged form of
violence" (much the way, Mr. Slotkin implies, that American Governments
justified the abuse of official procedure in the name of national security),
other films would begin to question just how far the gunfighter could go
"without becoming morally indistinguishable from the enemy."

The film "Vera Cruz" (1954), which tells the story of a group of American
gunfighters who go to Mexico to help suppress a radical revolution, suggested a
willingness, in Mr. Slotkin's words, "to measure means by their effectiveness
rather than by their conformity to 'longstanding concepts of fair play.' " And
"The Searchers" (1956), which features John Wayne as an ex-Confederate soldier
obsessed with exacting revenge on the Indians who massacred his family,
re-examines the whole concept of racialist war and its moral consequences for
both the victor and the vanquished.

As America's involvement in Vietnam escalated, Mr. Slotkin says, the western --
particularly the Mexico western focusing on the experiences of Americans south
of the border -- became a convenient vehicle for metaphorically dealing with the
problems of the war. By the mid-1960's, these films had already grown
increasingly violent and cynical; by 1970 -- after Tet and the shocking
revelations of the My Lai massacre -- some of these movies had begun to invert
the traditional myth of the frontier. In "The Wild Bunch" (1969), for example,
the adventures of a group of Americans in Mexico lead not to a heroic last
stand, but to a bloody shootout that destroys an entire town.

With the return of the last American combat forces from Vietnam, the popularity
of westerns precipitously declined, from a high of 29 in 1971 to only 7 in 1974,
a development indicative, Mr. Slotkin contends, of the decline of the frontier
as a viable national myth. Vietnam, the failure of the war on poverty,
Watergate, the hostage crisis and the sobering realities of a worsening economy
and a fragile environment all combined, in Mr. Slotkin's view, to diminish the
validity of the frontier myth with its old promises of manifest destiny and
infinite progress.

Although President Reagan tried to invoke the old symbolism of the myth -- with
promises of economic bonanzas, warnings about the "Evil Empire" and even
references to his former movie roles -- Mr. Slotkin argues that "his repair of
public myth was partial and incomplete" for he could not erase "either the
material consequences of our historical experience or its registration in
memory."

Yet a century after Turner pointed to the closing of the geographic frontier, a
nostalgia for the myth -- or at least the vocabulary -- of the frontier remains.
With United States forces in Somalia, both Government officials and reporters
have already begun to invoke some familiar imagery. As Ted Koppel recently said
on "Nightline," "We like, as Americans, that sort of western image of the big,
swaggering, broad-shouldered American coming into the town that is in trouble
and clearing everything up."

LOAD-DATE: December 18, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Richard Slotkin. (Alfa Studios)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              376 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 18, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

George Bush's Last Chance on Vietnam

SECTION: Section A; Page 38; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 441 words


In the remaining weeks of his term, President Bush can finish the last chapter
of the Vietnam War. More than 17 years after the end of formal hostilities, the
groundwork has at last been laid for mutually profitable economic cooperation
and normal diplomatic ties.

Mr. Bush has already made a good start by freeing U.S. companies to bid for
future business in Vietnam. But Americans are still prohibited from doing such
business, Washington still opposes loans to Hanoi from development banks, and
diplomatic relations remain ruptured.

Mr. Bush's move on contracts was made possible by a dramatic shift in Hanoi.
Vietnam now actively cooperates in looking for information about Americans
missing since the war. Besides giving American researchers access to its
military museums, Hanoi now publicly urges its citizens to report any remains
they may uncover.

Pentagon witnesses told the Senate Committee on P.O.W.-M.I.A. Affairs this month
that Washington had no evidence of any live Americans still in captivity. Even
so, two committee leaders, John Kerry, Democrat of Massachusetts, and Robert
Smith, Republican of New Hampshire, flew to Vietnam this week to follow up on
specific questions concerning a small number of Americans captured alive and
never returned.

The Senators also seek further progress on remains, and hope to speak candidly
with top Vietnamese leaders. They report to the White House next week. If all
goes well, the Administration seems disposed to take further conciliatory steps.

No one, either on the Senate committee or in the White House, is yet talking
about full diplomatic relations. Even Hanoi is far more interested in removing
economic barriers than in exchanging ambassadors. But in truth, there is nothing
to be gained from prolonging the diplomatic freeze past Inauguration Day.

The Administration has wisely declared that its goal is to reward and encourage
Vietnam's new cooperativeness, not punish past delays. No major P.O.W.-M.I.A.
issues remain unresolved. On Cambodia, the other U.S. test for normalization,
Washington says that Vietnam is cooperating fully with U.N. peace efforts.

Normalization wouldn't eliminate U.S. leverage over Vietnamese behavior;
Washington would still have the power to grant, withhold or condition
most-favored-nation tariff status.

To defer rapprochement until after Bill Clinton becomes President is to invite
recriminations from some veterans' groups that resent Mr. Clinton's efforts to
avoid the draft. That World War II veteran and Vietnam hawk George Bush could do
his country a patriotic favor by finally, honorably, ending America's longest
war.

LOAD-DATE: December 18, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              377 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 19, 1992, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Democrats Puzzled by Naming of Prosecutor on Clinton Files

BYLINE: By ROBERT PEAR,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 8; Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 903 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 18


Some Democratic members of Congress said today that they were puzzled that the
Bush Administration had asked for an independent prosecutor to investigate the
search of Bill Clinton's passport files in the Presidential election campaign.

The lawmakers said the request was surprising because the Administration had
vigorously resisted appointment of independent prosecutors in other cases where
there seemed to be far more evidence of wrongdoing.

Joseph E. diGenova, a former United States Attorney for the District of
Columbia, was secretly named on Monday to be the independent counsel by a
special three-judge panel of the United States Court of Appeals for the District
of Columbia.

Apparently Focusing on Baker

The court's action followed a request for an independent counsel by Attorney
General William P. Barr. Mr. diGenova's criminal investigation apparently
focuses on the activities of White House officials, including James A. Baker 3d,
the White House chief of staff who is the former Secretary of State, and two of
his top aides, Janet G. Mullins and Margaret D. Tutwiler.

Bush Administration officials searched Mr. Clinton's files for information that
could be used against him in the Presidential campaign. But they found none.

Mr. Barr has criticized the law that authorizes appointment of independent
prosecutors. He rejected Congressional demands for a court-appointed prosecutor
to investigate the Justice Department's handling of a bank fraud case involving
loans to Iraq.

Among the skeptics was Representative Patricia Schroeder, Democrat of Colorado,
who suggested that the Administration had sought an independent prosecutor to
protect White House officials from the embarrassment of a Congressional
investigation.

"I am very perplexed as to why they ran out and did this when they have been
been jumping up and down screaming how much they hate the special prosecutor
law," Ms. Schroeder said in an interview.

Republicans, she said, can now contend that Congressional investigations are
unneeded because an independent prosecutor is examining the case.

Justice Department officials insisted that the decision to seek an independent
prosecutor was a nonpolitical decision, based on the requirements of the Ethics
in Government Act of 1978.

Despite the skepticism of some Democrats, Mr. Clinton's communications director,
George Stephanopoulos, said the appointment of the independent prosecutor was a
"good step." Disclosures in the case grow "more curious every day," he said.

"Obviously, the preliminary investigation yielded some indication that laws were
broken, and the independent counsel is the way to get to the bottom of this,"
Mr. Stephanopoulos said.

A spokeswoman for the Clinton transition team, Max Parker, said, "There's a lot
of unanswered questions" about the search, which took place on Sept. 30 and Oct.
1. One of the biggest questions is whether White House officials authorized or
approved the search. Another is why they did nothing to stop the search when
they learned of it.

State Department officials asked the American embassies in Britain and Norway to
search their files for records on Mr. Clinton. The officials were looking for
evidence that Mr. Clinton, as a student in England in 1969 and 1970, had
considered renouncing his United States citizenship to avoid military service in
Vietnam. The officials were also seeking information about a trip Mr. Clinton
made to Moscow in 1969.

The British Government conducted a search through confidential files for
material on Mr. Clinton this fall. British officials said the search was
prompted by questions from journalists.

Robert S. Strauss, former Ambassador to Moscow and former chairman of the
Democratic National Committee, said today that the Bush Administration never
asked the embassy in Moscow or the Russian Government for information on Mr.
Clinton.

'There Was No Contact'

"No one ever contacted me about anything like that," Mr. Strauss said in an
interview. "If the Administration had contacted the Russian Government, they
would have had to go through me or my embassy. I am totally convinced that there
was no contact with the embassy or with the Russian Government."

Presumably Bush Administration officials were shrewd enough to realize that Mr.
Strauss, a Clinton supporter, would not assist them in political mischief
against Mr. Clinton.

The contents of Mr. Barr's request for an independent prosecutor and of Mr.
diGenova's charter have not been disclosed. Three news organizations, CBS, The
New York Times and The Washington Post, asked the appeals court today to make
those documents public.

The documents may name targets of Mr. diGenova's investigation and may outline
the evidence suggesting possible crimes.

The three news organizations said that such documents had been routinely
disclosed in other highly publicized cases. As precedents, they cited the 1986
appointment of Lawrence E. Walsh to investigate the Iran-contra affair and the
1984 appointment of Jacob A. Stein to investigate Edwin Meese 3d, then counselor
to President Ronald Reagan.

In revising the Ethics in Government Act in 1987, the Senate said the appeals
court should not be "unduly secretive" in deciding whether to disclose documents
related to independent prosecutors. The special panel of three Federal judges
exists exclusively for the purpose of appointing such prosecutors.

LOAD-DATE: December 19, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: James A. Baker 3d, the White House chief of staff, and two of
his aides are the apparent focus of an inquiry by an independent counsel named
to investigate the search of Bill Clinton's passport files. Mr. Baker spoke with
Brent Scowcroft, national security adviser, in the Oval Office on Thursday.
(Stephen Crowley/The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              378 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 20, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

MOST LIKELY TO SUCCEED

SECTION: Section 6; Page 8; Column 3; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 95 words


Alessandra Stanley was clearly less interested in Frank Aller's life and death
than in using his compelling story to snipe at Bill Clinton's character ("Most
Likely to Succeed," Nov. 22). The repeated comparisons between Clinton and his
late friend made her intentions quite transparent. How else to explain the
inclusion of a claim that Clinton tried to seduce a girlfriend of Aller's? What
of the ridiculous implication that Clinton was a phony because he once carried a
volume of William Blake's poetry in his back pocket?

STEVEN LEWIS
New Paltz, N.Y.

LOAD-DATE: December 20, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              379 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 20, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

MOST LIKELY TO SUCCEED

SECTION: Section 6; Page 8; Column 3; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 64 words


The profound psychological conflicts of the late 1960's are reflected in Frank
Aller's legacy. His suicide created a reference point against which some of our
nation's leaders will measure the success of their lives. Aller will keep his
friends struggling to prove not only that their lives mean something but that
his did, too.

VICTORIA F. REED GLESS
Chapel Hill, N.C.

LOAD-DATE: December 20, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              380 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 20, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

MOST LIKELY TO SUCCEED

SECTION: Section 6; Page 8; Column 3; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 42 words


Your article was illuminating for its revelation that, in 1971, The Los Angeles
Times would hire a draft-resisting, antiwar activist for its Saigon bureau.

No wonder the coverage of the war was so biased.

WILLIAM J. PARENTE
Scranton, Pa.

LOAD-DATE: December 20, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              381 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 20, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

On a Cold Night, Room for the Homeless

BYLINE: By ALBERT J. PARISI

SECTION: Section 13NJ; Page 1; Column 1; New Jersey Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1561 words

DATELINE: RIVER EDGE


A COLD, bitter December wind lashed at their clothing as the five men and two
women stepped from a van and entered the First Congregational Church here.
Somewhere in the building, radiators clanged and whistled a shrill song.

It was 7:30 P.M., and they had nowhere else to sleep. There had been no room for
them at the county center for the homeless in Hackensack, and a county van had
brought them to the church.

Inside the auditorium-gymnasium, where Christmas ornaments hung delicately from
the ceiling, volunteers waited to show the seven their cots for the night, the
men and women separated by a wooden divider. With blankets and bedsheets
supplied them by the county, they made up cots upon which they placed their few
belongings.

Anna Rodriguez, 37, a thin, fragile-looking woman from Jersey City, sat on her
cot, clothing neatly folded beside her, her back to the other visitors.
Confusion and joy chased each other across her face.

On this night, the church here, which is affiliated with the United Church of
Christ, was one of two in Bergen County that were taking the overflow from a
county-run shelter for the homeless in Hackensack. It is part of a program in
which 42 churches and synagogues are participating through the Inter-Religious
Fellowship for the Homeless of Bergen County, a nonprofit agency.

In this county, ranked for years as one of the nation's top 10 wealthiest areas,
the homeless population rose from 2,530 in 1989 to 4,302 in 1991, and it is
still rising, according to a county report issued in August. And those figures
reflect only the people who seek assistance. Advocates for the homeless say
there are at least seven times as many in need who do not seek help and remain
uncounted.

To receive help through the nonprofit group's program, applicants must be
actively seeking employment and come from the county's 72 communities, but even
those who do not meet the requirements are sometimes accepted.

"When the temperature outside is below freezing," said Kathleen J. Stanton, the
program's executive director, "it's kind of tough to say no to anyone."

In the hour before the visitors arrived, volunteers in the kitchen were
unwrapping dishes of food they had brought from home. "It's very hard to get
good gravy out of meat loaf," said Bertha Myhren, 64, of Oradell as Sally Zick,
65, of River Edge nodded agreement. They placed the heaping aluminum trays in an
oven and turned their attention to bowls of mashed potatoes and sunset bright
carrots.

Soon the food was ready, and the "guests," as the volunteers called them, began
filling their plates. At nearby tables they sat and ate as the volunteers joined
their ranks.

Miss Rodriguez sat to one side, and the Rev. John H. Danner, the congregation's
pastor and his wife, Linda, joined her and exchanged smiles. Nearby, a black and
white television set came to life with "Wheel of Fortune," but the volume was
low and it received little attention.

For Laura Silver, 32, formerly of New Milford, and Gordon DeFreese, 36, formerly
of Mahwah, this was their first night in a shelter after losing a makeshift
apartment in an illegal rooming house in Hackensack.

A Landlord's Complaint

"We've been staying with friends, but they could only take us in for so long
before the landlord started complaining," Miss Silver said. Both are receiving
limited government assistance and are looking for work, she said, but their
prospects are few.

"I was working in a cemetery, was there about 11 months, and the shop supervisor
took a dislike to me," Mr. DeFreese said. "I got fired." Being late for work "a
couple of days in a row sure didn't help," he added.

Miss Silver, a baker's helper by profession, said that more and more local
bakeries were laying off staff members rather than hiring.

They look upon the shelter program as a safety net of sorts. Mr. DeFreese, who
has been jailed three times for failure to pay support for his four children,
said that most of what he has earned recently has gone to pay that support.
"There just wasn't that much left for me after that," he said.

Three Children Taken Away

Miss Silver said her three children had been taken away from her and placed in
permanent foster homes. "It's tough, especially with Christmas coming on, what
with us not having enough to give to the kids," Mr. DeFreese said.

"If I could do it," he added, "if we both could do it, we'd like nothing more
than to have a place of our own and all the kids together under one roof. But
I'd be dreaming, and that wouldn't make this here nightmare go away."

By 8:30, the mealtime dishes had been cleared and another pot of coffee was
brewing. When the guests were asked about their lives, some talked eagerly;
others spoke hardly at all.

Larry Rogers said that his family was in Poland and that he hoped to join the
family members someday. He said he is terminally ill and unable to work.

Robert Jones, a Vietnam War veteran, told volunteers that he was a machinist for
18 years until he recently lost his job. He has entered a county retraining
program.

Miss Rodriguez, a native of Puerto Rico, does not remember the last time she
worked or what job she held, she said. Her deep brown eyes are both suspicious
and warm, as quick to change as the images on the nearby television screen.

First Night in Bergen Program

This was her first night in the Bergen County program. She recalled a stay in a
Newark shelter as a fearful experience. For a while, she said, she had stayed
with a male friend until his demands for sex led her to leave.

"People out there, they try to hurt you, and I've seen too many friends die in
the streets," she said. "Maybe here it is different, people are different. I
don't want to be raped again."

Tyrone C., who insisted that his full name not be used, is 26 and eager for
work. He passed around color photographs of his wife and 3-year-old daughter,
who live with family members in Middletown, N.Y.

"I never truly understood what it meant to be homeless until I became one
myself," he said.

"I was working two jobs, had my own place and was saving enough to bring my
family here when it happened," he said. Within the course of a week, the
part-time job he had at a Hackensack diner ended when it was closed for
renovations; he arrived one day at his other job, in an auto body shop, and
"found the place padlocked."

Tyrone C. said that he could have been staying with his brother nearby, but that
"he has enough to worry about with his own family." He added: "With God's help,
I'll come through this O.K., and living here like this, well, it's kind of a
means to an end."

Guests Getting Ready for Bed

By 9:45 the conversation had subsided. Overhead lights were dimmed, and some
guests began to drift toward their beds. Miss Rodriguez lay on her cot wrapped
in a gray blanket as though she were in a cocoon.

By 10:30, the lights in the auditorium were turned off. An illuminated exit sign
cast an orange glow over the cots and the guests in their blankets, some of them
already asleep. The overnight volunteers moved off to the separate kitchen area.

Art Caughlan, 45, of River Edge, a volunteer at the shelter, owns a local
insurance agency. He feels he has been lucky in life, he said, and "I believe in
giving back to the community in whatever way I can." In the past, he has helped
raise funds for the overflow shelter program -- but now, he said, "funds are
hard to come by, especially from corporations."

To be an overnight volunteer at the shelter, he added, was "kind of like having
guests overnight in your house; with your heart, you watch over them."

The other overnight volunteer, Wayne Placek, 45, of Oradell, the church's
shelter coordinator and a sales manager for a glass replacement company,
remembered an unemployed construction worker who had stayed overnight at the
church shelter last summer. "He asked us to pray for him," Mr. Placek said,
"that he had a job interview and was confident about it."

A Job Is Found

The following week, the construction worker returned, Mr. Placek said, "shook
hands all around -- he'd gotten the job -- and thanked us for our prayers and
support."

By 1:30 A.M., the wind was so strong that it was shaking the windowpanes. A
mandatory bed check showed that all the guests were accounted for. "All is
quiet," Mr. Caughlan noted in a log sheet that would be given to officials at
the county center.

During the night, Mr. Placek and Mr. Caughlan took turns catching naps on a
couch upstairs in the church. Shortly after 5 o'clock, they set about brewing a
fresh pot of coffee and preparing a breakfast of doughnuts, cold cereal and
orange juice for their guests.

Soon the guests themselves were up and stirring, folding their sheets and
blankets and putting personal belongings back into their bags. There was a
general move to the breakfast table, though Miss Rodriguez joined in only after
Mr. Placek invited her.

Tyrone C. knelt quietly against a far wall in silent prayer.

By 6:30, carrying bagged lunches prepared by Mrs. Danner, the guests were ready
to take the van back to Hackensack, where county aides would help in their job
search.

"Maybe today we'll be lucky," Miss Silver said as Mr. DeFreese nodded somewhat
groggily in agreement. "I've just got this feeling, a special feeling," she
said.

LOAD-DATE: December 20, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Volunteers joined the homeless for dinner at the First
Congregational Church in River Edge. (pg. 1); Homeless men at the First
Congregational Church in River Edge who could not be accommodated at the county
center. (pg. 16) (Norman Y. Lono for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              382 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 20, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Conversations/Mechai Viravaidya;
Brash and Unabashed, Mr. Condom Takes on Sex and Death in Thailand

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHENON

SECTION: Section 4; Page 7; Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1179 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand


AS the best-known anti-AIDS crusader in a country that is being ravaged by the
disease, Mechai Viravaidya understands that in explaining the dangers and
exploding the myths about AIDS, showing can be much more effective than telling.

So instead of simply talking about the importance of using condoms, he went to
last year's annual meeting of the World Bank, which was held in Bangkok, and
began distributing them by the fistful to wide-eyed bankers and finance
ministers.

And instead of lecturing Thais about the needless fear of day-to-day contact
with AIDS victims, Mr. Mechai appeared before reporters and photographers last
fall and had them watch as he picked up the cup of water from which a woman
infected with the AIDS virus had been sipping, and began to drink.

It was a headline-grabbing act that, for many Thais, finally made clear that
AIDS cannot be transmitted by a water glass or other casual contact.

"If there's a traffic jam and drivers see me on the street, they'll always call
out and ask me for condoms," said Mr. Mechai (pronounced MEE-chy) the ebullient
public-health advocate who is known to millions of Thais as "Mr. Condom."

He is so closely associated with the cause of AIDS prevention and family
planning that when Thais buy condoms -- and they do, in record numbers -- many
now ask for "Mechais."

A popular Bangkok restaurant, Cabbages and Condoms, was founded by Mr. Mechai
and a group of his associates. An adjoining gift shop sells key chains made of
condoms encased in clear plastic and prophylactic "flowers," the blooms created
from brightly colored condoms attached to wire stems. Vases overflowing with the
latex flowers decorate Mr. Mechai's office.

"Something is working in Thailand," he said of the Thai Government's anti-AIDS
program, considered the most effective in Asia. "Thailand woke up late to AIDS,
but I don't think too late."

Criticized by some Thais as a brash, fear-mongering self-promoter who has
crippled the nation's tourism industry, Mr. Mechai is likely to be remembered in
the annals of AIDS prevention as one of the few Asian leaders who tried to
educate the public early about the scourge that now seems likely to devastate
the continent.

Asia Looks the Other Way

AIDS is now expected to kill more people in Asia than on any other continent.
According to some estimates, tens of millions of Asians will be infected with
the AIDS virus by the end of the century.

Mr. Mechai, who led the Thai Government's anti-AIDS program until he stepped
down this fall to resume his work as chairman of Thailand's Population and
Community Development Association, said he is discouraged by how little other
Asian nations are doing to combat AIDS, and how little they know -- or want to
know -- about the spread of the disease.

Some Asian leaders like to suggest that AIDS is a "Thai problem," a result of
the nation's vast commercial sex industry and the undeniable and flagrant
promiscuity of Thai men. While sex outside of marriage is considered taboo for
Thai women, men face no similar prohibition, and millions of Thai men visit
brothels and massage parlors each week that are staffed, often as not, by
impoverished women from the countryside. After extensive testing, the Government
estimates that between 200,000 and 400,000 Thais are now infected with HIV, the
virus that causes AIDS.

"But if these other nations investigated, I believe they would find that their
situation is so much more serious than they'd dare anticipate," said Mr. Mechai.
"If you open the closet and look in, you'll find out what's inside. But if you
don't look inside, you won't know."

Thais are a reserved, consensus-loving people. But Mr. Mechai is only half-Thai.
The other half is blunt-talking Scot -- his mother was Scottish -- and Mr.
Mechai, a 51-year economist who was educated in Australia and speaks in perfect,
nearly accentless English, gladly singles out Asian nations that are shirking
their responsibility in the fight against AIDS.

"Do you think there is only prostitution in Thailand? " he asked. "You have
prostitution in Bangladesh, in Pakistan. Burma is going to be very, very
severely infected because you have a lot of girls coming to work in prostitution
in Thailand. Japan is going to be far more seriously infected than the Japanese
are publicly willing to admit," he said. "It's estimated that over a million
people are already HIV-positive in India. Prostitution exists in Indonesia, but
it's just not admitted."

AIDS, he said, will overwhelm Cambodia, only just emerging from a generation of
civil war and genocide. In Phnom Penh, the capital, "you already have brothels
running right through it, and there's no radio, no television, no knowledge of
condoms," he said. "AIDS will go through there like wildfire. And from Cambodia
it will go into Vietnam, because two-thirds of the prostitutes in Phnom Penh are
from Vietnam."

Touring the Brothels

In Thailand's $4 billion-a-year tourism industry, Mr. Mechai has many enemies.
He is blamed for driving away foreign visitors with his anti-AIDS campaign and
his attacks on what are known here as sex tours. Thousands of foreign men visit
Thailand each year on package tours that bypass Thailand's glittering Buddhist
temples in favor of its brothels.

Mr. Mechai insists that "what we're trying to do is save the tourism industry"
by controlling the spread of a disease that would otherwise decimate the
population. As for his attacks on the sex-tour industry, he has no apologies. "I
find it disturbing that men who are products of highly developed economies come
to a developing nation solely to exploit their women and their children."

Mr. Mechai said it is hopeless for Thailand to try to shut down the commercial
sex industry, both because it is so pervasive and because so many government
officials make a living in the business. "Take a look at some of the people who
own these places, these massage parlors," he said. "Several of them have been
elected to Parliament."

The Government's effort, he said, has instead been aimed at education --
specifically in safe-sex techniques and the need for men to limit their sexual
partners.

The budget for the program has been nearly doubled for next year, to nearly $45
million, and it is having an impact. Studies show that condom use is up
dramatically in some brothels and that the rate of other sexually transmitted
diseases is down.

Still, millions of Thai men, fully aware of the threat of AIDS, continue to
visit prostitutes, and then risk spreading the disease to their spouses and to
other sex partners. "It's common for a group of Thai men to go out and play golf
and then go to a massage parlor, where the girls would be organized to meet
them," said Mr. Mechai.

He thinks that may be changing. "I've noticed a change among my own friends,"
said Mr. Mechai. "Many of them come to me and laugh and say, 'Mechai, I don't
want to see your face anymore. Because of you, I haven't been to a massage
parlor in ages.' "

"I hope," he said, "they are telling me the truth."

LOAD-DATE: December 20, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Mechai Viravaidya with an umbrella from his restaurant. (Gary
Knight for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              383 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 20, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Vietnam to Reveal Data on Laotian M.I.A.'s

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Page 34; Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 200 words

DATELINE: SAN FRANCISCO, Dec. 19


Vietnam has agreed for the first time to reveal information about American
soldiers captured in Laos during the Vietnam War, Senator John Kerry said today.

Previously, Vietnamese officials had said that only Laos could disclose
information about incidents in their country, Senator Kerry, the chairman of the
Select Committee on POW/MIA Affairs, said. But when he visited Vietnam on
Thursday and Friday, Senator Kerry said, officials agreed to discuss incidents
in Laos.

"I think every American wants to see this issue resolved," he said during a stop
in San Francisco.

His committee is to give the full Senate a progress report on Jan. 5 on the
issues of prisoners of war and soldiers missing in action.

Senator Kerry, Democrat of Massachusetts, said that during this visit he had
talked to Vietnamese officers who had interrogated American prisoners.

He said the next step would be to get transcripts from the interrogations of 38
P.O.W.'s and M.I.A.'s, which could reveal additional information about other
missing soldiers.

The committee has focused on locating 135 soldiers, but for the most recent trip
the list was pared to the 38 who are considered most difficult to track.

LOAD-DATE: December 20, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              384 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 20, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Percentage of Foreigners in U.S. Rises Sharply

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Page 36; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 557 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 19


The percentage of foreign-born residents of the United States rose to 7.9
percent in 1990, up from 6.2 percent in 1980, a new Census Bureau report says.
Most of the increase came in 1985-90, when nearly five million people immigrated
to the United States.

The foreign-born population reached 19.8 million in 1990, the bureau said, a
sharp rise from 14 million in 1980 and 9.6 million in 1970, when immigrants were
only 4.7 percent of the population.

Susan J. Lapham, who prepared the report, which was released Friday, said the
percentage of foreign-born residents was well below the 13.5 percent of 1910,
when the population was much smaller.

The states with the largest numbers of immigrants are California, home to almost
one-third of all those born outside the country, New York, Florida and Texas.
Ms. Lapham said that "from every indication" the number of immigrants would
continue to grow.

Legal Status for Some

She said the data did not reveal how many of the new immigrants were in the
country illegally.

An immigration law enacted in 1986 has allowed three million aliens who were
illegally in this country at that time to acquire legal status here, mostly as a
first step toward citizenship.

Ms. Lapham said there had been no studies yet to determine whether the 1986 law
had affected Census Bureau tabulations of aliens in the country. "But
intuitively," she said, "if more people are legal it makes sense there would be
more people who would be apt to respond" to bureau surveys.

Mexico remained well ahead as the most common country of origin for foreign-born
residents, representing 21.7 percent of the total and almost doubling in numbers
to 4.3 million in 1990 from 2.2 million in 1980.

Following Mexico in the top 10 countries of origin were the Philippines at 4.6
percent; Canada, 3.8 percent; Cuba, 3.7 percent; Germany, 3.6 percent; Britain,
3.2 percent; Italy, 2.9 percent; South Korea, 2.9 percent; Vietnam, 2.7 percent
and China, 2.7 percent.

Big Jump in California

The bureau said nearly 60 percent of foreign-born residents were not United
States citizens. The percentages of non-citizens were generally low for people
from countries in Europe -- 28.1 percent for Germany and 24.2 percent for Italy
-- and high for those from Latin American countries -- 84.6 percent for El
Salvador, 84.9 percent for Nicaragua and 83.1 percent for Guatemala.

The number of foreign-born residents nearly doubled in California in the past
decade, to 6.5 million, or 21.7 percent of the state's population. Other states
with large foreign-born populations were New York with 2.8 million, or 15.9
percent, Florida with 1.7 million, or 12.9 percent, and Texas with 1.5 million,
or 9 percent.

New York City had the biggest foreign-born population, at 2 million, although
Los Angeles had a larger percentage, with 1.3 million, or 38.4 percent of its
population.

But Los Angeles ranked only 17th among cities in percent of foreign-born
residents. The highest was Hialeah City, Fla., with 70.4 percent of its 188,000
people immigrants, followed by Miami at 59.7 percent; Huntington Park, Calif.,
at 59.7 percent; Union City, N. J., at 55.1 percent, and Monterey Park, Calif.,
at 51.8 percent.

Wyoming had the smallest number of foreign-born residents, at 7,647. Mississippi
had the lowest percentage, 0.8.

LOAD-DATE: December 20, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              385 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 20, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

IN SHORT: NONFICTION

BYLINE: By David Murray

SECTION: Section 7; Page 18; Column 4; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 236 words



THUNDERBOLT
General Creighton Abrams
and the Army of His Times.
By Lewis Sorley.
Simon & Schuster, $25.

In "Thunderbolt," Lewis Sorley, a graduate of West Point who has taught there
and at the Army War College, has constructed a career-path guidebook for any
ambitious officer seeking general's stars. Abrams (1914-74) was a pre-World War
II cavalry officer who, like many others, saw the future of armor. By the end of
World War II, he was a 30-year-old battalion commander with four medals for
heroism. In Korea, he was a corps chief of staff, and when that conflict ended
he had to wait 12 years for another war. As a Pentagon staff officer, he ran the
buildup of American forces in Vietnam that began in 1965, when the decision was
made to send units up to division strength into Southeast Asia. But, staff
officer or not, Abrams was concerned with the troops. In Vietnam, where he
served as deputy commander of the American forces from 1967 to 1968, then as
commander until 1972, he was a muddy-boots general. However, whenever he
returned to Washington for consultation, he could be the military diplomat who
won the respect of President Lyndon B. Johnson. Eventually Abrams was named Army
Chief of Staff. "Thunderbolt" is a valuable addition to the Vietnam bookshelf
and ably makes the case that, capping an honorable career, Creighton Abrams
fought an honorable war in a questionable cause.

LOAD-DATE: December 20, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              386 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 20, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

A Majority of One

BYLINE: By John B. Judis;  John B. Judis is the author of "Grand Illusion:
Critics and Champions of the American Century."

SECTION: Section 7; Page 9; Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 781 words



IZZY
A Biography of I. F. Stone.
By Robert C. Cottrell.
Illustrated. 388 pp. New Brunswick, N.J.:
Rutgers University Press. $25.95.

BY the end of World War II, I. F. Stone, who died in 1989 at the age of 81, was
already at the top of his profession. He worked as a columnist for a string of
New York dailies and was the regular left-winger on "Meet the Press" 's panel of
journalists. But his sharp opposition to American cold war policies led to his
exile from the radio and television program. By November 1952, when The New York
Daily Compass, for which Stone wrote a column, went out of business, he had
become, in his biographer Robert C. Cottrell's words, "an unemployed,
middle-aged journalist and Old Leftist who appeared to be yet another victim of
the temper of the times."

But Mr. Cottrell tells us in "Izzy" that what might have been the end of Stone's
professional life was really the beginning. He decided to start his own
newsletter, which he called I. F. Stone's Weekly, and in which he pioneered a
new kind of investigative journalism, based upon the close reading of government
documents. In the 1950's, he gained renown for exposing the hazards of nuclear
testing. Then, as the United States became embroiled in Vietnam, he became one
of the war's most persistent and effective critics and a hero to a new
generation on the left.

Mr. Cottrell, an associate professor of history at California State University,
Chico, has written the first book-length biography of Stone. Without concealing
Stone's more foolish or ignoble opinions, particularly on the Soviet Union, Mr.
Cottrell portrays him as an ink-stained saint -- an "American original." Stone's
fans should welcome this book, but it is not a very good biography. Mr.
Cottrell's narrative is clumsy and repetitious. And despite his air of
familiarity with Stone, whom he repeatedly calls Izzy, he fails to make his
subject come alive. At a minimum, this biography would have been more
interesting if Mr. Cottrell had simply quoted more extensively from Stone, who
was a witty and acerbic writer, rather than constantly paraphrasing his
opinions.

Most important, Mr. Cottrell does not adequately account for the changes in
Stone's underlying political philosophy -- from uncritical admirer of Soviet and
American Communism to anti-anti-Communist to self-described "liberal" opponent
of the war in Vietnam. Mr. Cottrell relies entirely on Stone's own reminiscences
five decades later to explain his support in the early 1930's for a "Soviet
America." As for Stone's liberalism, the author fails to quote enough of Stone
for the reader to be able to judge what he believed. This is all the more
important because, in an unrelated context, Mr. Cottrell quotes Stone in 1983
praising the Soviet Union as a "distortion of socialism" but "still socialism."

Mr. Cottrell is justifiably effusive about Stone's journalism in the 1950's and
60's. Stone was a remarkable reporter who did not flinch from facts that
contradicted his hopes. After a 1961 visit to Fidel Castro's Cuba, he warned of
a "revolutionary euphoria" and "demagogy" that seemed "dangerously unrealistic."
Stone also sensed very early that the 60's New Left was destroying itself by
mimicking the sectarianism of the Old. Mr. Cottrell is on shaky ground, however,
in applauding Stone's work before 1952.

Stone was, unfortunately, another brilliant intellectual whose brain was addled
by the Russian Revolution. He was still defending the Soviet Union in 1939, when
many prominent intellectuals and journalists, including Edmund Wilson and Dwight
Macdonald, already understood that the Revolution had fatally miscarried. Mr.
Cottrell terms Stone's cold war criticisms "remarkably astute," but after World
War II Stone tended to grant the Soviet Union the benefit of the doubt while
believing the worst of American intentions. Unlike Walter Lippmann (who was also
a cold war critic), Stone failed to understand that the pro-Soviet regimes in
Eastern Europe were sustained by Soviet tanks, not by the wonders of
Marxism-Leninism. And like Henry Wallace, whom he supported for President in
1948, he mistakenly read into the politics of the late 40's the onset of an
American fascism.

Mr. Cottrell says in his introduction that Stone's life "serves as a microcosm
through which to view the state of the American left, political journalism and
the intellectual experience over the course of the better part of the 20th
century." That is true enough (even today, when some on the right are accusing
Stone of having been a paid Soviet agent), but Mr. Cottrell fails to make good
on the potential that this interesting microcosm holds.

NAME: I. F. Stone

LOAD-DATE: December 20, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: I. F. Stone in his home in Washington in 1987. (George Tames)

TYPE: Biography; Review

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              387 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 20, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

A Majority of One

BYLINE: By John B. Judis;  John B. Judis is the author of "Grand Illusion:
Critics and Champions of the American Century."

SECTION: Section 7; Page 9; Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 781 words



IZZY
A Biography of I. F. Stone.
By Robert C. Cottrell.
Illustrated. 388 pp. New Brunswick, N.J.:
Rutgers University Press. $25.95.

BY the end of World War II, I. F. Stone, who died in 1989 at the age of 81, was
already at the top of his profession. He worked as a columnist for a string of
New York dailies and was the regular left-winger on "Meet the Press" 's panel of
journalists. But his sharp opposition to American cold war policies led to his
exile from the radio and television program. By November 1952, when The New York
Daily Compass, for which Stone wrote a column, went out of business, he had
become, in his biographer Robert C. Cottrell's words, "an unemployed,
middle-aged journalist and Old Leftist who appeared to be yet another victim of
the temper of the times."

But Mr. Cottrell tells us in "Izzy" that what might have been the end of Stone's
professional life was really the beginning. He decided to start his own
newsletter, which he called I. F. Stone's Weekly, and in which he pioneered a
new kind of investigative journalism, based upon the close reading of government
documents. In the 1950's, he gained renown for exposing the hazards of nuclear
testing. Then, as the United States became embroiled in Vietnam, he became one
of the war's most persistent and effective critics and a hero to a new
generation on the left.

Mr. Cottrell, an associate professor of history at California State University,
Chico, has written the first book-length biography of Stone. Without concealing
Stone's more foolish or ignoble opinions, particularly on the Soviet Union, Mr.
Cottrell portrays him as an ink-stained saint -- an "American original." Stone's
fans should welcome this book, but it is not a very good biography. Mr.
Cottrell's narrative is clumsy and repetitious. And despite his air of
familiarity with Stone, whom he repeatedly calls Izzy, he fails to make his
subject come alive. At a minimum, this biography would have been more
interesting if Mr. Cottrell had simply quoted more extensively from Stone, who
was a witty and acerbic writer, rather than constantly paraphrasing his
opinions.

Most important, Mr. Cottrell does not adequately account for the changes in
Stone's underlying political philosophy -- from uncritical admirer of Soviet and
American Communism to anti-anti-Communist to self-described "liberal" opponent
of the war in Vietnam. Mr. Cottrell relies entirely on Stone's own reminiscences
five decades later to explain his support in the early 1930's for a "Soviet
America." As for Stone's liberalism, the author fails to quote enough of Stone
for the reader to be able to judge what he believed. This is all the more
important because, in an unrelated context, Mr. Cottrell quotes Stone in 1983
praising the Soviet Union as a "distortion of socialism" but "still socialism."

Mr. Cottrell is justifiably effusive about Stone's journalism in the 1950's and
60's. Stone was a remarkable reporter who did not flinch from facts that
contradicted his hopes. After a 1961 visit to Fidel Castro's Cuba, he warned of
a "revolutionary euphoria" and "demagogy" that seemed "dangerously unrealistic."
Stone also sensed very early that the 60's New Left was destroying itself by
mimicking the sectarianism of the Old. Mr. Cottrell is on shaky ground, however,
in applauding Stone's work before 1952.

Stone was, unfortunately, another brilliant intellectual whose brain was addled
by the Russian Revolution. He was still defending the Soviet Union in 1939, when
many prominent intellectuals and journalists, including Edmund Wilson and Dwight
Macdonald, already understood that the Revolution had fatally miscarried. Mr.
Cottrell terms Stone's cold war criticisms "remarkably astute," but after World
War II Stone tended to grant the Soviet Union the benefit of the doubt while
believing the worst of American intentions. Unlike Walter Lippmann (who was also
a cold war critic), Stone failed to understand that the pro-Soviet regimes in
Eastern Europe were sustained by Soviet tanks, not by the wonders of
Marxism-Leninism. And like Henry Wallace, whom he supported for President in
1948, he mistakenly read into the politics of the late 40's the onset of an
American fascism.

Mr. Cottrell says in his introduction that Stone's life "serves as a microcosm
through which to view the state of the American left, political journalism and
the intellectual experience over the course of the better part of the 20th
century." That is true enough (even today, when some on the right are accusing
Stone of having been a paid Soviet agent), but Mr. Cottrell fails to make good
on the potential that this interesting microcosm holds.

NAME: I. F. Stone

LOAD-DATE: December 20, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: I. F. Stone in his home in Washington in 1987. (George Tames)

TYPE: Biography; Review

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              388 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 20, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Making Georgia Howl

BYLINE: By Thomas Fleming;  Thomas Fleming is the author of a history of West
Point. His most recent novel is "Over There."

SECTION: Section 7; Page 6; Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1258 words



SHERMAN
A Soldier's Passion for Order.
By John F. Marszalek.
Illustrated. 635 pp. New York:
The Free Press. $29.95.

IN the 1970's and 80's William Tecumseh Sherman was consigned to moral obloquy
by books like James Reston Jr.'s "Sherman's March and Vietnam" and John B.
Walters's "Merchant of Terror." Michael Herr and Mary McCarthy also saw in the
volatile red-haired Ohioan the prototype of the evil general. In the
end-of-history post-ideological 90's, we have had Charles Royster remind us, in
his brilliant book "The Destructive War," that there were many others on both
sides of the battle lines who recommended Sherman's policy of total war.
Stonewall Jackson was as furiously in favor of ripping up railroads and burning
enemy factories and warehouses and living off (plundering) the local populace as
Sherman. Abolitionists like Wendell Phillips demanded the merciless use of fire
and sword long before Sherman applied it.

Now we have John F. Marszalek, a professor of history at Mississippi State
University and the author of a much-admired book about Sherman's stormy
relationship with the press, "Sherman's Other War," defending Sherman and his
determination to "make Georgia [and South Carolina] howl." Mr. Marszalek rests
his case on a psychological interpretation of Sherman's early life. His father
died when Sherman was 9 years old, leaving his wife and their 11 children
virtually penniless. His wealthy neighbor and close friend, Thomas Ewing,
adopted the boy and arranged support for the mother and other children.

From this experience, Mr. Marszalek maintains in "Sherman: A Soldier's Passion
for Order," Sherman acquired a dread of social instability, which he saw as
incipient anarchy -- and he considered almost any measure justified to restore
order. Mr. Marszalek also argues that Sherman's ambivalent feelings toward his
stepfather added to his anxiety about order, which Sherman often identified with
some form of success.

The thesis is unconvincing. Mr. Marszalek offers no evidence that his father's
death destabilized Sherman's world. He moved only 100 yards away -- often
dropping in to see his mother for lunch or dinner -- and Mr. Marszalek admits
the lost father was away from home most of the time in the first place. As for
Sherman's attitude toward Thomas Ewing, it seems little different from any son's
struggle to escape the looming shadow of a rich, powerful father -- compounded,
in Sherman's case, by his marriage to Ewing's neurotic daughter, Ellen.

The thesis is also superfluous. In the 1840's Sherman fought in Florida's
Vietnam-like Seminole War, which frustrated the United States Army for three
decades, and he was exposed, as a banker in the 1850's, to San Francisco's
wild-eyed vigilantism. Across the Rio Grande, Mexico was in political and
military upheaval for most of his adult life. Here were more than enough reasons
for Sherman to detest rebellious disorder -- especially when these examples were
combined with four years of fierce emphasis on order and obedience at West Point
and with the passionately held conservative opinions of his monumental
stepfather.

Mr. Marszalek is so busy using Ewing as a psychological foil that he never gives
us a coherent intellectual portrait of this giant, who was a power in state and
Federal politics for decades and unquestionably the dominant influence in
Sherman's life. Without Ewing, the author loses track of one of the central
ideas in Sherman's cosmos, the reverence for the Constitution that permeated the
Midwest -- and enraged the entire region against those descendants of the
original states who dared to break the sacred compact.

There is also no need for reductionist psychologizing to explain why Sherman
detested reporters after they described him as a raving madman in late 1861,
when he expressed violent doubts about the North's ability to win the war in
Kentucky. His emergence from this near disaster and his rapid ascent to fame as
the leader of the Civil War in the West depended almost entirely on his
friendship with Ulysses S. Grant.

How and why Grant enabled Sherman to flourish should be the heart of any new
assessment of the man who ignored conventional ideas of supplies and logistics
to march from Atlanta to the sea. Mr. Marszalek links Sherman's renewed
self-confidence to Grant's ability to achieve success -- hardly a novel notion.
He also fails to explore Sherman's relationship with other important generals,
notably George Thomas.

What is more important, Mr. Marszalek's narrow focus on Sherman's psychology
omits what makes his story still relevant for contemporary Americans -- the
debate that raged throughout the war on which tactics were permitted and which
not. Gen. George McClellan was the military spokesman for the North's numerous
Democrats, who wanted to limit the fighting to the rival armies. Sherman, who
had spent much of his military career in the South, was an early proponent of
the view that the Civil War was a struggle between two peoples, and it could be
won only by breaking the spirit of the Confederacy.

Mr. Marszalek defends Sherman's ruthlessness by noting his humane side. For
sniping at a steamboat, Sherman could order the razing of an entire Tennessee
town. But he was chary of human life. Whenever possible, he avoided pitched
battles and heavy casualties. He never massacred civilians in the style of the
Mongols, the Nazis or the Serbs.

In his best chapter, Mr. Marszalek describes the improbable climax of Sherman's
Civil War -- his attempt to win a soft peace for the South. The armistice he
signed with Joseph Johnston, commander of the last serious Confederate army left
after Lee's surrender, guaranteed political amnesty and the virtual restoration
of the prewar status quo, except, of course, for the abolition of slavery. But
Lincoln was dead, and the proponents of radical reconstruction swiftly
repudiated the deal.

Mr. Marszalek fails to connect this demarche to the profoundly conservative bent
Sherman had inherited from Thomas Ewing. His substitution of psychology for a
wider historical vision bars him from the only narrative mode that makes sense
of Sherman: irony. Sherman saw no place for blacks in the United States. He
opposed using them as soldiers. The man who earned the South's enmity liked
Southerners and saw little wrong with slavery. He was at one with his Midwestern
troops, who often declared they would rather shoot a New England abolitionist
than a Confederate soldier.

The same irony pervaded Sherman's postwar life. Married to an intensely pious
woman who never stopped trying to lure him into the Roman Catholic Church,
Sherman resisted her -- but lost his favorite older son to the priesthood. When
his friend Grant became President, he abandoned the Army to the politicians. As
commanding general, Sherman was little more than a figurehead while the Army
fought a series of indecisive wars with a foe infinitely more anarchic than the
Confederacy -- the Plains Indians. Sherman could have had the Presidential
nomination of either party, but America's chaotic politics made his famous
refusal of a draft a foregone conclusion.

The order Sherman craved in private and public spheres perpetually eluded him.
Mr. Marszalek ruefully notes this fact, but he sees it more as soap opera than
as a tragic collision between conflicting visions of America. The life of this
master of violence demonstrates, in the end, the limitations of the policy he
perfected -- and the relentless dynamism of American history.

NAME: William Tecumseh Sherman

LOAD-DATE: December 20, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: William T. Sherman. (Mathew Brady/National Archives)

TYPE: Biography; Review

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              389 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 20, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Here's Looking at You, Abe

BYLINE: By Andrew Delbanco;  Andrew Delbanco, a professor of English at Columbia
University, is the editor of "The Portable Abraham Lincoln."

SECTION: Section 7; Page 7; Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1474 words



LINCOLN
An Illustrated Biography.
By Philip B. Kunhardt Jr., Philip B. Kunhardt 3d
and Peter W. Kunhardt.
415 pp. New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $50.

LAST month, around the time of the election, there was a good deal of Lincoln
talk in my household, as there very likely will be for many Americans who watch
the documentary of his life to be broadcast by ABC just after Christmas. My
8-year-old daughter, confused by her father's reverence for a Republican
President, tried this theory out on me the other night: "In the old days the
good guys were the Republicans; now it's the other way around." "Something like
that" was my parentally evasive reply, as I worried that I had been encouraging
her to see the world through the categories of a child -- a privilege she will,
alas, soon outgrow.

The amazing thing about Abraham Lincoln's life -- beautifully recorded in
"Lincoln: An Illustrated Biography," a companion volume to the two-part
television program -- is that he seemed to have designed it to save us from this
embarrassment. Lincoln has always had a chastening effect on skeptics. His War
Secretary, Edwin Stanton, began their association by deriding him as "that
giraffe" and ended it beside his deathbed, tears streaming down his face as he
pronounced the quiet valediction, "Now he belongs to the ages."

The life of this irresistible man has been more densely documented than that of
any other American, and possibly more than any life in the modern world. Yet
even as the details continue to accumulate and merge into an almost gapless
chronicle, Lincoln has also become a blank slate on which succeeding generations
feel compelled to inscribe themselves.

In the 1930's Carl Sandburg's strong and frugal man of the prairie gave
Americans a kind of mirror of reassurance. In the 1950's we got Lincoln the cold
warrior, bent on victory over an enemy who seduces lesser men into thoughts of
appeasement. And by the late 1960's and 70's, when intellectuals had come to
feel bitterly estranged from politics and public life, Lincoln began to emerge
as a man who shared complicity in tolerating slavery and abetting the greed of
the dastardly railroads. This culpable Lincoln has been well suited for the
post-Vietnam American mood, especially as young historians have found it
difficult to imagine that power could be consistent with virtue.

This book, by Philip B. Kunhardt Jr., Philip B. Kunhardt 3d and Peter W.
Kunhardt, is one sign that this mood may be waning. It is not, to be sure, a
work of new historical interpretation -- and it has the look of old-fashioned
hagiography. There is a certain relentless gravity to the photographs, mostly
drawn from the great Meserve-Kunhardt Collection of Civil War images, an archive
lovingly assembled and curated by members of the authors' family beginning
around the turn of the century. Because of the requirements dictated by the
state of photography in Lincoln's day -- chiefly long exposure and enhanced
lighting -- the figures in the photographs often appear stiff and unsmiling (the
most natural image in this book may be the blurry portrait of Lincoln's dog,
which seems to have been recalcitrant about staying still). Yet formal and
familiar as they are, the images retain their haunting power, and some of them,
such as the enlarged detail of the photograph of Lincoln among the crowd at
Gettysburg, have an uncanny beauty. One does not look at this image; one stares
into it with a strange kind of excitement -- something like what believers must
feel when they make out the outline of Jesus in the Shroud of Turin.

The power of these images does not, of course, derive mainly from their
excellence as artifacts, but from their force as symbols of the convergence of
two lives -- a nation's and a man's -- whose mutual devotion is unique in
American history. The Kunhardts' book tells the story of this life efficiently
and clearly. It begins on the frontier, where the doctrines of self-reliance and
self-improvement fostered an antislavery sentiment that was sometimes perilously
close to hostility toward blacks, who were seen as aliens threatening to bring
down the market value of white men's labor. We then follow the remarkable
political ascendancy that took Lincoln to the head of a new party devoted, for
both moral and expedient reasons, to checking the spread of slavery into the
territories; and then to his leadership of the massive war effort, whose aim of
preserving the Union finally demanded the elimination of slavery in the rebel
states as well. Knowing the tragic end of the story, yet somehow still appalled,
we come to Lincoln's apotheosis as the martyred defender of the equality
principle of the Declaration of Independence, which he increasingly saw as
unlimited by race and which animated all his actions -- culminating in his
support for the 13th Amendment, which, just weeks before his death, outlawed
slavery throughout the nation.

In telling Lincoln's life mainly with images, the Kunhardts acknowledge that the
idea for a television program came first. But their book has no feeling of
second-handedness. Intelligently designed, it encourages the eye to move back
and forth across its illustrations, so that the conventional movement of running
the eye downward over the page is interrupted not only by visual images but also
by inset word-portraits from Lincoln's contemporaries. We read of how during his
address at the Cooper Institute in New York City in 1860 (where he argued that
the Founding Fathers had intended the eventual extinction of slavery), it became
so quiet in the great hall that one could hear the hiss of the gas burners. We
also hear of less portentous moments: Mary Todd in a fit, pelting her husband
with potatoes; Lincoln riding the Illinois court circuit in the company of a
judge and fellow advocates, all of them compelled at one point to strip and to
hold their clothes above their heads as they crossed a deep stream on their
nervous mounts -- an equestrian parade of naked lawyers.

This illustrated biography gets us as close to Lincoln as static images and the
approximations of words allow. When, too soon, my daughter discovers the paucity
of true virtue and learns that patriotic emotion is usually a ruse for partisan
or personal ambition, this book will be waiting on her shelf. It is a good place
to begin to learn about the distinction between credulity and belief. Lincoln
had no patience with the former, and thought it the demagogue's craft to play on
the people's susceptibility to fear and false hope. But he knew equally well
that the latter -- a genuine belief in the demanding idea of democracy based on
equality -- was indispensable to the future of the Republic. His life rebukes
the disbelievers.



GROWING UP WITH LINCOLN

Although Philip B. Kunhardt Jr. was born only 64 years ago, he can honestly say
he was raised with Abraham Lincoln. He was, as he puts it, "Lincolnized" by the
Meserve-Kunhardt Collection, a family trove of photography and memorabilia about
the former President. It became the basis for "Lincoln: An Illustrated
Biography," a companion to the television program "Lincoln," which will be
broadcast next Saturday and Sunday. Mr. Kunhardt collaborated on both projects
with two of his sons, Philip 3d, a 41-year-old Episcopal minister, and Peter,
39, a television producer.

"I grew up in the light of the lamps from the parlor where Lincoln was married,"
Mr. Kunhardt, a retired Life magazine journalist, recalled in a telephone
conversation from his home in Chappaqua, N.Y. "There were pictures of him
everywhere. My mother even kept Mrs. Lincoln's traveling commode by her bed."

Mr. Kunhardt's grandfather, Frederick Hill Meserve, began the collection in
1897, hoping to illustrate the memoirs of his father, a Union Army major. The
archive gained its focus several years later when Meserve happened upon seven
original glass negatives of Lincoln by the photographer Mathew Brady. The
collection was passed on to Mr. Kunhardt's mother, the well-known children's
book author Dorothy Meserve Kunhardt, who enlarged it.

"My favorite thing was a late photograph by Alexander Gardner," Mr. Kunhardt
said. "The negative was cracked, and Gardner made only one print. It's very
moving and symbolic -- the crack goes through Lincoln's head in the approximate
direction the bullet would travel a month later." The photograph, reproduced in
the book, is now in the National Portrait Gallery. But though Mr. Kunhardt gave
up a substantial amount of the collection to pay inheritance taxes on his
mother's estate, he still owns "tens of thousands" of pictures, and continues to
add modestly to the family holdings.

"It's hard to use Lincoln up," he observed. "He's probably the nicest companion
you could possibly have." -- LAUREL GRAEBER

NAME: Abraham Lincoln

LOAD-DATE: December 20, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Mary Todd Lincoln and Representative-elect Abraham Lincoln in
1846, in the couple's earliest known photographs, taken four years after their
marriage. (Daguerreotypes by N. H. Shepherd/From "Lincoln: An Illustrated
Biography")(pg. 7); Philip B. Kunhardt Jr. (Sandra K. Basile/Knopf)(pg. 8)

TYPE: Biography; Review

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              390 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 21, 1992, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Reshaping Pacifism to Fight Anguish in Reshaped World

BYLINE: By PETER STEINFELS

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 1376 words


For decades, the Rev. William Sloane Coffin Jr. was an outspoken critic of
American military actions abroad. As chaplain at Yale University, then as pastor
of the Riverside Church in Manhattan and finally as the leader of a group
promoting disarmament, he opposed the war in Vietnam, American support for the
contras in Nicaragua, the invasions of Grenada and Panama, and the war in the
Persian Gulf.

Today, despite misgivings, Dr. Coffin backs the presence of American forces in
Somalia, and he is at least willing to contemplate military measures against
Serbian forces in Bosnia.

"Moral isolation is simply not a defensible position for those opposed to war,"
he said last week. "There is great anguish and confusion. We are groping for
some kind of legitimate police action on an international scale."

Rethinking Military Morality

He is far from alone. Among pacifists and intellectuals most concerned with the
ethical issues of warfare, there is a widespread re-examination of the morality
of military intervention to deal with events like the "ethnic cleansing" in
Bosnia or the politically induced starvation in Somalia.

And some of these people say that as the world reshapes itself in the wake of
the cold war many more such conflicts are inevitable, as are the agonizing
questions they raise.

The Rev. J. Bryan Hehir, an adviser to the American Catholic bishops on
international affairs, said, "People are calling for reinterpretations of the
concepts of both national sovereignty and nonintervention, saying that the way
we've understood them for three centuries is not adequate."

Next semester, Father Hehir (pronounced hare), a faculty associate at the Center
for International Affairs at Harvard University and a professor at Harvard
Divinity School, will teach a course entitled "The Use of Force: Political and
Moral Criteria." Not long ago, many divinity students would have dismissed the
listing as a contradiction in terms.

And just this month, before the announcement of plans to send American troops to
Somalia, leaders of major Protestant, Catholic, Jewish and Muslim groups issued
a rare joint statement calling for firmer action by the United States in both
Bosnia and Somalia. The United States "is not policeman to the world," the
resolution acknowledged, "but the mass murder of innocents is unacceptable." The
United States, the statement continued, should act "in concert with other
nations where possible, alone where necessary."

Such views are hardly unanimous among clergy members or among their staff or the
active congregants who set the tone on international affairs.

Troubled Discussions

The American Friends Service Committee and the Friends Committee on National
Legislation, two independent Quaker organizations, have opposed the Somali
action. Kara Newell, executive secretary of the service committee, called its
position "consistent with the longstanding Quaker belief that military force
never solves problems." But she and other Quakers reported very troubled
discussions at local Sunday meetings of Friends.

The Fellowship of Reconciliation, a group that embraces a variety of religious
and nonreligious pacifists, also opposes the Somali action. "Some pacifists feel
that armed escort of food convoys is legitimate, just as most pacifists would
say that police actions within a society are legitimate," said Doug Hostetter,
the group's director. "What makes us so uncomfortable about this is that it is
not truly international," and there is "an element of skepticism about whether
the food delivery is the only goal."

New Questions for Pacifists

Pax Christi, a Roman Catholic anti-war organization whose 12,000 members include
about a fifth of the country's Catholic bishops, reluctantly approved of the
military intervention in Somalia. But it also called for troops to be placed
under the command of the United Nations Security Council, stressed the role of
the United States in arming Somalis during the cold war, and urged cooperation
with groups like clan elders rather than attempts to disarm the fighting
factions.

Anne McCarthy, a Benedictine nun who is the national coordinator for Pax
Christi, met last week with Balkan refugees in Zagreb, Croatia. She said Friday
that the conflicts in Somalia and in the former Yugoslavia were "bringing new
questions to the peace movement that we didn't deal with during the cold war."

She lamented that large contingents of pacifists were not already well trained
in nonviolence, nor were many prepared to enter such war zones as monitors or to
interpose themselves between warring parties. But in the absence of such a ready
force, she said, "the international community cannot let 500,000 people be wiped
out while peace groups sit around and discuss it."

'Certain Minimal Standards'

No less caught up in the current reassessment are the intellectuals -- political
analysts, theologians and ethicists -- who regularly study questions of morality
and war.

Jean Bethke Elshtain, a political scientist at Vanderbilt University who has
written on women and war, said she thought that the occasions in which
intervention was justified were "going to increase rather than decrease." She
reported growing agreement among this group on "certain minimal standards we
need to hold people to."

"You don't intervene because Iranians have put women in veils, even if that
offends you," she said. "They will have to work that out over time.

"But things like 'ethnic cleansing' violate a minimum standard set by a
rough-and-ready notion of fundamental human rights."

Motives Found Suspect

In her seminars and discussions, she said, she finds people evenly divided
between sympathy with this position and "stuck in what I would call a cynical
mode: if the United States is going to intervene it must be because of chicanery
-- we want an air base or something in Somalia -- an assumption deriving from
the Vietnam and cold-war years that all our public reasons really cover a
strategic or imperialist concern."

Stanley Hauerwas, a professor of Christian ethics at Duke University and one of
the most articulate theorists of Christian pacifism, noted that "for me it is
problematic that you have a standing army at all" and that he was "bothered by
the military's use of this event to reinforce the presupposition that we need a
big military."

But he continued: "Having said that, it is essential to distinguish between a
war and a police action. A police action means that there is a specified crime,
the police go in to stop it using no more force than needed, and they do not
serve as the judge and jury."

Using the military to intervene in Somalia could be justified as a police
action, he said; intervention in Bosnia would be an uncontrollable involvement
in a war.

'Shock the Moral Conscience'

Michael Walzer, a political philosopher at the Institute for Advanced Study at
Princeton University and the author of the widely used text "Just and Unjust
Wars" (Basic Books), said that existing moral principles could cover the events
in Somalia and Bosnia.

"I think of this in terms of the old international law doctrine of 'humanitarian
intervention,' " he said. "It was always held that in cases of massacre on the
other side of the border, you have a right, and maybe an obligation, to go in
and stop it if you can.

"I think that applies to starvation, whether politically induced or naturally
caused, or to 'ethnic cleansing,' mass deportations and other acts that, in the
old legal phrase, 'shock the moral conscience of mankind.' "

Referring to past interventions by the Tanzanians against Idi Amin in Uganda and
by the Vietnamese against Pol Pot in Cambodia, Dr. Walzer said a crucial
condition was that an intervention not be "a cover to create a satellite state,
a puppet government, or be used for conquest."

Although Father Hehir agreed that "humanitarian intervention" had always
provided grounds for actions to halt genocide or other mass violence, he said
that today "people are calling for more."

Still, he added: "The danger remains that this will just be the big guys telling
small nations what to do. Now that we've entered the process of change, how do
you establish limits?"

LOAD-DATE: December 21, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              391 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 22, 1992, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

BUSH AIDE ACCUSED OF LYING IN INQUIRY ON CLINTON SEARCH

BYLINE: By ROBERT PEAR,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1182 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 21


The Justice Department says that the White House political director, Janet G.
Mullins, "may have made false statements" to Federal investigators and may have
helped direct the search of Bill Clinton's passport files during the
Presidential election campaign.

The accusations against Ms. Mullins, who is among the inner circle of aides to
James A. Baker 3d, mark the first time Federal officials have suggested that the
White House may have helped orchestrate the effort to find damaging information
about the Democratic candidate at the height of the campaign.

An aide to Ms. Mullins said today that she was unavailable for comment.

Ms. Mullins worked for Mr. Baker when he was chairman of George Bush's
Presidential campaign in 1988 and when he was Secretary of State, from 1989 to
August of this year. She went with Mr. Baker when he was named chief of staff at
the White House, where they have been working together since Aug. 23.

Responding to Petition

The accusations were made in the Justice Department's request for appointment of
an independent prosecutor to investigate possible crimes. The text of the
request was disclosed today by the United States Court of Appeals for the
District of Columbia Circuit, in response to a petition by CBS, The New York
Times and The Washington Post.

The court appointed Joseph E. diGenova, a former United States Attorney in the
District of Columbia, who is a Republican, as independent prosecutor on Dec. 14,
a day before the law authorizing such appointments expired.

Attorney General William P. Barr summarized the evidence against Ms. Mullins in
his application to the court.

"Mullins was interviewed twice by agents" of the State Department inspector
general, Mr. Barr said. "During those interviews, she made statements denying
her knowledge of, or participation in, the search of Clinton's files. Other
evidence directly contradicts Mullins's statements."

Two Findings May Differ

Moreover, the Attorney General said, "There is also evidence that Mullins was
aware of the interest in Clinton's files before the search occurred, and that
Mullins helped encourage and direct the search."

This finding appears to differ from the conclusion of the inspector general,
Sherman M. Funk. In his report, issued Nov. 18, Mr. Funk wrote, "We found no
evidence that the White House -- or any other external source -- orchestrated an
'attack' on the Clinton files."

In the request for an independent prosecutor, Mr. Barr did not name Mr. Baker or
Margaret D. Tutwiler, the White House director of communications, as targets of
the investigation. The inspector general concluded that both of them were
apparently aware of the search at about the time it occurred, on Sept. 30 and
Oct. 1, at the height of the campaign.

Liaison to Campaign

But the court's charter authorizes the independent prosecutor to investigate and
prosecute "all matters and individuals whose acts may be related" to the search
of Mr. Clinton's passport files.

While at the White House, Ms. Mullins was political director and liaison to the
Bush campaign. At the State Department under Mr. Baker, she was Assistant
Secretary for Legislative Affairs. In Mr. Bush's 1988 campaign, which Mr. Baker
ran, she was in charge of advertising.

Ms. Mullins, 43, is also experienced on Capitol Hill, having served as an aide
to Senators Mitch McConnell of Kentucky and Bob Packwood of Oregon, both
Republicans. A Kentucky native, she majored in political science at the
University of Louisville and studied international economics at American
University in Washington.

What the Court Ordered

A special three-judge panel of the appeals court ordered Mr. diGenova to
investigate whether Ms. Mullins committed a crime by making false statements, by
obstructing the inspector general's investigation, by conspiring to violate
Federal law, by stealing confidential information from Mr. Clinton's file for
the benefit of the Bush campaign or by using her official authority to interfere
with the 1992 election.

The independent prosecutor may also turn up evidence that shows whether Mr.
Baker or President Bush authorized or approved the search of Mr. Clinton's
files. The inspector general's report quotes Mr. Baker as saying that he learned
of the search from Ms. Mullins on Sept. 30 or Oct. 1.

Mr. Baker insisted that no one at the State Department was "feeding a 'blow by
blow' account of the progress of the file search to the White House," Mr.  Funk
reported.

'From Credible Sources'

Attorney General Barr said on Nov. 16 the Justice Department became aware of
suspicions that Ms. Mullins had been involved in the search of Mr. Clinton's
passport files.

"Information was also received suggesting that Mullins may have made false
statements to agents of the State Department Office of the Inspector General who
were investigating the circumstances surrounding the search," Mr. Barr said. He
concluded that "the allegations against Mullins were specific and from credible
sources." The sources, he said, included Elizabeth M. Tamposi, an Assistant
Secretary of State who was dismissed from her job on Nov. 10.

In the campaign, President Bush raised many questions about Mr. Clinton's
character. He suggested that Mr. Clinton had been unpatriotic in demonstrating
against the Vietnam War when Mr. Clinton was a student in Britain in 1969 and
1970. The Bush campaign also raised questions about Mr. Clinton's travel to
Moscow in 1969.

Citizenship Issue Raised

Republicans encouraged journalists to file requests under the Freedom of
Information Act, to see if Mr. Clinton had ever tried to renounce his United
States citizenship to avoid military service in Vietnam.

In his report, Mr. Funk said, "Ms. Mullins related that she had no idea how the
rumors concerning Governor Clinton's citizenship and foreign travel got started,
and all she knew about the department's handling of the Clinton F.O.I.A.
requests was what she had read in the newspaper."

Mr. Funk said Ms. Mullins was in Ms. Tutwiler's office on the night of Sept. 30
when Ms. Tamposi tried to call Ms. Tutwiler to discuss the search.

Ms. Tutwiler "raised her eyebrows," refused to take the call and "told Ms.
Mullins that she did not think it would be appropriate for her to become
involved in the Clinton files matter," the inspector general said in his report.

This account suggests that Ms. Tutwiler knew enough about the search to avoid
Ms. Tamposi's phone call. But Mr. Funk never explained how Ms. Tutwiler might
have gained such knowledge, and Ms. Tutwiler has refused to discuss it.

The independent prosecutor was appointed under a section of the Ethics in
Government Act of 1978. The special panel of three Federal judges exists
exclusively for the purpose of appointing such prosecutors. The judges who named
Mr. diGenova are David B. Sentelle, John D. Butzner and Joseph T. Sneed. Judge
Sentelle was appointed to the Federal bench by President Ronald Reagan, Judge
Butzner by President John F. Kennedy and Judge Sneed by President Richard M.
Nixon.

NAME: Janet G. Mullins

LOAD-DATE: December 22, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: The Justice Department said that Janet G. Mullins, left, the
White House political director, "may have made false statements" to Federal
investigators about the search of Bill Clinton's passport files during the
campaign. She attended a Senate subcommittee hearing in 1990. (Associated Press)
(pg. B8)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              392 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 23, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

THE TRANSITION;
CHRISTOPHER AND ASPIN NAMED FOR STATE DEPT. AND PENTAGON

BYLINE: By GWEN IFILL,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 2541 words

DATELINE: LITTLE ROCK, Ark., Dec. 22


President-elect Bill Clinton selected Warren M. Christopher as Secretary of
State and Representative Les Aspin of Wisconsin as Secretary of Defense today,
making them the two anchors of a foreign policy team that draws heavily from the
last Democratic Administration.

In a news conference here today, Mr. Clinton also nominated R. James Woolsey
Jr., a 51-year-old former under secretary of the Navy and arms negotiator to be
Director of Central Intelligence, Anthony Lake, 53, a professor at Mount Holyoke
College, as his national security adviser and Madeleine Albright, 55, a
political scientist, to be the United States chief delegate to the United
Nations.

'No Longer a Simple Place'

In his comments today, as in the appointments themselves, Mr. Clinton shed
little new light on his foreign policy views.

"We must act to curb the spread of weapons of mass destruction, to counter
terrorism and to prevent the degradation of our global environment," he said in
a voice rendered hoarse from seasonal allergies. "The world is no longer a
simple place with clear choices. As we enter the 21st century, American foreign
policy will require steady hands, bold new thinking and the strength and courage
to advance our American values." [Excerpts from the news conference, page A14.]

Except for Mr. Aspin, 54, all of the major appointees Mr. Clinton announced
today served in President Carter's Administration. In reaching deep into the
Democratic Party's stockpile of foreign policy experts for his Cabinet, Mr.
Clinton, a former Governor who during his campaign sought to prove his
credentials in foreign affairs, seemed to signal a preference for experienced
professionals over the younger generation of foreign policy intellectuals.

Emphasis on Teamwork

Indeed, in contrast to these intellectuals, who have produced a growing body of
philosophical writings on the world after the cold war, those on Mr. Clinton's
national security team have disclosed little of their views on the major foreign
policy issues facing the United States.

Instead, Mr. Clinton seemed to choose the group more out of a sense that it
would work together as a team, avoiding clashes that have often characterized
relations between the Departments of State and Defense, or between the Secretary
of State and the national security adviser.

In selecting Mr. Aspin, who is chairman of the House Armed Services Committee,
Mr. Clinton turned once again to Congress to fill a critical position in his
Administration. Mr. Aspin said his primary challenges will be coping with
reducing the size of the military while maintaining readiness in a changing
global environment.

"The Clinton team faces a big job with a big payoff for America and I am proud
to be part of it," Mr. Aspin said.

Mr. Clinton has already selected Senator Lloyd Bentsen, the Texas Democrat who
is Finance Committee chairman, and Representative Leon E. Panetta, the
California Democrat who heads the House Budget Committee, to major economic
posts. Representative Mike Espy is still considered the leading contender to
become Secretary of Agriculture.

Mr. Christopher, 67, is a Los Angeles lawyer who was Deputy Secretary of State
under President Carter and has become a close Clinton adviser as well as his
transition director.

Priorities of Administration

He said his appointment today was a "dream come true" and said Mr. Clinton was
right when he said that domestic and foreign policy concerns must hold equal
sway now that the cold war has ended.

"In confronting these new challenges, we must remain cognizant that a great
power requires not only military might but a powerful economy at home, an
economy prepared for global competition," Mr. Christopher said. "In today's
world, that means that foreign policy and domestic policy must be addressed
simultaneously, not sequentially, or else neither will be successful for very
long."

Mr. Clinton also used his national security appointments to demonstrate his
commitment to what Vice President-elect Al Gore called the need "to build a
bipartisan base of support for diplomacy through strength and for an activist
U.S. role in the world."

Mr. Woolsey is a conservative Democrat and confidant of both President Bush's
national security adviser, Brent Scowcroft, and Senator Sam Nunn of Georgia. A
retired army captain, Mr. Woolsey worked as Mr. Scowcroft's chief aide on a
commission he headed in the early 1980's that recommended development of the
mobile, single-warhead intercontinental ballistic missile known as the
Midgetman.

Posts Still Unfilled

If he is to meet his self-imposed Christmas deadline for announcing all of his
major Cabinet selections, Mr. Clinton must still appoint an Attorney General, an
Interior Secretary, an Agriculture Secretary and a Transportation Secretary. He
said today that there was a "good chance" he could meet that deadline but that
some other Administration jobs, presumably on the White House staff, would not
be filled until after the New Year.

A new possibility for either Attorney General or White House counsel might be
Zoe Baird, the general counsel for Aetna Life Insurance in Connecticut, who met
with Mr. Clinton here earlier this week. Vernon Jordan, the transition chairman
and the only man who had been thought to be under consideration for Attorney
General at one time, has taken himself out of the running for any Administration
job, a senior transition official said.

Mr. Clinton must also select a United States Trade Representative.

Also within the foreign policy cluster, Mr. Clinton announced today that Dr.
Clifton R. Wharton Jr., the former president of Michigan State University and
chancellor of the State University of New York system, would be Deputy Secretary
of State under Mr. Christopher. Samuel Berger, another Carter Administration
veteran, was named deputy national security adviser.

National Security Aides

Mr. Clinton said today that Mr. Berger's national security deputies would be
Nancy Soderberg, who advised him during the campaign, and Leon Fuerth, who
advised Mr. Gore.

In addition, Adm. William J. Crowe, who served as chairman of the Joint Chiefs
of Staff under President Reagan, would serve as chairman of the President's
Foreign Intelligence Advisory Board, a largely ceremonial post. Admiral Crowe,
who came to Mr. Clinton's rescue during the campaign by endorsing him in the
face of charges about his decision to avoid the Vietnam War-era draft, was not
in Little Rock for the announcement today.

"I did not think I should appoint people who had not lived interesting, full,
productive lives in which they had garnered the experience and the judgment
necessary to fill these positions," Mr. Clinton said.

"But to say that this is a team of sort of retreads I think, which is the
inference there, would be totally unfair to a sterling and diverse array of
Americans who are here today. "

He said the mix of nominees he named today would assure "some continuity and
some change."

Once on Kissinger Staff

Mr. Lake, much like Mr. Clinton, is known as a mainstream Democrat who is open
to rethinking the positions he takes on issues if he feels the situation
warrants it. He supported United States involvement in Vietnam in the early
1960's, but resigned his position as special assistant to Henry A. Kissinger,
then national security adviser to President Richard M. Nixon, as a protest over
the decision to invade Cambodia.

"In 1972, he went to work for Ed Muskie, while Clinton went to work for George
McGovern," said Peter W. Rodman, a fellow at the Johns Hopkins Foreign Policy
Institute who worked for Mr. Lake under Mr. Kissinger. "That tells you
everything."

Mr. Lake is also a Massachusetts farmer who had to be talked into giving up his
cattle herd for life in Washington.

"I did it because the price of beef is down," Mr. Lake joked today.

A Veteran Educator

Clifton R. Wharton Jr., Mr. Christopher's deputy, has more background in
education as the former president of Michigan State University and chancellor of
SUNY than he does in foreign policy. But he pointed out that he grew up the son
of the first black career ambassador.

A former chairman of the Rockefeller Foundation and the chief executive officer
of a major teachers' pension fund, Mr. Wharton said he chose to concentrate on
the technical end of foreign economic development because he thought it would
become a central part of United States policy.

"I believe that we in the United States must forge a foreign policy which is
responsive to world needs for peace, for progress, as well as guaranteeing the
strength of the United States," he said.

All of Mr. Clinton's nominees today took care to draw attention to the
uncertainties they say remain in a world where ethnic and regional rivalries
hold uncertainty and potential for danger.

"In a number of ways it is a more complex and difficult agenda even than that
which existed before," Mr. Woolsey said.

But in one case, the knowledge that the agenda Mr. Clinton will inherit is very
different than the one Mr. Bush faced, was the cause for some poignance today.

Pride and Tears

Ms. Albright, a naturalized American citizen who was born in Czechoslovakia,
recalled that her father, Joseph Korbel, came to the United States as a
Czechoslovak diplomat and subsequently sought asylum.

"You can therefore understand how proud I will be to sit at the United Nations
behind the nameplate that says United States of America," she said. Standing
behind her, Mr. Clinton's eyes grew moist and he wiped them.

In appointing Ms. Albright, Mr. Clinton said he would make United Nations
Representative a cabinet-level position in much the same way that he has
promised to elevate the Environmental Protection Agency.

This would increase the number of women Mr. Clinton has appointed to his Cabinet
so far to four, including the nominees for Secretary of Health and Human
Services and Secretary of Energy. Mr. Clinton complained on Monday that women's
groups were not giving him enough credit for drawing from their ranks for his
administration. That criticism seemed a pre-emptive strike in anticipation of
today's announcements, in which six white men, one black man and one woman were
nominated to high positions in his Administration.

The Cabinet-level status is partly symbolic, but it would also give Ms.
Albright her own line of access to the President that would not have to be
funneled first through the State Department.

All of the appointees avoided answering questions about the foreign policy
issues they expected to occupy them during their first days in office. Mr.
Aspin, for instance, did an elaborate verbal sidestep when he was asked whether
he would pursue Mr. Clinton's pledge to lift the ban on homosexuals in the
military. But he said that current policy "has some serious flaws with it in
terms of equity and in terms of fairness."

Chart: CLINTON CHOOSES A FOREIGN POLICY TEAM

Madeleine K. Albright, Delegate to the United Nations

President of the Center for National Policy, a Democratic research
organization...55.. former professor of international affairs and director of
women in foreign service at the Georgetown University School of Foreign
Service...began her political career in 1976 as coordinator of Maine for
(Senator Edmund S. Muskie), went on advise Geraldine A. Ferraro and Walter F.
Mondale in 1984 and Michael S. Dukakis in 1988...worked under Zbigniew
Brzezinski at the National Security Council from 1978 to 1981...born in
Czechoslvakia but fled the country in 1948 with his father, a diplomat.

R. James Woolsey Jr., Director of Central Intelligence

Partner in the law firm of Shea & Gardner...51...Rhodes scholar...advisor to the
SALT delegation, delegate-at-large to the Soviet arms talks in Geneva from 1983
to 1986, and chief American negotiator at the talks on conventional armed forces
in Europe 1989 to 1991...member of the Council on Foreign Relations... director
of Martin Marietta, a leading military contractor... neo-conservative On Aug. 16
he joined a group of conservative foreign-policy specialists who endorsed Bill
Clinton for President . . . close to President Bush's national security advisor,
Brent Scowcroft...an expert on arms control, spy satellites and Pentagon
acquisitions.

William J. Crowe Jr., Chairman of the Foreign Intelligence Advisory Board

Former chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff under the Reagan and Bush
Administrations...retired after 47 years in the Navy, despite President Bush's
request that he stay on...supported Mr. Clinton's credibility on national
security issues when he endorsed him for President in the campaign . .
.67...commander of a Middle East task force in Bahrain in 1976 and 1977, which
gave him an enduring interest in Persian Gulf affairs.. from 1980 to 1983,
commander-in-chief of NATO forces in southern Europe... advocate of less rivalry
between the services...strong academic background with a Ph.D. in politics from
Princeton University

Clifton R. Wharton Jr., Deputy Secrtetary of State

Former President of Michigan State University, where he was the first black
president of a major college that was predominantly white... first black to
serve as chancellor of the State University of New York from 1978-
1987...chairman and chief executive of Teachers Insurance and Annuity
Association and College Retirement Equities Fund, one of the country's largest
private pension systems...66...son of Clifton R. Wharton Sr., the first black
American career diplomat to attain the ranks of Minister and Ambassador in the
Foreign Service...

W. Anthony Lake, National Security Asdvisor

 Professor of international relations at Mount Holyoke College...53...considered
a non-ideological pragmatist who believes the views of career State Department
experts have been ignored in recent years by Presidents who are push particular
ideologies ... worked as a foreign service officer in Vietnam in the early
1960's... Became a special assistant to Henry A. Kissinger in 1969... Resigned a
year later to protest the invasion of Cambodia....director of Internation
Voluntary Services, a private version of the Peace Corps, from 1974 to 1976...
In recent books and articles he has contended that the United States must learn
how to deal with radical regimes in the third world.

Samuel R. Berger, Deputy National Security Adviser

Lawyer with a specialty in international trade law and administrtive law...
46... senior foreign policy advisor to Mr. Clinton during the campaign and
headed foreign policy area of the transition... considered more dovish, but
helped forge links between liberal and moderate wings of the Democratic Party's
foreign policy establishment... from 19977 to 1981 he was deputy director of the
state Department's policy planning department under Anthony Lake in the Carter
Administration... Special assistant to New York Mayor John V. Lindsay of New
York, former legislative assistant to former Senator Harold Hughes of Iowa and
Representative Joseph Resnick of New York... met Mr. Clinton in 1972 when they
both worked on Senator George S. McGovern's Presidential campaign.

NAME: Warren M. Christopher; Les Aspin Jr.; R. James Woolsey; Anthony Lake;
Madeleine Albright

LOAD-DATE: December 23, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: ;Photo: President-elect Bill Clinton with Warren M. Christopher and Les
Aspin yesterday in Little Rock, Ark. (Reuters) (pg. A1); President-elect Bill
Clinton and Defense Secretary-designate Les Aspin listening yesterday in Little
Rock, Ark., as Warren M. Christopher discussed his appointment as Secretary of
State. (Stephen Crowley/The New York Times); Madeleine K. Albright; R. James
Woolsey Jr.,; William J. Crowe Jr.; Clifton R. Wharton Jr.; W. Anthony Lake;
Samuel R. Berger (pg. A13)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              393 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 23, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Man in the News;
Pathfinders of the Middle Ground: Leslie Aspin Jr.

BYLINE: By MICHAEL R. GORDON,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 918 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 22


In selecting Representative Les Aspin to be his Secretary of Defense,
President-elect Bill Clinton has picked a military specialist who favors further
cuts in Pentagon spending but who will also fortify the new Administration's
inclination to intervene in the fighting in Bosnia.

By all accounts, Mr. Aspin's strength is his fascination with military issues.
In recent years, as chairman of the House Armed Services Committee, he has
thought hard about the future of the Pentagon, the question of military
intervention, and about how to put the weapons industry to civilian use. He
knows the ins and outs of the budget process in the Pentagon and on Capitol
Hill.

And along with Sam Nunn, the Georgia Democrat who heads the Senate Armed
Services Committee, Mr. Aspin counseled Mr. Clinton on military issues during
the Presidential campaign.

Gap in Track Record

But Mr. Aspin has no track record in managing a large, multibillion-dollar
organization. And he will assume his post without the close working relationship
that Secretary Dick Cheney forged with Gen. Colin L. Powell, the Chairman of the
Joint Chiefs of Staff.  General Powell, who is wary of the limited use of
American troops abroad for political or diplomatic purposes, has differed
sharply with Mr. Aspin on the question of military intervention in the Balkans.

The Wisconsin Democrat began his career as a military specialist, working for
Defense Secretary Robert S. McNamara in the Johnson Administration in the Office
of Systems Analysis after earning a doctorate in economics at the Massachusetts
Institute of Technology.

Running against the war in Vietnam, Mr. Aspin was elected to the House in 1970
at the age of 32 and assumed a place on the House Armed Services Committee. He
quickly became a Pentagon gadfly, issuing one weekend news release after another
on wasteful Pentagon spending. The releases were astutely embargoed for the
Monday newspapers for maximum exposure on what is normally a slow news day.

"Peticare," or the care of military officers' pets at Government expense, was a
special concern in the early days, when his interests were less global. But over
two decades he has developed into a military expert who has not shrunk from
challenging the liberal orthodoxy.

Mr. Aspin's willingness to support the MX missile during the Reagan
Administration and his backing of the Persian Gulf war set him apart from many
Democrats and gave him solid centrist credentials. Mr. Cheney indicated as much
when he recently praised Mr. Aspin as a good candidate for the Pentagon post,
while saying that he thought the lawmaker's proposed budget cuts went too far.

Studied South Vietnam

Born Leslie Aspin Jr. on July 21, 1938, to a Yorkshireman who had immigrated to
Wisconsin, Mr. Aspin earned degrees from Yale, Oxford and the Massachusetts
Institute of Technology. He joined the Reserve Officers Training Corps at Yale
and performed his Army service as a Pentagon economist in the last two years of
the Johnson Administration, when he traveled to South Vietnam to study its
economy.

Mr. Aspin is divorced, and his main hobby appears to be his work. But he has a
warm and informal manner.  His dog, Junket, used to go to the office with him,
and Mr. Aspin put out a press release when the pet died.

Five years after his election to Congress, Mr. Aspin helped organize the ouster
of Representative F. Edward Hebert of Louisiana, a conservative who was chairman
of the Armed Services Committee, replacing him with Representative Melvin Price
of Illinois. Ten years later, Mr. Aspin helped dethrone Mr. Price, secured the
chairmanship for himself and urged the Democratic Party to stop being the
"Doctor No" on military issues and shed its dovish image.

As chairman, Mr. Aspin has used the panel to conduct wide-ranging inquiries on
military policy. It was under Mr. Aspin that the panel solicited William H.
Webster's assessment that the changes in the Soviet Union under President
Mikhail S. Gorbachev were "irreversible." The comments by Mr. Webster, the
Director of Central Intelligence, touched off a policy debate between Mr.
Webster and Mr. Cheney.

New Vision of Power

In several recent speeches Mr. Aspin has sought to articulate a new vision of
how military power should be used and what the structure of the military should
be.

In a September speech he criticized General Powell's "all-or-nothing" doctrine,
contending that the United States should be prepared to use force selectively to
buttress its diplomacy. Expanding on the point, Mr. Aspin said in an interview
before the speech that the United States should be prepared to use force to slow
the killing in Bosnia, a position adamantly opposed by General Powell. On the
military budget, Mr. Aspin has proposed cutting $48 billion more than the Bush
Administration projected over five years.

General Powell criticized Mr. Aspin's approach earlier this month, saying that
in a changing and uncertain world it would be unwise to cut the military forces
too deeply.

At the Pentagon, Mr. Aspin will have to contemplate the use of force, not as a
policy specialist but as a Defense Secretary whose recommendations could send
Americans into harm's way. He will have the enormous task of trying to manage
the Pentagon as its budget shrinks and of overseeing the lifting of a ban on
homosexuals in the military.

And, say some close associates, he will have to discipline his thinking further,
selecting among a flood of new ideas.

NAME: Leslie Aspin Jr.

LOAD-DATE: December 23, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              394 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 23, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

THE TRANSITION;
Clinton's New Foreign-Policy Thinkers: Like-Minded Ex-Carter Teammates

BYLINE: By THOMAS L. FRIEDMAN,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 14; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1335 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 22


President-elect Bill Clinton said today that the times demanded "bold new
thinking" in foreign policy. But in choosing his foreign policy team, he took
the most conventional of approaches -- picking experienced, loyal and generally
like-minded friends and advisers whom he can count on not to get him in trouble
abroad while he focuses on problems at home.

What is unsual about that experienced team of advisers is that for most of them,
the last time they had their hands on foreign policy was 12 years ago, when many
of them served together in the Carter Administration.

As a result, many have not written or spoken out publicly very much on the major
new foreign-policy issues confronting the United States since the end of the
cold war -- from the crisis in Bosnia to the future of relations with Japan.

Therefore it is difficult to predict exactly what sort of foreign policy they
will produce with Mr. Clinton, who himself is untested in that field. A Clinton
adviser said, "Fasten your seatbelts, ladies and gentlemen."

Cold-War-Era Labels

Secretary-of-State-designate Warren M. Christopher; Anthony Lake, his choice as
national security adviser; Samuel R. Berger, the designated deputy to Mr. Lake,
and Madeleine Albright, Mr. Clinton's pick as United Nations delegate, all come
out of the more liberal wing of the Carter Administration that was in opposition
to hard-liners in the Democratic Party who advocated a more confrontational
policy toward the Soviet Union.

Immediately after Mr. Clinton announced his choices today, conservative
Democrats were complaining in private that they had been frozen out of the top
jobs and that Mr. Clinton had turned to cold-war doves for post-cold-war policy.

But Mr. Clinton's circle contends that those old labels have lost their meaning.

For instance, Clinton aides said Mr. Lake, an ardent opponent of the Vietnam
War, was the strongest advocate that Mr. Clinton call for the use of force, if
necessary, in Bosnia.

Veteran Defense Experts

In many ways Mr. Clinton seemed to choose this group less for their specific
views or past ideology than for their instincts and ability to work as a team.

Mr. Clinton could have chosen the leading thinkers on the new world order within
his party on Capitol Hill -- like Senator Bill Bradley of New Jersey, who has
spent a great deal of time working on the Russian economic crisis, or Senator
Sam Nunn, who has specialized in the subject of arms proliferation from the
former Soviet Union.

He could have turned to Representative Stephen J. Solarz, an outspoken
foreign-policy specialist, or innovative but conservative academics like Will
Marshall of the Progressive Policy Institute, from which Mr. Clinton draws much
of his domestic agenda, and Michael Mandelbaum of the Johns Hopkins School of
Advanced International Studies.

Those Democrats have spent the last few years compiling an extensive written and
spoken record on the post-cold-war world.

No 'Team of Retreads'

Instead, Mr. Clinton reached back into the Carter Administration and to two
veteran defense experts, Representative Les Aspin of Wisconsin, chairman of the
House Armed Services Committee, and R. James Woolsey Jr., to be Defense
Secretary and Director of Central Intelligence , respectively.

Several factors seem to have motivated that set of choices. First, as Mr.
Clinton has repeatedly stated, he wanted a team that would be as collegial as
the Bush Administration's National Security team.

During the campaign Mr. Lake, Mr. Berger, Ms. Albright and Mr. Christopher
worked together closely, and managed to develop a Clinton foreign policy that
often seemed to have Mr. Bush on the defensive. Aides said that Mr. Clinton's
view was that people who proved they could work effectively in the heat of a
campaign could be trusted to do the same in government, no matter what
Administration they came from.

The Carter Administration "was the only Democratic Administration we had in 25
years," Mr. Clinton said, defending his choices. It was the only place a
Democrat could get hands-on experience, and therefore it was unfair to suggest
he had picked "a team of retreads," he said.

'The Vision Thing'

Mr. Clinton also was clearly looking for advisers of sober instincts, and proven
judgment -- able to handle foreign policy for him on a day-to-day basis, without
his having to worry about them pursuing their own agendas or leading him into
foreign adventures. In introducing Mr. Christopher, Mr. Clinton kept emphasizing
how much he prized his "judgment."

In economic policy, Mr. Clinton chose an elder Congressional statesman --
Senator Lloyd Bentsen -- as Treasury Secretary to carry out a program that Mr.
Clinton has already largely designed. In defense policy, Mr. Clinton did the
same, seeking out one of the top experts in military spending to reduce the
Pentagon budget and reshape the armed forces.

But in foreign policy, Mr. Clinton has chosen an elder foreign affairs statesman
-- Mr. Christopher -- to steer a cautious course through the foreign policy
problems already facing him and carry out a foreign-policy program that Mr.
Clinton knows he must design but has not yet fully thought through.

Clinton aides said the President-elect was not worried about Mr. Christopher's
lacking what Mr. Bush sardonically called "the vision thing." Mr. Clinton, they
said, believes he knows a lot more about foreign policy than was apparent in the
campaign and that he intends to be as much of an intellectual trend-setter, and
public voice, in that area as in domestic policy.He will draw on Mr. Lake and
Mr. Berger to help him conceptualize his views at the White House, and will lean
on Mr. Christopher for his strengths as an implementor, consensus builder, and
seasoned negotiator.

Comfort With Position Papers

Whether that balancing act will work is already a matter of great dispute.

"I think this is a time that does call out for some strategic vision and a
President who wants to concentrate on domestic policy would do well to appoint
someone strong as Secretary of State," said Peter Rodman, former counselor to
the national security adviser under Mr. Bush. "Mr. Christopher has many
qualities, but his skills as a strategic thinker are unproven. Rightly or
wrongly, some people identify him with the least impressive aspects of the
Carter Administration."

"In his favor," Mr. Rodman said, "he clearly is someone of great integrity and
meticulousness, as well as accomplished negotiator. The President will not have
to worry about a Secretary of State with his own agenda and ambitions, or who
will distance himself from the President in difficult moments. In this, Mr.
Clinton will have an advantage over his predecessor."

Finally, Mr. Clinton was quite comfortable with the foreign-policy position
papers that Mr. Berger, Mr. Lake, Ms. Albright and Mr. Christopher developed for
him during the campaign.

They called for a much more aggressive stand in support of Bosnia against
Serbia, more aid for President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia than the Bush
Administration was willing to give, the use of trade sanctions to force China to
moderate its human-rights abuses, a quicker United Nations rescue mission for
Somalia, a tougher bargaining position in trade negotiations with Japan, and a
more sympathetic posture toward Israel than was being evinced by the Bush
Administration.

But Clinton aides acknowledge that those policy positions were intended in large
part to distinguish Mr. Clinton from Mr. Bush during the campaign, and no one
really knows to what extent they will actually shape Mr. Clinton's foreign
policy when he takes office.

For instance, since the election Mr. Clinton has noticeably softened his oratory
about using trade sanctions against China, and his first statement about the
Arab-Israeli conflict -- in response to the Israeli expulsion of some 415
Palestinians -- was as evenhanded as anything ever uttered by the Bush
Administration.

LOAD-DATE: December 23, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Madeleine K. Albright, left, joining, from bottom, R. James
Woolsey Jr., Dr. Clifton Wharton, Vice President-elect Al Gore, Warren M.
Christopher, Representative Les Aspin, W. Anthony Lake and Samuel R. Berger as
President-elect Bill Clinton prepared to announce new appointments to his
administration yesterday in Little Rock, Ark. (Stephen Crowley/The New York
Times)

TYPE: News Analysis

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              395 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 23, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Judge Orders Mentally Ill Manhattan Man to Remain in Hospital

BYLINE: By CELIA W. DUGGER

SECTION: Section B; Page 1; Column 2; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 973 words


Larry Hogue, a mentally ill man whose aggressive behavior has terrified many
Upper West Side residents, was ordered held in a state hospital against his will
yesterday by a judge who ruled that Mr. Hogue was likely to abuse crack, refuse
treatment and become psychotic and dangerous if he was released to the streets
yet again.

The judge ruled after a state psychiatrist testified that Mr. Hogue, who is
being held in Creedmore Psychiatric Center in Queens, is "a disaster waiting to
happen."

The case of Mr. Hogue has become a widely publicized test of whether state laws
on involuntary commitment of the mentally ill are adequate to cope with the
growing numbers of mentally ill drug addicts on the streets of New York.

Repeatedly Taken Off the Street

Mr. Hogue, a Vietnam veteran, suffers from a manic depressive illness that is
worsened by drug abuse, said the state psychiatrist, Kusum Kathpalia. He has
been taken off the streets more than 30 times only to be released when the drugs
have cleared his body and his behavior improves. He then returns to the street
and the abuse of drugs that worsens his manic depressive illness.

At issue is the delicate balancing of Mr. Hogue's individual rights and his
demands for liberty against what the residents of West 96th Street -- his
favorite haunt -- consider their right to live in tranquillity, free from the
repeated harassments of a deranged man.

The law says a person can be hospitalized against his will only if he is an
imminent danger to himself or others.

State Supreme Court Judge Cosmo J. DiTucci made it clear how thin the line was
between committing a mentally ill person and releasing him when he said
yesterday that he would reconsider his decision if Mr. Hogue admitted that he
was a mentally ill drug abuser and promised to seek outpatient care. Mr. Hogue
is "almost eligible for release," the judge said.

Mr. Hogue can petition for his freedom in 60 days. The state can then ask the
court to commit him for six more months.

State mental health officials said the judge's decision supported their
contention that state law was broad enough to involuntarily commit a person like
Mr. Hogue, even though he was a peaceable person who passed his days playing
chess as long as he was hospitalized and locked away from street drugs.

State officials have maintained that psychiatrists and lawyers have often
interpreted the law too narrowly. For example, in Mr. Hogue's case, they say,
hospitals released him once the drugs cleared from his system and he became
calm. But the hospitals could have presented evidence that Mr. Hogue's sober
hospital stays were always followed by drug abuse and psychosis once he was
released.

"The judge's decision shows that when proper medical evidence is presented, Mr.
Hogue falls well within the framework that courts can use to retain him
involuntarily," said Peter A. Durfee, a deputy counsel for the state Office of
Mental Health.

Robert Spoor, a spokesman for the state Office of Mental Health, said, "More and
more, we're recognizing the broader interpretation of the law."

But New York City's Mental Health Commissioner, Luis R. Marcos, said the law was
still so murky that doctors were often reluctant to recommend the involuntary
commitment of patients whose mental illness was set off by drug abuse. He
believes the law should be modified.

Mr. Hogue's lawyer, Catherine Kerrigan, with Mental Hygiene Legal Services,
declined to comment on the case.

During the hearing at Creedmore hospital in Queens, Mr. Hogue angrily denounced
the psychiatrists, prosecutors and residents of West 96th Street for conspiring
against him.

He denied the testimony of one of the residents, Lisa Lehr, that he had
masturbated in front of children, slept on the yellow line in the middle of 96th
Street, set fires and threatened to kill her as he clutched a machete in one
hand and an ice pick in the other.

'A Bunch of Lies'

"Ms. Lehr is part of the 96th Street Ku Klux Klan," Mr. Hogue said. "That's a
bunch of lies by rich 96th Street people out to railroad me. I fought in Vietnam
for this country. For those people to make me out to be a bad person, that's
immoral."

Mr. Hogue's son, Shawn Sells, testified that he was willing to have his father
live with him and his three young children in their apartment in Bridgeport,
Conn. Mr. Sells said he was not working and would be home to make sure his
father attended treatment programs.

Ernest Crane, Mr. Hogue's mental health caseworker, said he thought Mr. Hogue
should be released to his son and given outpatient care.

Mr. Hogue testified that he would live with his son, or go to Newark if
released. Over the last 23 years, Mr. Hogue said, he has been in and out of
hospitals in New York, New Jersey and Rhode Island.

He admitted he has used cocaine and marijuana, though he denied that he was
homeless or "a crackhead." He said that he has $30,000 in the bank and receives
$3,000 a month in disability benefits. He is willing to go to a day treatment
program at a Veterans Administration Hospital, he said.

He attributed his disability to exposure to Agent Orange and injuries received
in Vietnam. He tends to walk the streets at night -- when Ms. Lehr frequently
observed him outside her window -- because of associations with night patrols in
Vietnam, he said.

Dr. Kathpalia said she was sure that Mr. Hogue would use drugs and begin acting
irrationally again if he were released. She said he had already been
hospitalized and released more than 30 times and told her that he had never
sought outpatient care on the outside.

"That is the biggest hurdle, his accepting the need for treatment," the doctor
said.

She said Mr. Hogue was suffering from organic affective syndrome and bipolar
affective disorder, commonly known as manic depression.


LOAD-DATE: December 23, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Larry Hogue, a mentally ill Vietnam veteran, was ordered held in
a state hospital against his will. (Associated Press)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              396 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 23, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

William E. Hegarty, 66, a Lawyer For Times on the Pentagon Papers

BYLINE: By BRUCE LAMBERT

SECTION: Section D; Page 19; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 454 words


William E. Hegarty, a lawyer who played a part in winning the landmark court
case permitting publication of the Pentagon Papers, died yesterday at Greenwich
Hospital in Greenwich, Conn. He was 66.

He had pneumonia and died of heart failure, his family said.

Mr. Hegarty, who lived in Greenwich, had a 37-year career at the law firm of
Cahill Gordon & Reindel in Manhattan. He retired in 1987 as a senior partner of
the firm.

He was best known for his cross-examination of Government officials in the trial
of the Nixon Administration's suit in 1971 to prevent The New York Times from
publishing the Pentagon Papers, a Defense Department study of how the United
States became involved in combat operations in Vietnam.

Floyd Abrams, who helped lead the Times's defense, said yesterday: "His
cross-examination of military and Defense and State Department witnesses exposed
the Government's claim as being based on avoiding embarrassment rather then on
genuine harm to national security. Without any prior information about what the
Government would claim, and in the enormous glare of national publicity, he
decimated the witnesses. He was the consummate litigator."

Classic Cross-Examination

The cross-examination, which Mr. Hegarty conducted at the age of 45, is often
cited as a classic by law professors.

The Times won the initial ruling. Prof. Alexander M. Bickel of Yale defended The
Times in the Government's appeal to the United States Supreme Court. The Court,
a 6-to-3 vote on June 30, 1971, upheld the Times's right to publish the
documents under the protection of the First Amendment, creating a precedent in
press freedom on the issue of prior restraint.

Later in his career Mr. Hegarty was co-executor of the Florence Gould estate,
which included 200 paintings by Impressionist painters like Van Gogh, Cezanne,
Degas and Monet. He was also a director of the Florence Gould Foundation,
fostering French-American relations, for which France honored him.

In retirement he did pro bono work as counsel to the Municipal Art Society. He
also helped the Greenwich environmental agency and was a director of the Mianus
Gorge Preserve, the Mianus River Watershed Council, the Greenwich Historical
Society and the New York Legal Aid Society.

He was born in Manhattan and grew up in Morristown, N.J., where his father,
William, was a judge. In World War II he served in the Navy. He graduated from
Princeton and Yale Law School.

Surviving are his wife of 42 years, the former Barbara M. Fischer; three
daughters, Katharine H. Bouman of Binghamton, N.Y., Mary H. Colombo of Old
Greenwich and Amanda Hegarty of Cambridge, Mass.; a son, William E. Hegarty Jr.
of Old Greenwich, and six grandchildren.

NAME: William E. Hegarty

LOAD-DATE: December 23, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Biography; Obituary (Obit)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              397 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 23, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Seoul-Hanoi Relations

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Page 3; Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 55 words

DATELINE: HANOI, Vietnam, Dec. 22


Communist Vietnam and staunchly capitalist South Korea, who fought each other in
the Vietnam War, established diplomatic ties today. Vietnam, emerging from years
of war and diplomatic isolation, has turned increasingly toward its Asian
neighbors and the West for trade and investment after the collapse of the Soviet
Union.

LOAD-DATE: December 23, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              398 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 24, 1992, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1044 words



International A3-8

AMERICAN KILLED IN SOMALIA

A civilian employee of the United States Army was killed in Somalia when the
vehicle in which he was traveling hit a mine. The death was the first in the
American-led force that arrived two weeks ago.  A1

A SURGE OF UNREST FOR ISRAEL

Israel's deportation of 415 Palestinians to Lebanon last week has led to a surge
of unrest in the occupied territories and, with it, a sharp rise in the number
of Palestinians shot to death by soldiers.  A3

RATIONING FOR DEPORTEES

Complaining of thirst, cold and hunger, the 415 Palestinians expelled by Israel
have begun to ration food and drinking water, their spokesman said.  A3

EGYPTIAN LEADER GREETS TOURISTS

Concerned by the blow dealt to Egypt's tourist industry by the killing of a
Briton by militant Muslims a few weeks ago, President Hosni Mubarak visited the
ancient ruins in Luxor and spent much of the day shaking hands with French,
South African and British visitors.  A6

CHINA SHUTS A FRENCH CONSULATE

China ordered France to close its consulate in the southern city of Guangzhou,
as punishment for the French sale of 60 fighter planes to Taiwan.  A6

YELTSIN FORMS A NEW CABINET

President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia approved a new Cabinet put together by
Prime Minister Viktor S. Chernomyrdin that with a few exceptions is a virtual
replica of the previous, much-maligned Government headed by Yegor T. Gaidar, the
young reform-minded economist.  A7

QUESTIONS AMONG THE CZECHS

In Czechoslovakia, professors are getting their students to question everything,
including the democratic revolution of 1989. But some students say their
teachers are the same old people, just working under new banners.  A8

U.N. PONDERS BOSNIA MOVES

With Serbia's militant nationalist President, Slobodan Milosevic, now apparently
assured of victory in last Sunday's elections, the United Nations Security
Council has become bogged down over what to do next about the ethnic civil war
he is accused of starting up in neighboring Bosnia and Herzegovina.  A8

Asuncion Journal: Military corruption is on trial in Paraguay.  A4

The most wanted Filipino rebel soldier agreed to a cease-fire.  A6

National A10-13

CLINTON FILLS CABINET

Aides to Bill Clinton said he had made his final five selections for his
Cabinet. His choice of a Connecticut lawyer for Attorney General would make her
the first woman to hold the position.  A1

A REVOLUTION ON THE HILL

The rise of Representative Ron Dellums, who came to Congress as a vigorous
opponent of the Vietnam War, to head the House Armed Services Committee is
easily the most intriguing Congressional shift set in motion by Bill Clinton's
choices for his Cabinet.  A12

QUESTIONS FOR ASPIN

Like virtually every lawmaker, Representative Les Aspin has tried to lure as
many Federal dollars to his district as possible, but now that he has been
picked to be Defense Secretary, some of his methods, like the creation of a
not-for-profit institute in Wisconsin, are certain to become a focus of debate.
A12

RETIREE BENEFITS BEING CUT

Large companies are cutting health benefits to thousands of retired employees to
satisfy a new accounting rule that will force employers to subtract from profits
the future costs the benefits.  A1

WELFARE CUT BARRED

The California Governor's plan to cut soaring welfare costs suffered a blow when
a Federal judge blocked the state from paying lower welfare benefits to poor
women and children who move to California from other states.  A10

UNIVERSITY MERGER ORDERED

Responding to the Supreme Court's action in a similar case in Mississippi, a
Federal judge in Louisiana again ordered the state to merge its university
systems to eliminate segregation.  A10

APOCALPYSE NOT NOW

In a dark day for doomwatchers, two scientists reported findings that life on
Earth may be sustainable for at least a billion years.  A10

A SIMMERING PROBLEM

The Hanford Nuclear Reservation is a timebomb of radioactive and toxic wastes,
the Government acknowledged in 1984, but cleanup remains years and billions of
dollars away. The situation confounds experts and is the most pressing
environmental problem the Clinton Administration will inherit.  A11

AWARD FOR GEL IMPLANTS

A Texas jury recommended a $25 million award to a woman who said she developed
an autoimmune disease as a result of silicon-gel breast implants that ruptured.
A13

A gas leak caused a traffic pileup that injured 15.  A13

New de-icing rules for airliners get a lukewarm grade.  A13

Metro Digest B1

TOUGH STEPS ORDERED

New York City must cut the number of homeless men housed in two overcrowded and
dangerous armories by two-thirds and improve the fire safety in the buildings
where the men sleep cot to cot.  A1

A 22,000-ACRE GIFT

The public will gain access to 22,000 acres of forest and white-water river in
the northwest Adirondacks under a plan that includes the largest gift of land in
the 100-year history of the Adirondack Park.  A1

BATTERED BY DISCONTENT

The Brooklyn District Attorney who built a reputation as the crusading special
prosecutor in the Howard Beach assault case finds his stardom waning after a
series of setbacks in high-profile bias cases.  A1

AGE DISCRIMINATION CHARGED

Kidder, Peabody was accused of unlawfully dismissing 17 senior executives.
Government lawyers said it was the first major age-discrimination case brought
against a brokerage and securities firm.  A1

Business Digest D1

Neediest Cases B5

Obituaries B6-7

Arts/Entertainment C9-18

Film: Deneuve in "Indochine." C9

Home Section C1-7

These days, you make up holidays as you go along.  C1
At home with Robin Williams.  C1

Sports B8-13

Hockey: Rangers lose to Devils in overtime.  B9

Soccer: Youth soccer's up.  B9

Editorials/Op-Ed A16-17

Editorials
Standing firm for open skies.
Why rush to pardon Weinberger?
Christmas coal.
Diane Camper: Mother Hale.

Letters

William Safire: Switching the goal posts.
Leslie H. Gelb: Who did good.
Henry Petroski: Memories of a low-tech Christmas.

LOAD-DATE: December 24, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              399 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 24, 1992, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

THE TRANSITION;
War Foe Set to Oversee Military Panel

BYLINE: By ADAM CLYMER,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 12; Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 920 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 23


Ronald V. Dellums, almost certain to be the new chairman of the House Armed
Services Committee, came to Congress in 1971 at age 35 opposing the Vietnam War.
When the committee brushed off his demand for an investigation of war crimes, he
conducted his own informal hearings.

Two years later, Mr. Dellums became a member of the committee. And soon the
57-year-old California Democrat from Oakland will be in a position to hold any
hearings he wants.

Over 21 years, Mr. Dellums's criticisms have softened a little, his voting
record has remained consistently liberal, and he has built a reputation for
fairness and hard work that helped him and an Ohio Republican, John R. Kasich,
effectively challenge the B-2 stealth bomber program.

Still, his ascension to the chairmanship -- virtually assured when
Representative Les Aspin of Wisconsin was chosen by President-elect Bill Clinton
as Defense Secretary -- is easily the most intriguing of the Congressional
shifts set into motion by Mr. Clinton's Cabinet choices.

Trickle-Down Power

In the House, the effect of Leon E. Panetta's departure from the chairmanship of
the Budget Committee to become director of the office of Management and Budget
is hard to predict, since it is not clear whom House Democrats will elect to
succeed Mr. Panetta, another California Democrat, as chairman.

In the Senate, Lloyd Bentsen's selection as Treasury Secretary will put Daniel
Patrick Moynihan of New York in charge of the Finance Committee. In turn, Mr.
Moynihan will give up the chairmanship of the Environment and Public Works
Committee to Max Baucus of Montana.

While each change will bring a distinct difference in style, neither new
chairman differs as profoundly or substantively from his predecessor as Mr.
Dellums does from Mr. Aspin, whom he will now have before him as a witness.

Dellums Rattles Pentagon

While Mr. Aspin has worked to shrink the Pentagon's budget, Mr. Dellums prefers
far deeper cuts. As he told the House last June when pushing unsuccessfully for
a $27.4 billion cut in the Pentagon budget, a full 10 percent reduction, "The
cold war is over, and our military budget ought to reflect that."

But even more than the potential disagreements between the two men, the thought
of Mr. Dellums -- who reveled in Spiro T. Agnew's view of him as a radical
summoning generals and admirals before him -- rattles some conservatives and
some in the military.

Indeed, a baseless rumor flashed through the Pentagon on Tuesday that House
leaders had agreed to bypass Mr. Dellums and the next senior Democrat on the
Committee, Patricia Schroeder of Colorado, in favor of a dedicated supporter of
the military.

'A Straight Shooter'

Republicans on the committee, in fact, say they expect him to be a fair
chairman, and Defense Secretary Dick Cheney said on the NBC News Program "Meet
the Press" earlier this month that while he and Mr. Dellums "violently"
disagreed on most issues, Mr. Dellums was "a good member of Congress, a straight
shooter" who kept his word.

Adm. William J. Crowe Jr., a former Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, said
recently of Mr. Dellums: "He comes in, puts on his show, then sits down and gets
to work."

Mr. Dellums is giving no interviews until his succession is assured, but on
Tuesday he issued a statement emphasizing his view of the chairman's role.

"The chair must be a facilitator of a full discussion of the issues before the
committee," he said, "a guarantor of fairness and the integrity of the committee
process."

Gingrich to the Defense

Only after that procedural manifesto did he get around to observing that the
current Pentagon budget is still based on cold-war assumptions.

Despite his outspoken manner, Mr. Dellums's reputation in Congress differs from
impressions held by those outside. For example, while he was opposing the war
against Iraq in early 1991, Representative Newt Gingrich of Georgia, the
Republican whip who was hawkish on the conflict, defended him against assertions
in The Wall Street Journal that Mr. Dellums could not keep classified
information secret.

Representative Bob Davis of Michigan, who served as the senior Republican on the
research and development subcommittee that Mr. Dellums heads, said today that he
"makes his point, and if he lost, he lost and went on."

And Representative Jon Kyl, Republican of Arizona, said he enjoyed working with
Mr. Dellums, whom he described as "almost two different people," because he can
"sublimate his own liberal ideology to the needs of the committee."

The major new tool Mr. Dellums will have as he seeks to leave his own imprint on
the committee is control of its large staff. Much of Mr. Aspin's influence as
chairman was achieved through skillful use of its professional staff to poke
into a wide range of issues that intrigued him. Mr. Dellums's colleagues said
today they had little sense of how he would use committee staff.

Still, for all the legislative polish Mr. Dellums has acquired over the years,
it will be different for this committee to have a chairman who once accepted the
label of radical.

"If it's radical to want an end to war and an end to violence, so that we can
devote ourselves to the challenges of peace," Mr. Dellums said in 1970 "then I
am pleased to call myself a radical."

Indeed, it is even more unusual for the committee to have a chairman who led an
anti-war demonstration on the Capitol steps, as he did in 1971, protesting as
Capitol police arrested his audience.

LOAD-DATE: December 24, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: As a freshman Congressman in 1971, Ronald V. Dellums appeared
with Representative Bella Abzug of New York to announce his own investigation of
the Vietnam War after the House Armed Services Committee refused his request. He
is now likely to become chairman of the powerful panel. (Associated Press)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              400 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 24, 1992, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Review/Film;
Deneuve As Symbol Of Colonial Epoch

BYLINE: By VINCENT CANBY

SECTION: Section C; Page 9; Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1086 words


Catherine Deneuve reigns in "Indochine." That is, she presides over its
second-rate fiction with the manner of an empress who knows her powers are
constitutionally limited but who continues to take her duties seriously.  She
can't change the course of the film, but her lofty presence keeps it from flying
apart. She plays Eliane who, when first met in 1930, divides her time between a
mansion near Saigon and a successful rubber plantation, which she oversees with
(sometimes for) her widowed father.

Miss Deneuve has her work cut out for her, since the new French film, made on
location at great expense and with attention to historical accuracy, intends to
be nothing less than epic. "Indochine" is the story of the last 25 years of
French rule in Indochina as reflected by the events in Eliane's life. The
subject is potentially rich, but the screenplay, whomped up by three
screenwriters in collaboration with Regis Wargnier, the director, has neither
the conviction of fact, the sense of revelation found in good fiction, nor the
fun of trashy literature.

In 1930 Eliane enjoys all the perks that accrue to the dominant class in a
smoothly functioning colonial society. Though French by birth, she has never
seen France. She was born and reared in Indochina, which she considers as much
her home as it is for the anonymous laborers who work on her plantation. Eliane
is not as bigoted as some French. She is bringing up Camille (Linh Dan Pham) as
her own daughter. The pretty teen-ager, an Annamese princess, was adopted by
Eliane after her parents -- Eliane's best friends -- were killed in an accident.

Since Eliane is France to a large extent, it's not surprising that her life
falls apart more or less in concert with French colonial rule, and that her
heartbreak and (dare I say?) her hopes parallel those of France itself.  She's
sorely tried, both as an adoring mother and as the conscience of a great
European nation.

Camille has been betrothed since childhood to Tanh (Eric Nguyen), a well-born
Vietnamese fellow whom she likes but does not love. She shatters her adoptive
mother by falling madly in love with Jean-Baptiste (Vincent Perez), a handsome,
mostly uncharacterized French naval officer, who had once been Eliane's lover.

Eliane puts her foot down, but Camille runs off to join Jean-Baptiste at the
remote outpost to which Eliane has arranged that he be sent. It's the beginning
of the end for both the motherland and Eliane. I'm not giving away one-tenth of
what happens in the movie by reporting that the feckless Tanh turns out to be a
sort of Vietnamese Scarlet Pimpernel, a dedicated, recklessly brave Vietnamese
freedom fighter and Communist.

Camille, too, is politicized, becoming known as "the red princess" for her
underground activities. When last heard from in 1954, she's at the table in
Geneva, a member of the Indochinese committee negotiating independence from
France.

It's not easy for any movie, even one running for 2 hours and 35 minutes, to
cover so much time and history and still maintain its coherence as drama. Though
Eliane is the film's focal point, she is not Scarlett O'Hara.  Eliane has her
weaknesses: she falls in love with the wrong man, and she occasionally seeks
solace in a pipe of opium. Yet she's not so much a character as a beautiful,
somewhat frosty icon, like the statue of Marianne, the official symbol of the
French Republic for which Miss Deneuve's likeness was used in 1985.

Without seeming to age a day from 1930 to 1954, Miss Deneuve moves through
"Indochine" more as an observer than as a participant. Her Eliane/Marianne is
not an embodiment of the ideals of the French Revolution, but a representation
of the kind of chic associated with Coco Chanel and Yves Saint Laurent.

She looks ravishing from start to finish. She's supremely unruffled when a man
with a nosebleed attempts to make love to her. Not a hair is out of place as she
beats a worker for attempting to run away from the plantation. She's not a
particular woman but an abstraction as she tells the victim, "Do you think I
like beating my children?"

In spite of all that, Miss Deneuve lends the movie a lot of her own instinctive
intelligence. Behind the movie-star facade, a real actress is at work. It's not
her regal beauty but the force of her personality that carries the viewer
through a choppy screenplay not always easy to follow. It may be that the film
has been re-edited for its American release, but whatever the reason, characters
seem to disappear before their time, or to appear on screen without having been
properly introduced. In the etiquette of cinema, this is called rude editing.
There also are times when the soundtrack music hails an emotional crescendo that
only it recognizes.

Aside from Miss Deneuve's performance, the only one worth noting is that of Jean
Yanne, whose acting style has become increasingly self-important and busy since
the early 1970's when he appeared in two fine Claude Chabrol films, "This Man
Must Die" and "Le Boucher." Here he plays the head of the French security police
in Saigon, a jaded functionary who half-heartedly courts Eliane while wearily
going about his brutal job.

"Indochine" offers the audience much more history and many more views of the
Vietnamese landscape than can be seen in "The Lover," Jean-Jacques Annaud's
fine, laconic screen adaptation of the Marguerite Duras novel, also set in
Vietnam in the 1930's. Yet "The Lover" evokes subtle truths about colonial
relationships that are effectively buried in the epic fanciness of "Indochine."

"Indochine," which has been rated PG-13 (under 13 strongly cautioned), has
scenes of violence.




INDOCHINE

Directed by Regis Wargnier; screenplay (in French with English subtitles) by
Eric Orsenna, Louis Gardel, Catherine Cohen and Mr. Wargnier; director of
photography, Francois Catonne; music by Patrick Doyle; produced by Eric Heumann
and Jean Labadie; released by Sony Pictures Classics. At the Lincoln Plaza
Cinemas, Broadway and 63d Street. Running time: 155 minutes. This film is rated
PG-13.

Eliane . . . Catherine Deneuve
Jean-Baptiste . . . Vincent Perez
Camille . . . Linh Dan Pham
Guy . . . Jean Yanne
Yvette . . . Dominique Blanc
WITH: Carlo Brandt, Mai Chau, Alain Fromager, Chu Hung, Jean-Baptiste Huynh,
Gerard Lartigau, Hubert Saint-Macary, Henri Marteau, Thibault de Montalembert,
Andrzej Seweryn, Eric Nguyen, Nhu Quynh, Tien Tho, Thi Hoe Tranh Huu Trieu,
Nguyen Lan Trung and Trinh Van Thinh.

LOAD-DATE: December 24, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Linh Dan Pham and Catherine Deneuve in "Indochine," a love story
set amid the fall of French rule in Asia. (Sony Pictures Entertainment Inc.)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              401 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 24, 1992, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

AT HOME WITH/Robin Williams;
Good for a Laugh, Not a Bad Listener

BYLINE: By BERNARD WEINRAUB

SECTION: Section C; Page 1; Column 1; Home Desk

LENGTH: 1533 words

DATELINE: HOLLYWOOD


IT is 7 P.M., and Robin Williams has just returned home from taping "The Arsenio
Hall Show." His two younger children are scampering and laughing in the hallway,
and Mr. Williams, wearing a black shirt and baggy pleated pants, steps into the
living room and sits wearily on a footstool.

His wife, Marsha, brings him a Coke. He tries to stifle a yawn. He has jet lag
from a London flight earlier in the day, and he has barely had time to unpack.

"The land is so nice," he says. "Pool's in the back. Tennis court's in front.
There's even a tree house. Which is for rent. A sublet." He smiles.

The living room in the elegant and sedate two-story rented home in the Brentwood
section of Los Angeles is open and spare. There are several pieces of Mexican
art and modern art, a ficus plant and a low varnished rattan table. Zelda, Mr.
Williams's 3-year-old daughter, wanders in and he embraces her.

Mr. Williams, perhaps the most inventive comedian of his generation, is in the
midst of a blizzard of promotion for his new film, "Toys," a fantasy directed by
Barry Levinson, which opened on Dec. 18. (He has worked with Mr. Levinson
before; the director's 1987 film, "Good Morning, Vietnam," was a breakthrough in
Mr. Williams's movie career.)

" 'Toys' is a very whimsical, strange feast, almost a nonmusical musical," says
Mr. Williams, who plays a childlike heir to a toy factory. "I hope people enjoy
the ride."

Many critics haven't. For example, Vincent Canby wrote in The New York Times
that the film "dazzles the eye even as the mind goes numb attending to the
narrative, which is about the apocalyptic battle for control of Zevo Toys."

But Mr. Williams makes it plain that talking about a movie -- any movie -- or
even himself, is odd and less than relevant in today's bizarre world.

Of the "Arsenio Hall" taping, he says quietly: "Going on stage is part catharsis
for me, but it's almost trying to work out my own fears. Tonight I was
jet-lagged, but I just wanted to explode with all this information.

"You want to talk about the marines in Somalia hitting the beach and meeting the
press," he says, dropping his voice into a perfect John Wayne imitation: "All
right Colonel, I want you to take out that camera position. Get away son! He's
got a flashbulb!"

He continues. "And, like, the royal family. I was in England and Windsor Castle
was burning down and, like, it's not insured." He puts on an upper-class English
accent. "Oh, damn, I'm sorry. Let the people pay 8 billion crowns. And there's
no sprinkler system. Oh rot!"

Marsha Williams watches for a moment, smiles and says she's ordering takeout
chicken. Mr. Williams settles back.

Robin Williams, at home, seems like a perfectly friendly 41-year-old actor who
is, not surprisingly, highly articulate, somewhat vulnerable and quite serious.
If most movie stars (or, for that matter, politicians) are entranced by
themselves, Mr. Williams seems an aberration. He engages in conversation,
watches and listens intensely and seems intrigued by anyone who crosses his
path.

Aside from starring in "Toys," he is also the voice of the genie in the Disney
animated hit "Aladdin." He nearly steals the picture with his imitations of,
among many others, Jack Nicholson, Carol Channing, Ethel Merman, William F.
Buckley Jr., Robert De Niro ("Are you talkin' to me?"), Pinocchio and Senor
Wences.

Mr. Williams has upset Disney Studios by not promoting the film, instead
focusing his efforts entirely on the Levinson movie. " 'Aladdin' doesn't need my
promotion," he says. "I did the film because I wanted to do something for my
children. Besides, singing the songs was a blast. 'Toys' is an unusual film. It
needs people to champion it. I'm basically selling it door to door."

Mr. Williams lives mostly in San Francisco with his wife and their two children,
Zelda and Cody, who is 1. His oldest child, Zach, 9, lives in San Francisco with
Mr. Williams's first wife, Valerie Velardi. The comedian, who also has a ranch
in the Napa Valley, sees Zach frequently.

Mr. Williams is renting the Los Angeles house for a year. "I make raids to L.A.,
sort of like 'Mosby's Raiders,' " he says. "I love working here, I like the
business, but living here is very strange. Surreal. Disneyland staged by Dante.

"You imagine purgatory is something like this, except not such good parking.
It's always: 'How am I doing? Where am I on the food chain? Let's make a deal.'
I just feel safer in San Francisco. Here, it's like being a hemophiliac in a
razor factory."

Although Mr. Williams is a little wary of interviews -- and plainly enjoys
hiding behind his humor -- he also has bursts of unusual candor. He discusses,
quite easily, his stardom in the early 1980's in the television series "Mork &
Mindy," when alcohol and drugs threatened to obliterate his career, as well as
his continuing rage at the way magazines covered his divorce and subsequent
marriage to Marsha, who had been Zach's nanny.

A turning point, he says, was the death in 1982 of his friend John Belushi of a
drug overdose. Mr. Williams had been with Mr. Belushi hours before, and his
death precipitated Mr. Williams's decision to quit drugs.

If the Belushi death evokes sorrow for Mr. Williams, the publicity about events
leading to his second marriage stirs fury. He cites an article in People several
years ago that depicted Marsha as the nanny who broke up his first marriage.

"It was an ambush by them," he says tensely. "It's very destructive. It still
is. There are still nanny jokes. You want to go out and yell.

"There was an article about men who leave their wives when they become famous,"
he says. "And I wanted to write to this man and say, 'Listen, you may have your
ridiculous theories, but the truth is my wife left me.'

"My marriage had been in a shambles for some time. Marsha just basically started
to talk to me and said: 'Listen jerk, what are you having these ridiculous
affairs for? What are you yelling and screaming about? Wake up!' Slowly I began
realizing I'm a decent person, and everything wonderful that has happened to my
life is because of her. It's hideous that she takes the rap as a home wrecker,
which is a lie. It's the exact opposite. She has taken me from zero to the sky."

Mr. Williams's personal difficulties in the early 1980's seemed to mirror his
career. His first movie, "Popeye," in 1980, was a dud. His next, in 1982, the
absurdist "World According to Garp," received some critical applause. But "The
Survivors" (1983) and "Club Paradise" (1986) failed.

What jump-started his movie career was "Good Morning, Vietnam," followed by
"Dead Poets Society," which established him as a serious actor. His more recent
parts -- in "Awakenings," "The Fisher King," and "Hook" -- have turned him into
one of the higher priced stars, earning around $8 million a picture.

Mr. Williams is now completing a film, "Being Human," directed by Bill Forsyth
and partly set in London, in which he plays five characters over five historical
periods. Then he will prepare for what sounds like the archetypal Williams role
in "Mrs. Doubtfire," a comedy. In it, a man loses custody of his children to his
former wife, then dresses as a woman and becomes their nanny.

Down the line, he says, he may star in "The Harvey Milk Story," directed by Gus
Van Sant Jr., about the man who was the first openly gay member of the San
Francisco Board of Supervisors and was assassinated in 1978.  Mr. Williams says
he also has a yearning to portray Albert Einstein and hopes to play a villain
soon for the first time. (The fact that he lost the villainous role of the Joker
in "Batman" still rankles him, he says.)

When he is working on a film, Mr. Williams says, his family joins him on
location. In fact, Marsha Williams is listed in the credits for "Toys" as his
assistant. Occasionally, like an athlete working out at the gym, Mr. Williams
develops his comedy in local clubs. He gives some financial support to one in
San Francisco, the Holy City Zoo. In Los Angeles, he sometimes phones a small
club, Igby's, on Pico Boulevard, to report that he's on the way.

"I call them the last minute," he says, "and there are sometimes only 10 people
there and it's great. You feel totally free, and you can talk about something as
bleak as you want."

For all his wild, improvisational humor, Mr. Williams has rarely, if ever,
smashed political and social boundaries in the manner of one of his idols, Lenny
Bruce.

"I've wanted to do certain things, but the desire to please sometimes overcomes
that," he says. "But I've got to a point where I can't be politically correct
anymore. There are so many things somewhere to annoy people. The vegetarian
lesbian alliance will be angry. Even saying that, I'll get hate letters from the
zucchini front. Someone, somewhere will be angry. So you have to ask yourself,
what do you really believe?"

Mr. Williams, obviously exhausted, stifles another yawn. The doorbell rings, but
he barely looks up.

Then Billy Crystal enters and shouts, "Don't I know you from a rooming house in
San Francisco?"

Mr. Williams rushes toward him. They laugh and embrace.

"You tired?" Mr. Crystal asks.

"No!"

NAME: Robin Williams

LOAD-DATE: December 24, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Robin Williams and his daughter, Zelda, at home in Los Angeles.
(Jim Wilson/The New York Times) (pg. C1); Robin Williams in a coat of many
lights and sound effects at the opening of "Toys" in Los Angeles. (Reuters) (pg.
C5)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              402 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 24, 1992, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Essay;
Switching The Goal Posts

BYLINE: By WILLIAM SAFIRE

SECTION: Section A; Page 17; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 726 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


Bill Clinton's selection of Tony Lake and Sandy Berger to head the Conceptual
Frameworkers Union down in the White House basement sends an unmistakable signal
to the world: The foreign policy of the United States will be a far cry from the
one denounced on Oct. 2 by candidate Clinton in Milwaukee.

In that speech, which might have been titled "It's Foreign Policy, Stupid,"
Governor Clinton attacked a Bush "policy that embraces stability at the expense
of freedom" and called for one "that lights fires in the hearts of millions of
freedom-loving people around the world."

The primacy of Clinton's National Security Council staff in foreign policy was
underscored by the designation of Warren Christopher, a Weltanschauung-free
negotiator, as Secretary of State. He will be traveling a lot, leaving the
administration of the department to his deputy, an experienced pension-fund
manager.

"We need bold new thinking to guide us in this new era," declaimed Mr.
Christopher, who thereby showed he needs a bold new speechwriter to steer him
away from the cliches of an old era. The bolding SecState should also resist
alarmist insertions from Al Gore about "the very destruction of our planet's
life-support system."

Let us assume that Clinton's four foreign-policy addresses, culminating in the
Lake-Berger Milwaukee speech, form the basis for his vision of America's
shouldering of responsibility in the single-superpower world.  Also assume that
his choice of James Woolsey to head the C.I.A., heartening to hard-liners, is
evidence of his desire to refocus that agency's mission and to make its product
more usable.

What this means is that the Democrats have recovered from their generation-long
Vietnam trauma and have returned to the Wilson-F.D.R.- Truman-Kennedy-Johnson
view of the American burden, or at least a multipolar version thereof.

That stunning, historic turnabout has had an immediate effect: Because Clinton
publicly supported intervention in Somalia and air cover and arms for the
besieged Bosnians, President Bush -- after calling the latter "reckless" -- felt
politically free to send our troops to Africa and at least make threats to the
aggressive Serbs. (Bush and Clinton forget only the endangered Kurds.)

Intervention is in. Although the Pentagon qualifies that with "We do deserts,
but we don't do mountains," our military establishment -- part of Washington's
dovecote for a generation -- now goes along with global burden-bearing, provided
it is short and solitary and not nasty or brutish.

Much of this new readiness to enforce law or establish order may be to justify
the continuance of big budgets, but the Joint Chiefs are effectively buttressing
intervention on behalf of the new idealism -- as espoused by the Vietnam
dissenter Bill Clinton.

If the former liberal doves and conservative hawks are now human-rights
bedfellows, where will the opposition to intervention come from? Though
isolationists are presently unelectable, the law of ideological compensation is
ineluctable.

The first opposition to be heard from is respectable. As Gerald Seib reports in
The Wall Street Journal, the conservative Senators Hank Brown of Colorado,
Malcolm Wallop of Wyoming and Robert Smith of New Hampshire voted against the
resolution urging force against the Serbs; 18 of the 22 senators who voted nay
were Republicans. A conservative Democrat, Representative John Murtha of
Pennsylvania, was skeptical about involvement in Somalia.

Certainly there should be voices demanding to know: "What are we getting into?
Who is making what secret commitments? Under what principles? Why can't regional
powers take on or share the burden? How do we measure success, limit risk and
end involvement?"

But if all does not go well somewhere, these seekers of clear definitions and
goals will be joined, perhaps overwhelmed, by the "troubadours of trouble," in
Clare Luce's phrase: isolationists of the resentful right, Perot protectionists,
diplomatic accommodationists, and old New Left peaceniks now lying quietly in
the weeds.

The Clinton foreign-policy consensus is creating a vacuum, and politics abhors a
vacuum. Unreconstructed interventionists know which side we're on -- active
engagement to stop mayhem and promote democracy -- and we're waiting to see who
emerges to lead the side of determined detachment.

LOAD-DATE: December 24, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              403 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 25, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

THE PARDONS;
Text of President Bush's Statement on the Pardon of Weinberger and Others

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 22; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1372 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 24


Following is the text of President Bush's statement pardoning former Defense
Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger and others: Today I am exercising my power under
the Constitution to pardon former Secretary of Defense Caspar Weinberger and
others for their conduct related to the Iran-contra affair.

For more than six years now, the American people have invested enormous
resources into what has become the most thoroughly investigated matter of its
kind in our history. During that time, the last American hostage has come home
to freedom, worldwide terrorism has declined, the people of Nicaragua have
elected a democratic Government, and the cold war has ended in victory for the
American people and the cause of freedom we championed.

In the mid-1980's, however, the outcome of these struggles was far from clear.
Some of the best and most dedicated of our countrymen were called upon to step
forward. Secretary Weinberger was among the foremost.

Caspar Weinberger is a true American patriot. He has rendered long and
extraordinary service to our country. He served for four years in the Army
during World War II, where his bravery earned him a Bronze Star. He gave up a
lucrative career in private life to accept a series of public positions in the
late 1960's and 1970's, including chairman of the Federal Trade Commission,
director of the Office of Management and Budget, and Secretary of Health,
Education and Welfare. Caspar Weinberger served in all these positions with
distinction and was admired as a public servant above reproach.

He saved his best for last. As Secretary of Defense throughout most of the
Reagan Presidency, Caspar Weinberger was one of the principal architects of the
downfall of the Berlin Wall and the Soviet Union. He directed the military
renaissance in this country that led to the breakup of the Communist bloc and a
new birth of freedom and democracy. Upon his resignation in 1987, Caspar
Weinberger was awarded the highest civilian medal our Nation can bestow on one
of its citizens, the Presidential Medal of Freedom.

Secretary Weinberger's legacy will endure beyond the ending of the cold war. The
military readiness of this nation that he in large measure created could not
have been better displayed than it was two years ago in the Persian Gulf and
today in Somalia.

As Secretary Weinberger's pardon request noted, it is a bitter irony that on the
day the first charges against Secretary Weinberger were filed, Russian President
Boris Yeltsin arrived in the United States to celebrate the end of the cold war.
I am pardoning him not just out of compassion or to spare a 75-year-old patriot
the torment of lengthy and costly legal proceedings, but to make it possible for
him to receive the honor he deserves for his extraordinary service to our
country.

Moreover, on a somewhat more personal note, I cannot ignore the debilitating
illnesses faced by Caspar Weinberger and his wife. When he resigned as Secretary
of Defense, it was because of his wife's cancer. In the years since he left
public service, her condition has not improved. In addition, since that time, he
also has become ill. Nevertheless, Caspar Weinberger has been a pillar of
strength for his wife; this pardon will enable him to be by her side
undistracted by the ordeal of a costly and arduous trial.

I have also decided to pardon five other individuals for their conduct related
to the Iran-contra affair: Elliott Abrams, Duane Clarridge, Alan Fiers, Clair
George and Robert McFarlane. First, the common denominator of their motivation
-- whether their actions were right or wrong -- was patriotism. Second, they did
not profit or seek to profit from their conduct. Third, each has a record of
long and distinguished service to this country. And finally, all five have
already paid a price -- in depleted savings, lost careers, anguished families --
grossly disproportionate to any misdeeds or errors of judgment they may have
committed.

The prosecutions of the individuals I am pardoning represent what I believe is a
profoundly troubling development in the political and legal climate of our
country: the criminalization of policy differences. These differences should be
addressed in the political arena, without the Damocles sword of criminality
hanging over the heads of some of the combatants. The proper target is the
President, not his subordinates; the proper forum is the voting booth, not the
courtroom.

In recent years, the use of criminal processes in policy disputes has become all
too common. It is my hope that the action I am taking today will begin to
restore these disputes to the battleground where they properly belong.

In addition, the actions of the men I am pardoning took place within the larger
cold war struggle. At home, we had a long, sometimes heated debate about how
that struggle should be waged. Now the cold war is over. When earlier wars have
ended, Presidents have historically used their power to pardon to put bitterness
behind us and look to the future. This healing tradition reaches at least from
James Madison's pardon of Lafitte's pirates after the War of 1812, to Andrew
Johnson's pardon of soldiers who had fought for the Confederacy, to Harry
Truman's and Jimmy Carter's pardons of those who violated the Selective Service
laws in World War II and Vietnam.

In many cases, the offenses pardoned by these Presidents were at least as
serious as those I am pardoning today. The actions of those pardoned and the
decisions to pardon them raised important issues of conscience, the rule of law,
and the relationship under our Constitution between the Government and the
governed. Notwithstanding the seriousness of these issues and the passions they
aroused, my predecessors acted because it was time for the country to move on.
Today I do the same.

Some may argue that this decision will prevent full disclosure of some new key
fact to the American people. That is not true. This matter has been investigated
exhaustively. The Tower Board, the Joint Congressional Committee charged with
investigating the Iran-contra affair, and the independent counsel have looked
into every aspect of this matter. The Tower Board interviewed more than 80
people and reviewed thousands of documents. The Joint Congressional Committee
interviewed more than 500 people and reviewed more than 300,000 pages of
material. Lengthy committee hearings were held and broadcast on national
television to millions of Americans. And as I have noted, the independent
counsel investigation has gone on for more than six years, and it has cost more
than $31 million.

Moreover, the independent counsel stated last September that he had completed
the active phase of his investigation. He will have the opportunity to place his
full assessment of the facts in the public record when he submits his final
report. While no impartial person has seriously suggested that my own role in
this matter is legally questionable, I have further requested that the
independent counsel provide me with a copy of my sworn testimony to his office,
which I am prepared to release immediately. And I understand Secretary
Weinberger has requested the release of all of his notes pertaining to the
Iran-contra matter.

For more than 30 years in public service, I have tried to follow three precepts:
honor, decency, and fairness. I know, from all those years of service, that the
American people believe in fairness and fair play. In granting these pardons
today, I am doing what I believe honor, decency, and fairness require.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, GEORGE BUSH, President of the United States of America,
pursuant to my powers under Article II, Section 2, of the Constitution, do
hereby grant a full, complete and unconditional pardon to Elliott Abrams, Duane
R. Clarridge, Alan Fiers, Clair George, Robert C. McFarlane, and Caspar W.
Weinberger for all offenses charged or prosecuted by independent counsel
Lawrence E. Walsh or other members of his office, or committed by these
individuals and within the jurisdiction of that office.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand this 24th day of December, in
the year of our Lord 1992, and of the Independence of the United States of
America the 217th.

LOAD-DATE: December 25, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Text

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              404 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 25, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

THE PARDONS;
BUSH PARDONS 6 IN IRAN AFFAIR, ABORTING A WEINBERGER TRIAL; PROSECUTOR ASSAILS
'COVER-UP'

BYLINE: By DAVID JOHNSTON,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 1889 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 24


Six years after the arms-for-hostages scandal began to cast a shadow that would
darken two Administrations, President Bush today granted full pardons to six
former officials in Ronald Reagan's Administration, including former Defense
Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger.

Mr. Weinberger was scheduled to stand trial on Jan. 5 on charges that he lied to
Congress about his knowledge of the arms sales to Iran and efforts by other
countries to help underwrite the Nicaraguan rebels, a case that was expected to
focus on Mr. Weinberger's private notes that contain references to Mr. Bush's
endorsement of the secret shipments to Iran.

In one remaining facet of the inquiry, the independent prosecutor, Lawrence E.
Walsh, plans to review a 1986 campaign diary kept by Mr. Bush. Mr. Walsh has
characterized the President's failure to turn over the diary until now as
misconduct.

Decapitated Walsh Efforts

But in a single stroke, Mr. Bush swept away one conviction, three guilty pleas
and two pending cases, virtually decapitating what was left of Mr. Walsh's
effort, which began in 1986. Mr. Bush's decision was announced by the White
House in a printed statement after the President left for Camp David, where he
will spend the Christmas holiday.

Mr. Walsh bitterly condemned the President's action, charging that "the
Iran-contra cover-up, which has continued for more than six years, has now been
completed."

Mr. Walsh directed his heaviest fire at Mr. Bush over the pardon of Mr.
Weinberger, whose trial would have given the prosecutor a last chance to explore
the role in the affair of senior Reagan officials, including Mr. Bush's actions
as Vice President.

'Evidence of Conspiracy'

Mr. Walsh hinted that Mr. Bush's pardon of Mr. Weinberger and the President's
own role in the affair could be related. For the first time, he charged that Mr.
Weinberger's notes about the secret decision to sell arms to Iran, a central
piece of evidence in the case against the former Pentagon chief, included
"evidence of a conspiracy among the highest ranking Reagan Administration
officials to lie to Congress and the American public."

The prosecutor charged that Mr. Weinberger's efforts to hide his notes may have
"forestalled impeachment proceedings against President Reagan" and formed part
of a pattern of "deception and obstruction." On Dec. 11, Mr. Walsh said he
discovered "misconduct" in Mr. Bush's failure to turn over what the prosecutor
said were the President's own "highly relevant contemporaneous notes, despite
repeated requests for such documents."

The notes, in the form of a campaign diary that Mr. Bush compiled after the
elections in November 1986, are in the process of being turned over to Mr.
Walsh, who said, "In light of President Bush's own misconduct, we are gravely
concerned about his decision to pardon others who lied to Congress and
obstructed official investigations."

In an interview on the "McNeil-Lehrer Newshour" tonight, Mr. Walsh said for the
first time that Mr. Bush was a subject of his investigation. The term "subject,"
as it has been used by Mr. Walsh's prosecutors, is broadly defined as someone
involved in events under scrutiny, but who falls short of being a target, or a
person likely to be charged with a crime. In the inquiry into the entire
Iran-contra affair, a number of Government officials have been identified as
subjects who were never charged with wrongdoing.

What Charges Are Unlikely

The prosecutor said he would take appropriate action in Mr. Bush's case,
implying he might contemplate future legal action against the President for
withholding relevant documents. But prosecutors have said in the past that
charging a President or former President with wrongdoing would be highly
unlikely without overwhelming evidence of a serious crime.

C. Boyden Gray, the White House counsel, said today that Mr. Bush had
voluntarily supplied the disputed material to Mr. Walsh, asserting that the
notes contained no new information about the affair. Mr. Gray said Mr. Bush
wanted make the notes public, but did not say when.

President-elect Bill Clinton, at a news conference in Little Rock, Ark., to
announce his remaining Cabinet selections, said he wanted to learn more about
the pardons, adding, "I am concerned by any action that sends a signal that if
you work for the Government, you're beyond the law, or that not telling the
truth to Congress under oath is somehow less serious than not telling the truth
to some other body under oath."

Mr. Bush, in a statement accompanying the pardon, seemed to anticipate his
critics, acknowledging that his decision might be interpreted as an effort to
"prevent full disclosure of some new key fact to the American people." He said,
"That is not true."

Asserting that "no impartial person has seriously suggested that my own role in
this matter is legally questionable," the President sought to position himself
on the side of greater openness. Mr. Bush said he had asked Mr. Walsh to provide
him with a copy of his testimony to the prosecutor, which he would make public.

Lobbying by Ex-Reagan Aides

Today's action followed intensive lobbying by former Reagan aides to pardon Mr.
Weinberger and a series of meetings in recent days at the White House,
culminating with the President's decision this morning. Republicans, long
angered by the prosecution, were incensed by the new indictment of Mr.
Weinberger four days before the election. The indictment said Mr. Weinberger's
notes contradicted Mr. Bush's assertions that he had only a fragmentary
knowledge of the arms secretly sold to Iran in 1985 and 1986 in exchange for
American hostages in Lebanon.

Mr. Weinberger was also charged with testifying falsely to Congress that he did
not recall whether Saudi Arabia had ever contributed to the contras. Prosecutors
said his notes showed that he had known of the Saudi contributions.

Records made public over the years included no evidence that Mr. Bush knew about
he secret efforts to arm the Nicaraguan rebels, but they did suggest he knew of
Iran operation almost from its inception in 1985 and took part in crucial
meetings where the arms sales were openly discussed as an arms-for-hostages
swap. The Reagan Administration's public policy was never to bargain for the
freedom of hostages.

Mr. Bush said today that the Walsh prosecution reflected "a profoundly troubling
development in the political and legal climate of our country: the
criminalization of policy differences."

Question of Politics

He added: "These differences should have been addressed in the political arena
without the Damocles sword of criminality hanging over the heads of some of the
combatants. The proper target is the President, not his subordinates; the proper
forum is the voting booth, not the courtroom."

In his comments, Mr. Bush said he was trying to "put bitterness behind us,"
asserting that each of the men he was pardoning had a long record of public
service and had already paid a heavy price for their involvement in the affair
in damaged careers, hurt families and depleted savings.

The Iran-contra affair, the worst scandal of Mr. Reagan's Presidency, came into
the open in the fall of 1986 with the disclosure of two intertwined secret
operations: the arms sales to Teheran, and the diversion of profits from those
sales to help finance a covert weapons supply network to the contras, set up in
1985, after Congress barred direct aid to the rebels.

Besides Mr. Weinberger, the President pardoned Robert C. McFarlane, the former
national security adviser, and Elliott Abrams, the former assistant Secretary of
State for Central America. Both officials had pleaded guilty to misdemeanor
charges of withholding information from Congress about support for the contras.

Others Who Are Pardoned

The President also pardoned Clair E. George, the former head of the Central
Intelligence Agency's clandestine services, who was convicted earlier this
month, at his second trial, of two felony charges of perjury and misleading
Congress about both the contras and the Iran initiative -- crimes for which he
faced up to five years in prison and $250,000 in fines.

Two other intelligence officials were granted clemency, Duane R. Clarridge, the
former head of the C.I.A.'s European division, who was awaiting trial on charges
that he misled Congressional investigators about a missile shipment to Iran in
1985.

The other was Alan D. Fiers Jr., once a rising star with the agency, who had
pleaded guilty in 1991 to withholding information about the contras from
Congress and who later decided to cooperate with the prosecution, becoming Mr.
George's chief accuser at both his trials.

Mr. Bush described Mr. Weinberger as a "true American patriot" and he said
clemency was granted both to spare him torment and cost of lengthy legal
proceedings as well as out of a concern for the health of Mr. Weinberger, who is
75 year old.

Mr. Weinberger, who was asked at a news conference today whether his notes
contained any entries that might be embarrassing to Mr. Bush, replied: "No,
certainly not. There's nothing in those notes that in any way contradicts what
President Bush said, or what President Reagan said."

But not since President Gerald R. Ford granted clemency to former President
Richard M. Nixon for possible crimes in Watergate has a Presidential pardon so
pointedly raised the issue of whether the President was trying to shield
officials for political purposes. Mr. Walsh invoked Watergate tonight in an
interview on the ABC News program "Nightline," likening today's pardons to
President Richard M. Nixon's dismissal of the Watergate special prosecutor,
Archibald Cox, in 1973. Mr. Walsh said Mr. Bush had "succeeded in a sort of
Saturday Night Massacre."

Democratic lawmakers assailed the decision. Senator George J. Mitchell of Maine,
the Democratic leader, called the action a mistake. "It is not as the President
stated today a matter of criminalizing policy differences," he said. "If members
of the executive branch lie to the Congress, obstruct justice and otherwise
break the law, how can policy differences be fairly and legally resolved in a
democracy."

The main supporters of the pardon were Vice President Quayle, the Senate
Republican leader, Bob Dole, and Mr. Gray, one senior Administration official
said today. The decision, discussed in private, seemed to coalesce in the last
three weeks although Mr. Bush was said to believe that Mr. Weinberger had been
unfairly charged ever since the former Reagan Cabinet officer was first indicted
in June.

Throughout the deliberations, Mr. Bush consulted with Attorney General William
P. Barr and Brent Scowcroft, the national security adviser, who had sat on a
Presidential review panel that examined the affair in early 1987.

In lengthy Oval Office meetings in the last week, Mr. Bush and his advisers,
none of whom offered a sharp dissent, discussed how to balance their desire to
grant a pardon with their realization that such an act would almost certainly
provoke hostility.

In the end, Mr. Bush's advisers decided he could surmount his critics by
expressing, as did in his statement, his willingness to make public additional
documents about the affair, like his statement to the prosecutors and Mr.
Weinberger's notes.

LOAD-DATE: December 25, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Former Defense Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger after he was
granted a pardon by President Bush in the arms-for-hostages case. (Associated
Press) (pg. A1); Former Defense Secretary Casper W. Weinberger speaking at a
news conference yesterday in Washington after President Bush granted full
pardons to him and five other officials of the Reagan Administration. At right
was Mr. Weinberger's lawyer, Carl Rauh. (Michael Geissinger for The New York
Times) (pg. A20)

Charts

Caspar W. Weinberg, former Secretary of Defense. Charged with perjury and making
false statements stemming from a secret missile shipment to Iran in 1985. Trial
was scheduled for next month.

Duane R. Clarridge, former senior C.I.A. official. Charged with seven counts of
perjury and making false statements stemming from secret missile shipment to
Iran. Trial was scheduled for March.

Clair E. George, former head of C.I.A. covert operations. Found guilty this
month on two felony counts of lying to Congress. Was awaiting sentence.

Elliott Abrams, former Assistant Secretary of State. Pleaded guilty in 1991 to
withholding information from Congress. Sentenced to two years' probation and 100
hours of community service.

Alan G. Fiers Jr., former head of C.I.A. Central American Task Force. Pleaded
guilty in 1991 to withholding information from Congress. Sentenced to one year
probation and 100 hours of community service.

Robert C. McFarlane, former national security adviser. Pleaded guilty in 1988 to
withholding information from Congress. Sentenced to two years' probation and 200
hours of community service and fined $20,000. (pg. A1)

"Presidential Pardons, Historically"

Article 2 of the United States Constitution gives the President broad power "to
grant reprieves and pardons for offences against the United States." Most
Presidents grant hundreds of individual pardons during their terms of office,
and a few, including Abraham Lincoln and Jimmy Carter, have granted blanket
amnesties, another form of pardon, to a whole class of people. Pardons can be
granted at any time, before or after a person has been convicted of a crime.

The following are among the more noted Presidential pardons:

Thomas Jefferson, elected in 1800, pardoned all those convicted of violating the
Alien and Sedition Acts enacted two years earlier. The Act expired in 1800, and
was later found unconstitutional.

Abraham Lincoln, in 1863, and Andrew Johnson, in 1868, proclaimed amnesty for
Confederate soldiers.

Andrew Johnson, in 1869, pardoned Dr. Samuel A. Mudd, the doctor who set John
Wilkes Booth's broken leg after Mr. Booth assassinated President Lincoln.

Warren G. Harding, in 1921, pardoned Eugene V. Debs, a Socialist who was jailed
for sedition, and dozens of others jailed under World War I seidtion and
espionage laws.

Richard M. Nixon, in 1971, commuted the prison term of Jimmy Hoffa, the former
president of the teamsters' union, on the condition that Mr. Hoffa not resume
union activities.

Gerald R. Ford, in 1974, granted a full pardon to Mr. Richard M. Nixon, who had
resigned the Presidency because of the Watergate scandal.

Jimmy Carter, on the first day of his Presidency in 1977, proclaimed amnesty for
those who evaded the draft during the Vietnam War. President Ford, earlier, had
offered a more limited amnesty for the Vietnam War resisters.

Ronald Reagan, in 1989, pardoned George Steinbrenner 3d, the owner of the New
York Yankees, who had been convicted on illegal contributions to Mr. Nixon's
1972 re-election campaign.

George Bush, in 1989, pardoned Armand Hammer, the chairman of Occidental
Petroleum, who had pleaded guilty to making illegal contributions to Mr. Nixon's
1972 re-election campaign. (pg. A22)

Chart: "Touched by Scandal"

AWAITING TRIAL AND PARDONED

Caspar W. Weinberger: The former Defense Secretary, who operated within the
inner circle of Ronald Reagan's advisers on military and diplomatic affairs, was
indicted in June on five felony charges, including accusations that he had lied
to Congress and concealed more than 1,700 pages of notes from a personal diary
recording his discussions with other officials about arms sales to Iran. He was
indicted again on Oct. 30 on a charge of making a false statement to Congress.
The indictment was brought to replace a similar charge dismissed in September by
a Federal district judge. He was scheduled to stand trial next month.

Duane R. Clarridge: The Central Intelligence Agency's former chief of European
operations was indicted Nov. 26, 1991, on 10 counts of perjury and making false
statements stemming from a secret missile shipment to Iran in November 1985. He
pleaded not guilty on Dec. 6, 1991. On Dec. 10, a Federal judge ordered
prosecutors to drop two charges from the indictment. No trial date had been set.



GUILTY AND PARDONED

Clair E. George: The highest-ranking former C.I.A. official charged in the
scandal, he was indicted Sept. 6, 1991, on 10 counts of perjury, false
statements and obstructing Congressional and Federal investigators. He pleaded
not guilty on Sept. 12, 1991. Three obstruction-of-justice charges were
dismissed by a Federal judge last May 18; two new obstruction-of-justice charges
were filed two days later. A first trial ended in a mistrial in August, when the
jury failed to reach a unanimous verdict. After a second trial, he was found
guilty on Dec. 9 of two counts of lying to Congress, and faced sentencing in
February of up to five years in prison and a $250,000 fine.

Robert C. McFarlane: President Reagan's national security adviser from to
December 1985, he pleaded guilty March 11, 1988, to four misdemeanor charges of
withholding information from Congress. On March 3, 1989, he was sentenced to two
years probation and 200 hours of community service and fined $20,000.

Elliott Abrams: Former Assistant Secretary of State pleaded guilty on Oct. 7,
1991, to two misdemeanor counts of withholding information from Congress about
secret Government efforts to aid the Nicaraguan rebels. Prosecutors said that he
knew that Oliver L. North, then a National Security Council aide, had been in
contact with people supplying the contra rebels and encouraged them to continue
to aid the rebels despite a Congressional ban on such aid. He was sentenced Nov.
15, 1991, to two years' probation and 100 hours of community service.

Alan G. Fiers Jr.: The former head of the C.I.A.'s Central American Task Force,
who had worked for Mr. George, pleaded guilty on July 9, 1991, to two
misdemeanor charges of withholding information from Congress about diverting
money from Iranian arms sales to the Nicaraguan contras. He was sentenced Jan.
31, 1992, to one year's probation and 100 hours of community service.


GULITY AND NOT PARDONED

Carl R. (Spitz) Channell and Richard R. Miller: Both businessmen who helped
Oliver L. North raise money from private donors for the contras. Both pleaded
guilty to a charge of conspiring to defraud the Government by soliciting
tax-deductible donations for non-deductible purposes, and both were sentenced to
probation.

Albert A. Hakim: An Iranian-born businessman who created a company to funnel
arms and money to the contras. He pleaded guilty on Nov. 21, 1989, to a
misdemeanor charge of providing an illegal gratuity to Mr. North by paying for a
security fence at Mr. North's home. He was sentenced on Jan. 24, 1990, to two
years' probation.

Richard V. Secord: A retired Air Force major general who played a crucial role
in the secret arms shipments to Iran and support for the Nicaraguan rebels.
He pleaded guilty on Nov. 8, 1989, to lying to Congressional investigators. He
was sentenced on Jan. 24, 1990, to two years' probation.

Thomas G. Clines: The former C.I.A. agent was a business partner of Mr. Secord
and Mr. Hakim in supplying arms to Iran. He was convicted Sept. 18, 1990, on
four felony counts involving the underreporting of his earnings to the Internal
Revenue Service in 1986 and 1987 and falsely telling the Government that he had
no foreign bank accounts. On Dec. 13, 1990, he was sentenced to 16 months in
prison and fined $40,000. A Federal appeals panel upheld the convictions on Feb.
27, 1992. He began serving his jail sentence on May 25, the only defendant in
the scandal to go to prison.


CASES DIMISSED

John M. Poindexter: President Reagan's national security adviser from December
1985 to November 1986 was convicted on April 7, 1990, on five counts involving
charges that he obstructed, conspired to obstruct and made false statements to
Congress. He was sentenced June 11, 1990 to six months in prison. A Federal
appeals panel threw out the convictions on Nov. 15, 1991, on the ground that Mr.
Poindexter's testimony to Congress under immunity was improperly used against
him.

Joseph F. Fernandez: The case against the former C.I.A. station chief in Costa
Rica was dismissed after the Government refused a defense request for classified
documents.

Oliver L. North: The former Marine lieutenant colonel was a staff member of the
National Security Council. Was convicted on May 4, 1989, on three felony counts
for his role in the Iran-contra affair: aiding and abetting obstruction of
Congress, destroying security council documents and accepting an illegal gift.
He was acquitted on nine counts. He was sentenced July 5, 1989, to two years'
probation and 1,200 hours of community service and fined $150,000. On Sept. 16,
1991, the convictions were thrown out on appeal because testimony in the trial
might have been influenced by Mr. North's testimony before Congress under
immunity.

Photos of those involved in Iran-contra affair discussed in chart above.

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              405 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 25, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Old Weapons Are Plants' New Work

BYLINE: By LOUIS UCHITELLE,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 1; Column 3; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1639 words

DATELINE: PHILADELPHIA


The steel hulls of 12 big Chinook cargo helicopters on the assembly line of the
Boeing Company's helicopter factory here have been sanded and burnished so that
the silvery metal looks new. But small numbers stenciled in black on the hulls
tell a different story. "O22," one says, documenting that this was the 22d
Chinook ever built, in 1961. None of the hulls is less than 15 years old.

Like so many military contractors, Boeing Helicopter is increasingly en gaged in
the rebuilding and upgrading of old weapons instead of building more expensive
new ones. The conversion of old weapons into more modern versions -- rather than
simply overhauling them periodically as the Air Force does with the B-52 bomber
-- now appears to account for more than half the military hardware manufactured
in America, and the percentage keeps growing.

But as the numbers grow, so do the questions about whether the economics of such
an approach make sense. With military budgets shrinking, rebuilding a Chinook so
that it can carry more cargo, or an M-1 Abrams tank so that it is a more deadly
weapon, is good business for weapons contractors, especially if it is a question
of selling 20 improved weapons rather than only 6 new ones.


Improvements Are Costly

The improved weapons, however, sometimes end up costing the Pentagon almost as
much as a new weapons system. And while the practice saves money in the short
run, weapons experts say it could bring on a crisis in a decade or so when
Chinook and Abrams tank hulls -- and the hulls of many other rebuilt weapons --
are too old for yet another upgrade.

"You get in the bind where the oldest model costs so much to run and maintain
that you have no money to buy a new system," said Maj. Peter Keating, an Army
spokesman.

Congress would then have to choose between raising military spending to purchase
new weapons or letting the weapons inventory shrink as worn-out weaponry is
scrapped. Neither the Bush Administration nor President-elect Bill Clinton has
addressed these issues.

"But right now, we have a lot of existing platforms with years of life in them,
so we are looking for upgrades, and that trend will continue," said Robert Hall,
a Defense Department spokesman.

The pressure to rebuild weapons has intensified because the cost of new weapons
has kept rising. The Pentagon, in effect, covers a weapons maker's costs,
negotiating ever-higher amounts to be covered, and then adds a profit on top --
as it has for more than two decades. As a result, the Pentagon has increasingly
chosen to rebuild, say, 30 existing weapons rather than purchase 15 more
expensive new ones.

The practice has gathered steam since 1987, when spending on weapons procurement
began to shrink, after reaching a record $100 billion. Adjusted for inflation,
the annual outlay today is about $80 billion.

For Boeing Helicopter, as for many other weapons makers, upgrading weapons has
kept factories open. At Boeing's complex along the Delaware River, with its huge
gray and blue buildings, upgrading the twin-rotor Chinooks keeps more than 4,000
workers employed. A brand new Model D comes off the assembly line only rarely,
and usually for a foreign customer. Most of the four Model D's completed here
each month are overhauled Chinooks, which first carried soldiers and supplies
into battle in Vietnam.

Since the late 1980's, Boeing has been working on a contract that is costing the
Pentagon more than $5 billion to rebuild 538 older Chinooks into the Model D.
The Chinooks are flown here intact. Their rotors and engines are removed. The
wiring, cockpit paneling and electronics gear are gutted. The paint is sanded
off the hulls. The Model D's can carry more weight a longer distance.


Looking to Foreign Sales

The last copter in this process is to be returned to the Army by mid-1995, and
after that the hope is to sustain the production line with foreign sales. "We
have people girdling the globe, trying to sell new Chinooks," said Stuart D.
Dodge, director of Boeing's tandem rotor helicopter programs.

Anticipating that foreign sales will not be enough to keep the factory open,
Boeing is now arguing that the Persian Gulf war demonstrated the need for
another upgrade: Model D's should be rebuilt into the more powerful Model F,
still in the design stage.

In a carpeted conference room at the headquarters building here -- a room with
huge backlighted photo transparencies on every wall that show Boeing helicopters
in action -- Mr. Dodge offers to a reporter the Model F sales pitch that he
gives regularly now to people at the Pentagon and members of Congress.

The Model D, Mr. Dodge explained, was everywhere in Saudi Arabia and Iraq during
the Persian Gulf crisis, carrying troops, drums of fuel, artillery and the
injured. But fully loaded, the Model D's two engines and fuel capacity could
travel only 100 miles without refueling -- half the range of the proposed Model
F.

"On the first day of the ground fighting, that 100 miles took troops and
supplies only halfway to Baghdad on the Euphrates from the Saudi border," Mr.
Dodge said. "The Model F could have gone all the way to the Euphrates nonstop."
And Mr. Dodge suggested that the Model F might have gotten American troops to
Baghdad quickly enough to surprise Saddam Hussein and capture him.
 The Persian Gulf experience is frequently invoked to justify the expense of
upgrading old weaponry in the post-cold-war period. The deployment of American
troops in Somalia is the latest such experience.

But rebuilding older weapons rather than buying new ones raises issues that have
not been adequately debated in Congress or by the public, according to
Representative Andy Ireland of Florida, the ranking Republican on the House
subcommittees for military procurement and for investigations of weapons
contracts.

"If the threat is no worse than Saddam Hussein's Republican Guard, do you really
need to spend so much on upgrading weaponry?" Mr. Ireland asked. "I know in my
gut that upgrading weapons is a growing trend, although still not fully
measured. Accountability is necessary to head off overcharging, which is just as
likely with an upgrade as with a new B-1 bomber. Most important, is this an
overlooked area for cutbacks in defense spending?"

One issue is whether companies like Boeing are rebuilding too much -- replacing
too many parts -- and overcharging in the process. The rebuilding of Chinooks
into Model D's, for instance, costs the Pentagon $11 million a copter, compared
with $15 million to $17 million for a new Model D. In the early 1980's, when the
Pentagon first began to convert earlier versions into the Model D, the cost per
copter was $7 million.

In addition, the profit that Boeing earns from building a new Chinook or
rebuilding an old one is roughly the same, says B. Dan Pinick, president of
Boeing's Defense and Space Group. "The skills and capabilities that go into
rebuilding a helicopter from the bare shell involve the same skills and
capabilities that are necessary to build a new plane," Mr. Pinick said.

The source of much of the increase in costs since 1980 appears to be the new
electronics systems and computers wired into the stripped-down Chinooks on the
line here, or into the F-14 fighter planes that the Grumman Corporation is
upgrading at its Calverton plant on Long Island, or into the older Abrams tanks
that General Dynamics wants to rebuild at its Lima, Ohio, plant into the M1-A2
model. Among other upgrades, the M1-A2's have a new digital electronics system
capable of detailed communication with other battle units.

In any modern weapon, the electronics gear is the costliest element and the
source of the highest profit, said Peter Oram, president of Grumman Aircraft
Systems. "You don't replace landing gears or wings or fuselage, and this air
frame is maybe $500 a pound for aluminum and steel," Mr. Oram said. "But
electronics go for $2,500 a pound installed, and if you are replacing 3,000
pounds of electronics, that is expensive."

The 18 stripped-down F-14's that Grumman has been upgrading at Calverton with
new radar, new engines, new electronics and new missile-firing ability are
costing the Pentagon $37 million a plane, compared with a $50.8 million price
tag for an F-14, newly built.

"They don't have to do so much; they are making work," said Seymour Melman, a
retired Columbia University engineering professor and a weapons industry expert.



Overhauls Without Upgrading

Alternatively, these 10-year-old aircraft could remain in operation without
becoming more powerful weapons, their lives extended through periodic overhauls
at Air Force depots every year or two, at a cost of only $1 million to $2
million for each overhaul, Grumman officials say.

The Army faces a similar alternative for Abrams tanks. The new M1-A2
outperformed earlier models in the Persian Gulf crisis, with its more powerful
cannon, its new electronics and a turret that offered the crew protection
against chemical warfare. Until the Berlin wall came down in 1989, ending the
rivalry with the former Soviet Union, General Dynamics had sought a contract to
build 3,000 new M1-A2's.

But the company has switched strategies, bidding instead to upgrade 1,000 older
tanks for $3.1 billion, compared with $4.6 million for a new M1-A2. A contract
has not been signed, but the Army has endorsed the General Dynamics bid. It is
seeking Defense Department approval to upgrade the first 260 tanks over the next
five years, guaranteeing in the process the survival, until at least 1997, of
the Lima plant, the nation's only tank assembly factory.

"You want to send soldiers into the field with the best equipment, even if it is
an overmatch for the enemy," said Major Keating, the Army spokesman. "You want
to have the best tanks up front."

LOAD-DATE: December 25, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: At the Boeing Helicopter factory in Philadelphia, old Chinook
cargo helicopters are being upgraded. (Sal DiMarco Jr. for The New York Times)

Table: "Like New"

Instead of buying new models of expensive equipment like helicopters and tanks,
the Pentagon is paying manufacturers to upgrade older models, like these
examples.

M1-A2 Abrams tank

Contractor: General Dynamics

Cost to buy new: $4.6 million

Cost to upgrade an M1-A1 tank: $3.1 million

CH-47D Chinook helicopter

Contrator: Boeing

Cost to buy new: $15 million

Cost to upgrade an older CH-47: $11 million

F-14D Tomcat fighter/attack jet

Contrator: Grumman

Cost to buy new: $50.8 million

Cost to upgrade an older F14: $37 million

(Sources: Defense Department; General Dynamics; Boeing; Grumman)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              406 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 25, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

THE PARDONS;
The President as Pardoner: A Calculated Gamble

BYLINE: By R. W. APPLE Jr.,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 23; Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 934 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 24


As he begins to edge offstage, George Bush is taking a calculated gamble with
his place in history.

Having spent a good deal of his energy in the last few days on grand global
problems of the kind that have always engaged him, he has now ventured into the
cockpit of domestic politics by pardoning six of the leading figures in the
Iranian arms deal and the diversion of profits to Nicaraguan rebels.

He hopes to be remembered as the victor of Kuwait and as the man, even in his
hour of defeat, who planned a humanitarian mission to Somalia, sought an end to
the strife in Bosnia and pressed for reductions in nuclear weapons. But will he,
in fact, be remembered instead, or at least in part, as the President who in
effect pardoned himself?

Mr. Bush served as Vice President, of course, during the years when the
arms-for-hostages deal developed. He has maintained ever since that he knew
little about it -- an assertion that has been shaken but never disproved in the
years since. The trial of former Defense Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger, which
was to have begun on Jan. 5, would have provided the most thorough public airing
of the matter. By blocking that trial, President Bush has vastly reduced his own
exposure to damage from the affair, at least in the court of public opinion.

Impeccable Timing

The President's timing was impeccable, politically speaking. Few politicians
were in their offices to comment, and even if they had been, the mighty engines
of communication were all but shut down. Christmas Eve television draws one of
the smallest audiences of the year, as do the Christmas morning newspapers.

But Mr. Bush is not yet home free. Lawrence E. Walsh, the independent counsel in
the case, spoke mysteriously about what he termed "President Bush's own
misconduct" and about notes taken at the time by Mr. Bush and delivered to Mr.
Walsh only on Dec. 11, two weeks ago. That and Mr. Walsh's other remarks suggest
that he intends to dig further and that he disagrees with the President's view
that the nation should put the entire Iran-contra episode behind it.

It is just conceivable, if unlikely, that some Congressional committee might
seek to question Mr. Bush about the pardons, either before or after he leaves
office. When Gerald R. Ford pardoned Richard M. Nixon in 1974, Mr. Ford agreed
to testify.

It is the pardon of Mr. Nixon that comes most readily to mind when evaluating
those issued by Mr. Bush, even though it is one of the few precedents that he
did not mention. The Lafitte pirates pardoned by James Madison after the War of
1812 and the draft-evaders forgiven by Jimmy Carter after the Vietnam War were,
after all, very small fry compared with Mr. Weinberger and the others involved
in the arms-for-hostages matter.

Risks and Nonrisks

The biggest difference between 1974 and 1992 is this: Mr. Ford acted before his
campaign for a full term two years later, in the full knowledge that it could
cost him the Presidency. Many believe that it did.

Mr. Bush, on the other hand, waited until after the election, when the personal
electoral risk would be nil. That deprives his action of the aura of
selflessness that clung to Mr. Ford's pardon, all the more so since it was
always clear that Mr. Ford had no role in the Watergate scandal that drove Mr.
Nixon from office.

Mr. Bush put Mr. Weinberger in a different category from the other five men whom
he forgave. They might have acted wrongly, though out of decent motives, he
said, but they deserve clemency.

But the former Defense Secretary, the President said, is "a true American
patriot" who deserves to be honored by his country, not prosecuted by it. The
subtext was clear: This man has done nothing wrong and is being unjustly
persecuted.

Many in Washington will welcome that verdict; Mr. Weinberger is immensely well
connected and popular with senior people in both parties. He is also 75 years
old and ailing. But some of those who have spent years investigating the case,
especially those on Capitol Hill, argue that none of that gave him the right to
withhold notes of important meetings when asked for them. One person's
patriotism may involve protecting a President; another's may involve being frank
and honest with a Congressional committee or a prosecutor, no matter how much it
hurts.

'The Proper Target'

Perhaps Mr. Bush was therefore right, theoretically speaking, in saying that
"the proper target is the President, not his subordinates, and the proper forum
is the voting booth, not the courtroom."

The problem is that Ronald Reagan never faced the voters after the
arms-for-hostages affair came to light. His successor, Mr. Bush, was not much of
a target in 1988 and 1992, and could hardly have been judged on the issue, even
if the electorate had been outraged, given his protestations of noninvolvement.

Again in Mr. Bush's phrase, the country is likely to "move on" now, toward and
into the Clinton Administration. One wonders whether even a Weinberger trial
would have slowed that inevitable change of focus. Caspar Weinberger and Robert
MacFarlane will soon be forgotten by all but the experts, like Harold Brown and
William Clark and dozens of others who have held their jobs before them.

But George Bush will be remembered. All Presidents are. And he will be judged
and rejudged as the years go by, not only for what he did but also for the
standards he demanded of those around him. History alone will decide whether he
was too lenient with the Iran-contra Six or whether, as he asserted, only his
pardons could avoid further national ructions.

LOAD-DATE: December 25, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: President Bush in his Camp David office yesterday with his
granddaughter Lauren, who was dressed as Rudolph for a Christmas play. (Reuters)


TYPE: News Analysis

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              407 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 25, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

A Nostalgic Look At Fun and Games

BYLINE: By ANDREW H. MALCOLM

SECTION: Section C; Page 1; Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1862 words

DATELINE: KATONAH, N.Y.


PARCHEESI, it can now be revealed, causes stomach flu.

I know this because in my childhood every single time I stayed home from school
because I had turned green, the Parcheesi board was found next to my bed, plus
crackers, warm ginger ale, at times tepid tea and sufficient Kleenex to blip the
stock of the Kimberly Clark Corporation. (Never mind the battered pot always
within emergency reach.)

To be fair, some bedside blame for my flus, measles, mumps, chicken pox and
other childhood maladies should also fall on Chinese checkers, Snakes and
Ladders and perhaps poker, which my father taught me when Mom was out. (When Dad
was away, she tried tutoring me in bridge. But I fell asleep.)

As youngsters, we have the most wondrous way of unconsciously soaking up
indelible intellectual associations. Say New Year's Eve today, and I instantly
picture little-boy pajamas with the seat flap and built-in slippers, because
that's what I was always wearing when roused to watch Ben Grauer watch the next
year arrive in Times Square. (Why, by the way, does every new year start with
those same two men climbing that light pole and removing their shirts at
midnight to celebrate Dick Clark's growing one year younger?)

Likewise, the slightest scent of cigar smoke today makes me think of yesterday's
baseball games, which may explain that sport's declining attendance.

So, now you say Parcheesi, and I think of retching. No offense to Milt Bradley.

That explains the absence of a closetful of battered game boxes in our house,
each with the traditional one piece missing. (All right, there is a game of
rabblSce, but words are my profession and a triple-word score can make an entire
day.) And it explains my initial reaction to news that the Katonah Museum of Art
has opened a new exhibition titled "The Board Game: America at Play 1845-1945."
Even with free admission in tree-strewn Westchester County, who wants to wax
nostalgic about nausea?

But Skip Hospital and Go Directly to Museum. For many, this exhibition about
what I once thought were called bored games may well be more fun than the games
themselves. Certainly more informative.

Of course, it's not so much the myriad games on display here through Feb. 28.
(Did anybody with the slightest sign of brain activity ever really buy and then
play a game called Bobby and Betty's Trip to the New York World's Fair?) What's
compelling is what the games tell us about the contemporary society that
produced and played them, its passions, priorities and prejudices, and how our
country and its values have changed since. "Our games mirror our society," says
William C. Ketchum, the show's guest curator, who also writes about folk art.

Reflecting Their Times

What a mirror! Early board games were flat morality plays with players spinning
a wheel (dice, you'll recall, were associated with gambling and the devil) to
move through Frugality and Diligence to a pictorial Heaven bearing a remarkable
resemblance to the suburbia in promotional brochures for modern housing
developers.

In the faddish 1890's, when bicycling swept the land like nothing until Hula
Hoops, there was the Bicycle Race: A Game for Wheelmen. In expansionist
turn-of-the-century days, families could sit around with jingoistic pastimes
like the Rough Riders Game and the Philippine War Game: Crushing the Rebellion
in Luzon. (The ultimate goal was Manila, of course, but the landing came at a
place called Subic Bay, which the United States just lost.)

By the Roaring 20's, American consumers were consumed by Keeping Up With the
Joneses. (Wouldn't it be interesting someday to peruse the checkbook of the
original ostentatious Joneses?) Then came Monopoly, of course, which Mr. Ketchum
and his siblings played all through their father's long unemployment, and Cabby:
The Game With Rules Made to Be Broken. Of course.

In 1939, before the enemy could be properly identified, there was Flying G-Men:
Dynamiting the Lid Off the Foreign Spy Menace, followed in 1942 by Dave Dawson's
Pacific Battle Game, then the Ration Board Game and Air Raid Warden ("Unexploded
Bomb on Broadway Between Union and Main"). And just imagine the excitement of
the Let's Go to College Game (1944).

Evolution of a Pastime

Some form of board game existed 4,000 years ago. (That's a good question for
Trivial Pursuit. Here's another: In what country was Trivial Pursuit invented?)
But modern games have typically required a middle class with sufficient size,
disposable income and time to play.

Not surprisingly, different cultures produce different games. Board games were
popular in 17th- and 18th-century Europe. To this day Europeans like chess along
with cheese, wine and car races full of finesse turns. Americans prefer
Monopoly, beer, chips and the Indianapolis 500, which entails 2,000 very fast
left turns. Other popular American games involve vaporizing aliens with electron
guns or smashing a mallet on the heads of gophers who pop up from holes in a
table. (The mallet, thank goodness, is chained to the table.)

Games -- video, athletic and board -- have become an integral part of American
culture. In fact, someone could argue that thanks to opinion polls and
television, modern American life is like one big board game with few players and
millions of spectators. Win New Hampshire. Pass Iowa. Capture California. Enter
the White House. Add some rich competitors, and you can see Barry Bonds Break
the Bank, Ivan Boesky Land on Insider Trading (Go to Prison) and Donald Trump
Buy the Plaza, Mortgage Boardwalk, Lose Wife, Sell Airline, Enter Bankruptcy and
Refinance Casino.

Historically, the growth of American board games was greatly hindered by the
enduring Puritan ethic of the Cotton Mather crowd (picture them sitting around
in those immense collars saying, "Go Fish!") and the lingering belief that
leisure time was a fertile field for the work of you-know-who from
you-know-where. Few frontier homes had time or space for parlors or drawing
rooms.

The 1840's, however, witnessed the start of drastic changes in the lives of
Americans, and their games. Instead of being merely extra farmhands, society
began seeing children as future adults, who required training. And how better
could conscientious parents train offspring than through educational games,
which reinforced and rewarded the same virtues society professed to value in
real life?

A Certain Kind of Progress

No accident that early game producers were book publishers and mapmakers. No
accident that games' popularity grew with the advent of labor-saving machinery
and socially acceptable leisure time in the post-Civil War Industrial Age. (No
accident, either, that the painful Civil War -- and Vietnam too, come to think
of it -- did not immediately produce games.)

However, the spread of the nation's transportation network provided game
possibilities for competitors to cross the country and ostensibly learn
geography en route, as did Lucky Lindy's trans-Atlantic flight and the
newspaperwoman Nellie Bly's successful bid to circle the globe and beat Jules
Verne's 80-day record by one week. (Ponder the commercial sophistication in that
one: an 1890 board game of a newspaper's circulation stunt to beat a fictitious
travel record.)

The advent of radio and the mass media in the late 1920's opened a new spectrum
of commercial game possibilities, from Superman and Little Orphan Annie to games
built around a dummy called Charlie McCarthy and a rodent named Mickey Mouse. As
a sign of progress, millions of Americans chewing dinner each night can now yell
"Jeopardy" answers at their deaf television sets.

But imagine the impact of board games on values and aspirations before the mass
media, back when 8 of 10 Americans lived in the country. They might spend one
hour a week in church, but many more spinning the wheel on Mansion of Happiness,
the Chequered Game of Life, Shall I Marry? or Errand Boy, which turned Horatio
Alger into a game.

Shifting Values

In Mansion (1843), players moved through five dozen spaces from Piety and
Charity (move ahead) to Audacity and Immodesty (lose one turn). The European
edition showed a topless woman for Chastity, an image deemed contradictory to
players in North America, where she received a robe and torch. Over the years
other changes crept in: Poverty became a vice, along with Sabbath Breakers
(baseball players), and Prudence (a woman sewing) became a man banking money.

In Chequered (1863), the point was to acquire the most points (5 for landing on
Honesty or College, but 10 big ones for Government Contract). Fat (political)
Office was a major goal.

Shall I Marry? (1890) was another in the Old Maid genre suggesting women could
be fulfilled only through marriage. Interestingly, however, many other games
like Nellie Bly reflected women's liberation long before even suffrage. Although
American Indians were generally portrayed as wily foes, other games like
Watermelon Patch (1896) played to racial stereotypes and prejudices.

With no national media, each game's box had to sell itself. This produced
colorful and imaginative lithography, which still excites collectors like Mary
Lou Alpert, who spent nearly two years assembling this exhibition. Many
collectors have made a game out of acquiring old games at auctions for thousands
of real dollars.

Congratulations! You have reached The End. The answer to that Trivial Pursuit
question is: Canada.

WHERE ANY NUMBER CAN PLAY

"THE BOARD GAME: AMERICA AT PLAY, 1845-1945" is on view through Feb. 28 at the
Katonah Museum of Art, Route 22 at Jay Street, Katonah, N.Y. Hours: tomorrow, 10
A.M. to 5 P.M.; Sunday and Tuesday through New Year's Day, 1 to 5 P.M. After
Jan. 1, the museum is open Tuesdays through Fridays and Sundays, 1 to 5 P.M.;
Saturdays, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M. Free admission.

Special events are planned at the Katonah Museum as part of the exhibition.
There will be a family workshop on making one's own game on Jan. 9 at 10:30
A.M.; fee, $8 a family. There will be a workshop for children in game-making on
Jan. 16 at 10:30 A.M.  Information: (914) 232-9555.

On Jan. 23, from 10 A.M. to 1 P.M., there will be a free seminar called "Games
in America, Then and Now," featuring a discussion with Robert Weis, a consultant
on childhood play; Richard H. Berg, a game designer, and William C. Ketchum, a
guest curator.

In addition, in Manhattan there is a games exhibition on view at the New-York
Historical Society, 170 Central Park West, at 76th Street. "VICTORIAN PLEASURES:
19TH-CENTURY AMERICAN BOARD AND TABLE GAMES" will be on view through Jan. 3 at
the society. On permanent display, there is "A TREASURY OF TOYS," a collection
of stuffed toys, doll furniture, racing cars and other items from the 19th and
early 20th centuries. Hours: Sunday, Tuesday, Wednesday and Jan. 3, 11 A.M. to 5
P.M. On Jan. 4, the exhibition galleries are to close for at least nine months
and reopen in September pending a permanent collaboration with the New York
Public Library or another cultural institution. Admission: $4.50; $3 for
students and the elderly; $1 for children under 12. Information: (212) 873-3400.


LOAD-DATE: December 25, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: The Rough Riders, a board game from the expansionist 1890's.
(Bill West) (pg. C27)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              408 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 25, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

What Separation Means

SECTION: Section A; Page 30; Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 228 words


To the Editor:

Although I share Hans Koning's misgivings in "What the U.S. Isn't Besides
'Christian' " (letter, Dec. 7), about Gov. Kirk Fordice's premise that we are a
Christian nation, certain of his assertions should not go unchallenged. For
instance, Mr. Koning states that the separation of church and state "means that
religion is never to enter politics," and he cannot think of one public deed in
this country "where Christian love (or Judaic ethics) won out."

On the contrary, many of us remember fondly the lament of a Southern Congressman
in the 1960's that the Civil Rights Act would never have had a chance except
that so many preachers supposed it to be some sort of moral issue. Similarly, it
was a coalition of such preachers -- Daniel and Philip Berrigan, the Rev. Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr., the Rev. William Sloane Coffin Jr., Abraham Heschel and
the like -- who gave powerful impetus to our nation's rethinking of the war in
Vietnam.

The separation of church and state does not mean that religious leaders and the
people who frequent churches, synagogues and mosques are forbidden to do their
utmost to influence public opinion and policy. It simply means that the
Government cannot give official support or sanction to any one religious body
toward that valid goal.

NILS BLATZ
Rector, Trinity Church
Roslyn, L.I., Dec. 7, 1992

LOAD-DATE: December 25, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              409 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 26, 1992, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

As Foreign Investment Rises, Vietnam Wants the U.S. Back

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHENON,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1; Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1556 words

DATELINE: HO CHI MINH CITY, Vietnam


At a meeting in November with a delegation of American Senators, Vietnamese
officials interrupted the conversation to offer their guests a glass of what is
now Vietnam's most popular soft drink: Coca-Cola. The Senators took small sips.
The Vietnamese gulped it down.

In a sign of how the free market has begun to take hold here -- and of the
willingness of Vietnamese to embrace even the most potent symbols of American
capitalism -- Coca-Cola, Pepsi, 7-Up and Sprite are being sold openly almost
everywhere in Vietnam, north and south, city and countryside, smuggled in across
the porous border from Cambodia.

Far from discouraging the purchase of American-brand soft drinks, the Vietnamese
Government has begun buying them by the caseload for official celebrations.

"Why don't the Americans come back?" asked Tran Dien, who hawks American soft
drinks on a street corner of Ho Chi Minh City, still known by its residents as
Saigon and now the bustling if decrepit center of Vietnam's increasingly free
market. "The war is over. The Vietnamese want the Americans to return."

If the 17-year-old American trade embargo is lifted, foreign economists and
bankers say, Vietnam could be on the verge of an economic boom that will end its
sad distinction as one of the world's most impoverished nations.

[In a significant easing of the embargo, the Bush Administration said last week
that it would permit American companies to sign contracts to do business in
Vietnam. The move came after Vietnam pledged to expand its cooperation in
determining the fate of Americans still listed as missing from the Vietnam War.]


Economic Boon Possible

Vietnamese leaders appear to understand that the transformation of Vietnam into
something other than an economic basket case will take years, and in a
demonstration of utter pragmatism by a group of aging men who spent much of
their lives at war with the United States, they are now eager for American trade
and investment.

Impressed by Vietnam's commitment to the free market and by the diligent,
well-educated and low-wage work force, foreign investors from outside the United
States who had once been intimidated by the American embargo are now simply
ignoring it.

In the first eight months of 1992, the total value of new foreign investment
projects was $1.8 billion, more than in all of last year, with Taiwanese and
Hong Kong investors in the forefront.

The Japanese Government announced in November that it would resume development
aid to Vietnam, which some large Japanese corporations took as a signal that
they could begin long-delayed investments. All nine of Japan's major trading
corporations have opened offices in Vietnam in recent years.

Fear of Being Shut Out

What frightens American business people is the thought that the Vietnamese
economy might take off so quickly -- even before the embargo is lifted -- that
they would be left behind, forever shut out of a market of about 70 million
people that many consider the last great business opportunity in Southeast Asia.

"We think the American embargo should be lifted right now," said Frank Martin,
president of the American Chamber of Commerce in Hong Kong. "One of our major
concerns has been that other countries might get into Vietnam before we did and
would get a foothold. Well, the fact is that the other countries are there."

Increasingly American business people like Mr. Martin seem willing to press for
an end to the embargo even if that means a public feud with the families of
American troops still unaccounted for from the war.

A number of families believe that the embargo is the only way of insuring
Vietnam's cooperation in determining the fate of the 2,265 Americans still
listed as missing, and they say they are not convinced that Vietnam will live up
to a recent pledge to open up its war archives to Pentagon investigators.

Non-U.S. Companies Active

"In some areas, it's already too late for the U.S. companies," said Eugene A.
Matthews, an American lawyer who lives in Hanoi. Although officially listed in
Government records as a Vietnamese-language student, Mr. Matthews spends much of
his time outside of class working as a business consultant for foreign clients
interested in Vietnam. He pointed to Vietnamese telecommunications contracts and
offshore oil leases that had already been locked up by non-American companies.

John Brinsden, the country manager for Vietnam for the Standard Chartered Bank
of Britain, said that even if the Americans investors were to rush in now, "they
would face a daunting challenge in Vietnam -- they are a long way behind."

Mr. Brinsden said American businesses should nevertheless take heart from
Vietnamese history, which suggests that the Vietnamese will do what they can to
prevent domination of the economy by Japan and other Asian nations.

"The Vietnamese have survived by playing big powers off against each other, and
I believe they look at the United States as the only power capable of preventing
a Japanese juggernaut," Mr. Brinsden said. He said the Vietnamese might have set
aside some promising business deals for American investors.

Effect of Embargo

The embargo, imposed after North Vietnamese forces defeated the Saigon
Government in 1975, cut off not only the legal supply of American goods but also
aid from the World Bank, the International Monetary Fund and other international
lending agencies.

Coupled with decades of incompetent centralized planning, the embargo had the
effect intended by Washington, and Vietnam's war-shattered economy has only now
begun to recover.

The per capita annual income in Vietnam today is estimated at less than $200.
Malnutrition remains severe in stretches of northern and central Vietnam, and
whatever the sudden wealth of many residents of Ho Chi Minh City, visitors to
the city are often swarmed by families of homeless beggars.

In 1986, the Vietnamese Government introduced a series of economic changes that
were devised to promote private enterprise while keeping Vietnam's authoritarian
and still avowedly Marxist Government in place. The reforms had much in common
with those begun earlier in China.

Six years later, the Vietnamese economy is now sufficiently resilient that it
managed to show modest growth in 1991 -- slightly more than 2 percent -- despite
the cutoff of hundreds of millions of dollars a year in assistance from the
former Soviet Union, long Vietnam's chief benefactor.

Record Rice Crop Expected

The Government also appears to have tamed hyperinflation. After years of
near-famine condition, this year's rice crop, the staple of the Vietnamese diet,
is expected to set records.

Investment in Vietnam remains a enormous risk, not least because of the nation's
crumbling infrastructure and because of extensive corruption among Government
officials. "What once could be had with a fifth of Chivas Regal now takes a
bribe of $5,000," a Western businessman said. Thousands of Government workers
and Communist Party cadre have been jailed in recent years on corruption
charges.

Under rules set by the Bush Administration, American companies can send
representatives to Vietnam to make contact with Government officials, but with
very limited exceptions, the Americans cannot invest or sell their products
here.

The representatives are not even permitted to use American credit cards to pay
their hotel bills, forcing them to enter the country with stacks of $100 bills,
since virtually all large cash transactions must be carried out in American
dollars.

Several American corporations have been aggressively courting the Vietnamese in
the hope that they will eventually be allowed to do business here.

Last spring, Delta Air Lines played host in the United States to the general
director of Vietnam Airlines, Nguyen Hong Nhi, a former MIG-23 fighter pilot who
was credited with shooting down several American jets in the war.

He was taken to Atlanta, where he toured Delta's headquarters, and to Orlando,
Fla., where he visited Disney World. Delta, United and Northwest Airlines are
also thought likely to bid for Vietnamese routes if the embargo is lifted.

The American Telephone and Telegraph Company is one of a handful of companies
that are being allowed to do business with the Vietnamese. In November the
company was permitted by the Bush Administration to sign an agreement to
establish direct telecommunication links between Vietnam and the United States.

Billboards Light the Rive

Along the shore of the languorous Saigon River, which snakes through the center
of Ho Chi Minh City, brightly lit billboards advertise the names of companies
that are already in Vietnam in force -- Sony, Panasonic, Aiwa.

"The signs are very useful because they light our path on the river at night,"
said a 42-year-old fisherman, a former South Vietnamese soldier who was placed
in a Communist re-education camp for four years after the North Vietnamese
takeover. He asked that his name not be used because "I don't need more
trouble."

"The Americans companies should put up their signs, too," he said as his boat
passed another billboard along the river bank, this one for Toshiba.

"Everybody wants to forget the war," he said. "Americans should come to Saigon
and try to think of Vietnam without always thinking about the war."

LOAD-DATE: December 26, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Impressed by Vietnam's commitment to the free market, foreign
investors from outside the United States who had once been intimidated by the
American trade embargo are now simply ignoring it. A sign by the Saigon River
advertised a Japanese electronics company now doing business there. (Gary Knight
for The New York Times)(pg. 3)

Graph: "Beginnings of a Free Market" shows foreign investment approved by the
Vietnamese Government. (Source: State Committee for Cooperation and Investment,
Government of Vietnam)(pg. 3)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              410 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 26, 1992, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section 1; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 790 words



International 2-5

ISLAM'S EMBRACE OF JORDAN

Using the politics of accommodation, Muslim fundamentalists are changing the
face of Jordan's schools, politics and even the monarchy. Unlike their armed
brethren in Egypt, they are building a social edifice that they hope will
"ripen" until the nation falls into their lap.  1


FORLORNLY, HANOI TOASTS U.S.

Far from discouraging the purchase of American-brand soft drinks, the Vietnamese
Government is buying them by the caseload for official celebrations. It is a
show of pragmatism by men who are desperate for American investment.  1

NO RESPITE FOR 415 PALESTINIANS

A divided Israeli Government rejected a Red Cross request to bring food and
water to 415 Palestinians deported to a no man's land in southern Lebanon.
Lebanon repeated that it was not a "dumping ground" and said it would not allow
aid to pass through its territory, either.  5

DROOPING SPIRITS IN MOSCOW

Moscow Journal: With the decline of the ruble has come a decline in spirit -- an
air of license and decay rather than liberty and promise.  4

Russia said full accord on arms cuts must come before a summit.  4

SPIRIT OF GIVING IN SOMALIA

American troops shared holiday generosity with Somalis in the form of a special
makeshift first-aid center, small gifts, donations to an orphanage and even a
song.  5

American and French forces took control of the town of Hoddur.  5

U.N. GENERALS ACCUSE BOSNIANS

United Nations commanders in Sarajevo say Bosnian Government forces are making
them the target of mortar attacks because the United Nations officers oppose
Western military intervention.  4

India arrested 3,000 who sought to march to a disputed site.  3

National 6-9

WALSH SAYS HE'LL PRESS ON

Despite Presidential pardons, Lawrence Walsh, the Iran-contra prosecutor, said
he planned to keep working, focusing on whether President Bush improperly
withheld his personal diary.  1

CONGRESS MAY INVESTIGATE

Aides said Congress would probably investigate the pardons for Caspar Weinberger
and five others in the arms-for-hostages scandal.  6

POLICE TRY TO HALT CHASING

To trim the number of deaths caused by high-speed pursuits, police departments
across the nation are clamping down on such chases.  1

One woman's personal loss in a police chase.  7

BETTER ECONOMY, POORER JOBS

While most economic indicators show that the economy is recovering, many good
factory and office jobs are giving way to unstable and mediocre jobs, making
this recovery different from any other.  1

A RETAIL CLIFFHANGER

Merchants bit their nails this holiday season as sales got off to a strong start
but then weakened before posting sharp gains in the final days.  1

THE USUAL CLINTON CHRISTMAS

Bill Clinton spent his holiday the usual way, with a last-minute shopping spree
and a private celebration with family members.  7

BLACKS AND KOREANS SPLIT

The six-year-old Los Angeles Black-Korean Alliance has disbanded as antagonism
between the two groups has risen.  9

Alaska Journal: Reindeer are threatened in Alaska.  6

Beliefs: A girl in the South Bronx dreams of becoming a pastor.  9

Metro Digest 23

 TICKET SCALPERS' HARD LIFE

Officials in New York and New Jersey are cracking down on people who scalp
tickets on the street and on ticket brokers.  1

Business Digest 37

Arts/Entertainment 11-19, 39

P. D. Q. Bach returns.  11

Theater: "Them . . . Within Us." 15

Music: "Messiah" around town.  11

Bach concertos.  13

Dance: Alvin Ailey troupe.  11

Stiefel in "Nutcracker." 17

Lansbury in change of pace.  39

Sports 29-34

Basketball: Knicks fall to Bulls.  29

Ramon Ramos, three years later.  29

Spurs beat Clippers.  32

Boxing: Roy Jones Jr. ready for title shot.  32

Columns: Vecsey on Michael Jordan.  29

On golf.  34

Sports People.  31

Football: Marinovich takes a fall.  31

Jets end year in reverse.  31

Odds on the next Giants coach.  31

Hockey: Devils' Stastny starts scoring. 34

Obituaries 10

Thomas William (Teddy) Gleason, led longshoremen for 24 years

Helen Joseph, early foe of apartheid in South Africa

Richard H. Ichord, former Representative and anti-Communist

Editorials/Op-Ed 20-21

Editorials

It takes years to get to J.F.K.

The Somalia Christmas.

A wider passport scandal.

Letters

David Popenoe: Controversial truth -- two-parent families are better.

G. John Ikenberry: A world from scratch.

Ellen Hopkins: Sex is for adults.

Neediest Cases 27

LOAD-DATE: December 26, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              411 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 26, 1992, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

A FRENCH GENERAL SEES BOSNIAN PLOT

BYLINE: By JOHN F. BURNS,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 4; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 913 words

DATELINE: SARAJEVO, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Dec. 25


Citing two mortar attacks on United Nations military headquarters, the French
commander of the international peace force here said today that Bosnian
Government troops were trying to kill the two top-ranking United Nations
officers in the former Yugoslav republics because the generals strongly oppose
Western intervention.

The commander, Maj. Gen. Philippe Morillon, said he saw a link between the
attacks Thursday and again today on the United Nations villa and the Security
Council debate whether to authorize the United States and European nations to
enforce a ban on military flights over Bosnia.

Such enforcement would represent the first Western tactical military
intervention in the Bosnian war, and approval of a resolution has been delayed
by differences over the form that any Western military action should take.

As part of a tougher policy prompted by growing evidence of Serbian atrocities
against civilians, Washington is seeking authorization to shoot down Serbian
military aircraft, most of them helicopters, that have defied the ban more than
300 times.

But Britain and France, which provide about half the 7,500-member United Nations
force here, are concerned that attacks on Serbian aircraft could lead to
retaliation on the ground.

These doubts have been reinforced by positions taken by the co-chairmen of a
joint United Nations-European Community peace conference on the Yugoslav region,
former Secretary of State Cyrus R. Vance and Lord Owen of Britain. They have
said they want more time for negotiations in Geneva with the Serbian leaders.

Strong opposition to battlefield intervention has also been expressed by the
United Nations command here, a point made strongly today by General Morillon at
a news conference called to mark the visit of Gen. Satish Nambiar of India,
overall commander of the 21,500-member United Nations force in the Balkan
republics.

General Morillon described the Bosnians' mortar blasts as a "deliberate attack"
aimed at killing General Nambiar and himself. "They know that Nambiar and I have
been resisting military intervention," he said.

As many as 500 shells strike Sarajevo every day, most of them fired by Serbian
guns from positions in the surrounding hills.

But General Morillon said there was "no doubt" that the mortars that struck
outside the villa had been fired from an area of Sarajevo that is under the
control of the Bosnian defenders.

He said United Nations observers posted on the mountains had confirmed that the
mortars were fired from positions near the Miljacka River in the city center,
close to Grbavica, a district controlled by Serbian forces.

"They are not stupid, these people," General Morillon said, adding that the
firing positions were close enough to a Serbian stronghold so that the Serbs
would be blamed.

He said the more dangerous of the two attacks, which occurred at breakfast time
Thursday, had forced him and General Nambiar to take shelter in a sandbagged
storage room in the villa. Only one soldier, from Britain, was lightly wounded.
But General Morillon said the three 82-millimeter mortar rounds, two of which
struck within 20 feet of the villa, could have had far worse consequences.

A spokesman for General Morillon said later that he was considering pulling his
headquarters out of Sarajevo and moving it to Kiseljak, a Croatian-controlled
town 25 miles to the northwest. This would be a blow to many Sarajevans, who
have come to regard the United Nations presence in the city as at least symbolic
protection.

While Britain and France have urged patrols over Bosnian airspace rather than
attacks, the two generals seemed to take a warier view. In effect, they said,
they have argued within the United Nations system against any form of military
intervention on the ground that it could bog down the West in a long war with
high casualties.

"The alternative to what we are doing is much more serious and will only prolong
the conflict," said General Nambiar, who arrived in March to head a force then
intended to separate Serbian and Croatian forces in Croatia. It expanded into
Bosnia after the war erupted here in April.

Generals Oppose Combat

"The use of force here will mean more lives lost," he continued. "It will mean a
continuation of the conflict."

This opposition from top-ranking officers to full Western intervention began in
June, when Maj. Gen. Lewis W. MacKenzie of Canada, then the United Nations
commander in Sarajevo, argued against bombing Serbian gun positions around the
capital, saying this could draw the West into a ground war comparable to
Vietnam.

After General MacKenzie left in July, General Morillon took a similar stance,
saying Western forces could eventually suffer 100,000 casualties if they became
embroiled in the Yugoslav conflict.

But those opposing fuller Western intervention have been under increasing
pressure as evidence of Serbian atrocities against civilians increased.

General Nambiar said today that advocates of intervention should recognize that
it would no longer be possible to escort relief supplies to Sarajevo once
Western military action was taken against the Serbs.

Many of the United Nations soldiers, he said, would be involved in attacks on
Serbian aircraft or airfields, adding, "It endangers our troops far too much."

The two generals said they saw no alternative to continuing negotiations with
Serbian leaders for a cease-fire and an end to the disruption of relief efforts.

LOAD-DATE: December 26, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Map of Bonia and Herzegovina showing location of Sarajevo.

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              412 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 26, 1992, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Thomas Gleason, 92, Head of Longshoremen, Dies

BYLINE: By DENNIS HEVESI

SECTION: Section 1; Page 10; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1005 words


Thomas W. (Teddy) Gleason, who as president of the International Longshoremen's
Association for 24 years held an iron grip on the docks of both the Atlantic and
Gulf coasts, only to see that grip pried open by containerized shipping, died on
Thursday at Cabrini Medical Center in Manhattan. He was 92.

Mr. Gleason, who lived in Manhattan, was in the hospital's coronary care unit
when he died. But a hospital spokeswoman, Gisele Roberge, could not provide the
exact cause of death.

A fireplug of a man at five feet, six inches and 180 pounds, Mr. Gleason was
alternately described during his heyday as "hard as nails" and "smooth as silk."
He could be gracious, pleasant and courteous or could uncork a torrent of
language suitable for the waterfront.

He always felt that his greatest achievement as president of the I.L.A. was the
guaranteed annual income he won for union members, which allowed hundreds of
them to collect as much as $32,000 a year for doing no work after
containerization eliminated their jobs.

'Everything We Fought For'

When he went to work alongside his father in 1915, Mr. Gleason was paid 35 cents
an hour. By 1985, members of the I.L.A. were making a minimum of $17 an hour.
"We got everything we fought for," Mr. Gleason said at the time of his
retirement in 1987.

In 1915, Mr. Gleason walked down Charles Street, where the family lived in a
succession of cold-water flats, to sling bales on the docks alongside his
father. The oldest of 13 children, Mr. Gleason left school after the seventh
grade and later said he passed up a high school scholarship to help support his
family. He was one of the youngest full-fledged dockworkers in New York.

The son and grandson of longshoremen, he was one of the last of a generation of
trade unionists, including the Reuther brothers in the automobile industry and
James Hoffa of the teamsters, who developed their organizing and political
skills during the bitter labor conflicts of the 1920's and 1930's.

For a youth on the piers of Manhattan, the labor scene was particularly violent
in those times. Some dockworkers were ex-convicts; others would become convicts.
Murder and mayhem were routine as warring factions fought for control of the
piers and access to their lucrative cargoes.

Corruption was a way of life and remained so long after labor and management had
come to terms or at least truces almost everywhere else. Elia Kazan's film about
corruption on the New York piers, "On the Waterfront," was considered a
contemporary portrayal when it was made in 1954.

'Just a Gang of Rebels'

In 1919, Mr. Gleason joined the I.L.A., which was then, he said, "just a gang of
rebels." Over the years he worked as a checker, a billing clerk, longshoreman,
winch driver, truck loader and timekeeper. By 1932, he had advanced to dock
superintendent.

That year, in the depths of the Depression, he was blacklisted by the
stevedoring companies and the steamship lines because of his union activities.
To support his family, he took a job pushing a hand truck in a sugar factory
during the day and sold hot dogs at Coney Island at night.

With the coming of the New Deal and the legalization of union activity on the
docks, Mr. Gleason returned to both his trade and his union activities. Soon he
was president and business agent of Checkers Local 1346 of the I.L.A. Later, the
local merged with three others to form Local 1, with Mr. Gleason as president.

In 1953, the I.L.A. was expelled from the American Federation of Labor over
corruption. The president, Joseph P. Ryan, resigned and Capt. William Bradley,
with Mr. Gleason's support, was elected president. Mr. Gleason was elected
general organizer. In 1961, he became executive vice president and two years
later was elected president after reportedly pressuring Captain Bradley to
resign.

Mr. Gleason served six consecutive four-year terms as president of the I.L.A.,
retiring in July 1987.

His Stubborn Side

The guaranteed annual income he negotiated, which took effect in 1964, insures
that all union members in good standing are paid whether they work or not. Both
the shipping industry and the union prefer the admittedly costly guaranteed
income to the old shape-up when dock work was day labor, when seven to 10 men
would bid for each job each morning and who got the job was often determined by
kickbacks and violence.

The world saw Mr. Gleason's stubborn side when in 1963 he opposed the Kennedy
Administration's proposal to sell surplus wheat to the Soviet Union. He relented
when the Government agreed that half of the grain ships would be American.

When the Johnson Administration reneged on that agreement, Mr. Gleason began a
dockworkers' boycott of the Soviet-bound wheat. He called it off after eight
days, but not before Luther H. Hodges, then Secretary of Commerce, accused the
I.L.A. of trying to make foreign policy.

During the Johnson Administration, Mr. Gleason served on the President's
Maritime Advisory Committee. During the Vietnam War, he made four trips to
Saigon to help set up a program to relieve port congestion. Later, he performed
similar duties at Mombasa in Kenya.

If Mr. Gleason seemed to have changed little since the days he traveled in a
bullet-proof car and angered Presidents, by the time of his retirement the union
was just a shadow of what it once was. It still represented dockworkers along
the Atlantic and Gulf Coasts, but its membership -- around 110,000 -- was less
than half of the 250,000 it had been before automation.

Mr. Gleason was a lifelong supporter of Irish-American causes. In 1984, he was
named grand marshal of the St. Patrick's Day parade in New York in recognition
of his years of support for the unification of Northern Ireland and the Irish
Republic.

Mr. Gleason held an honorary Doctor of Laws degree from Molloy College in
Rockville Centre, L.I.

Mr. Gleason's wife, Emma, died in 1960. He is survived by three sons, Thomas
Jr., John and Robert, 15 grandchildren and six great-grandchildren.

NAME: Thomas W. (Teddy) Gleason

LOAD-DATE: December 26, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Thomas William Gleason (NYT, 1980)

TYPE: Biography; Obituary (Obit)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              413 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 26, 1992, Saturday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

Ex-Rep. Richard Ichord, 66, Dies; Led Un-American Activities Panel

BYLINE: By CLIFFORD J. LEVY

SECTION: Section 1; Page 10; Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 530 words


Former Representative Richard H. Ichord, a fervent anti-Communist who crusaded
against the peace movement during the Vietnam War and served as the last
chairman of the House Un-American Activities Committee, died yesterday at a
hospital in Nevada, Mo. He was 66.

He died of complications from a heart attack on Dec. 18, said his daughter, Pam
Ichord Ehlers. He had divided his time in recent years between Washington and a
cattle ranch in Waynesville, Mo., she said.

A conservative Democrat who represented a district in central and southern
Missouri, Mr. Ichord (pronounced EYE-cord) spent 10 terms in the House of
Representatives before retiring in 1981. He earned a reputation as a man
preoccupied by the spread of Communism abroad and at home, where he feared
radicals were trying to undermine the Federal Government.

His critics accused him of engaging in smears and witch hunts similar to the
activities of Senator Joseph R. McCarthy, Republican of Wisconsin, in the
1950's.

"The kooks of the right and the left say that nobody in Congress should be
dealing with such problems, but I think they're wrong," Mr. Ichord said in 1974
when asked about the Un-American Activities Committee. The Communist Party in
the United States, he added, "could be a real threat if the country has an
economic depression of the 1930's type."

The Un-American Activities Committee earned notoriety in the 1940's and 1950's,
when it investigated Alger Hiss and others accused of being Communists. Richard
M. Nixon, a little-known Representative from California in that time, gained
national attention from the committee's hearings.

After Mr. Ichord was named chairman of the committee in 1969, he used his
position to campaign against antiwar protesters. He published a list of "radical
orators" at colleges around the country, including Muhammad Ali, Angela Davis,
Abbie Hoffman and Dr. Benjamin Spock. Other lawmakers said it represented an
effort to stifle dissent.

Mr. Ichord also introduced a bill banning travel to countries with which the
United States was at war. The bill was prompted, he said at the time, by Jane
Fonda's trip to North Vietnam at the height of the war in Southeast Asia.

The committee was disbanded in 1975, a few years after it had changed its name
to the House Internal Security Committee. Mr. Ichord fought to save it,
maintaining that it was needed to fight terrorism, crime and other activities.

Mr. Ichord was born on June 27, 1926, in Licking, Mo. He enlisted in the Navy
Air Corps in World War II and later earned his undergraduate and law degrees
from the University of Missouri.

When he was 32, he became the youngest speaker in the history of the Missouri
House of Representatives. In 1960 he was elected to Congress, where he was known
for his folksy wit. He also served as a member of the Armed Services Committee.

After he retired, he worked as a lawyer and lobbyist in Washington and served on
several corporate boards. The Pentagon awarded him the Distinguished Civilian
Service Award, the Army's highest honor for civilians.

Besides his daughter, he is survived by his wife, Millicent, his son Richard and
three grandchildren.

NAME: Richard H. Ichord

LOAD-DATE: December 26, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: December 28, 1992, Monday

CORRECTION:

Because of an editing error, an obituary on Saturday about former Representative
Richard H. Ichord misidentified his hometown in some copies. He lived in both
Waynesville, Mo., and Washington, not in Nevada, Mo.


GRAPHIC: Photo: Richard H. Ichord (The New York Times, 1974)

TYPE: Biography; Obituary (Obit)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              414 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 27, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THE WORLD;
Somali Culture Holds Surprises, Some Pleasant, For American G.I.'s

BYLINE: By ERIC SCHMITT

SECTION: Section 4; Page 6; Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1127 words

DATELINE: MOGADISHU, Somalia


MARINE Cpl. Charles Cox landed here expecting to see starving children in a grim
tableau of misery and death. In his first week, though, Corporal Cox drove by
lush farms and grazing land for cattle and other livestock that rivaled the
richest countryside near his hometown, Mobile, Ala.

"We didn't expect to see camels and cornfields," said the 23-year-old
infantryman. For thousands of young American marines and soldiers in the
military relief operation here -- many serving on their first overseas mission
-- the reality of Somalia has differed sharply from their expectations.

Since the Vietnam War, in which American commanders learned hard lessons about
insensitivity toward the citizens of an occupied land, the military has worked
hard to prepare its grunts for the cultures they will encounter in overseas
operations. But most young troops interviewed in the first two weeks of the
Somalia operation said there were some things here that they had to learn
firsthand.

The soldiers expected to see poverty, but not the large number of seemingly
healthy people they also encountered. Somalia is a Muslim country, but the
forces here have been able to quietly observe Christmas and Hanukkah with none
of the religious restrictions encountered in Saudi Arabia during the Persian
Gulf war.

Marines were prepared to engage guerrillas in battle, but so far have seen
little action and suffered few casualties (the first American fatality occurred
last week, a civilian Army worker killed by a mine). Scattered potshots from
snipers are about the extent of the opposition encountered by the troops, as
well as gunfire from 10-year-olds with AK-47 assault rifles, usually aimed
harmlessly into the air. American troops had heard of Somalia's culture of guns,
but in the initial days of the military relief operation, before gunmen largely
retreated from the streets of Mogadishu, they were shocked at how young and
cocky those with guns were.

The American troops say their attitude toward their mission hasn't changed --
they still want to help. But immersed in the chaos that long ago replaced a
working government, soldiers and marines say it will take much more than
delivering tons of food to solve Somalia's problems in the long run.

"Once you get here, you understand why you're here," said Cpl. Norman Finley,
22, a gulf war veteran from Rio Vista, Tex.

Before they arrived, marines heading to Somalia aboard ships were given magazine
articles and briefings on the country. Cpl. Larry Abeyta, 25, an anti-tank
gunner from Redondo Beach, Calif., took a cultural geography course offered on
the dock-landing ship Rushmore. Cpl. Greg Bernhardt, 21, a radio operator from
East Northport, L.I., brushed up on the Somali words for "halt" and "Are you in
pain?" from a military handout. Many others summoned their experience from
recent relief missions in Kurdistan, Bangladesh and the Philippines.

But the unexpected greeted marines from the moment photographers blinded
camouflaged scouts storming Mogadishu's beach. The marines came ashore unsure
what, if any, opposition they might face. So far, random snipers, working mainly
after dark, have been errant but still unnerving.

Reading Expressions

Behind the heavy, double-metal gates of the United States Embassy, marine and
Army sentries say they have had to become quick judges of character. "You can
tell which ones need help and which ones are gang members by the expressions in
their faces," said Corporal Finley. "During the day they are your friends, and
at night some of them are the snipers shooting around you."

In those same faces, American troops say, they see little of the debilitating
hunger that camera crews captured regularly for the evening news last summer.
Instead, many soldiers have had to contend with the crowds of curious and
frequently exuberant Somalis thronging around foot patrols and armed vehicles.

As the military operation gradually expands into Somalia's famine belt, many
marines are surprisingly unaware of the steady efforts of private relief
agencies who have continued to deliver supplies in the most violent situations.
Other scenes of abject poverty, though, burn into soldiers' memories. Pfc. Jason
Karger, 19, an Army cook from Duluth, Minn., said he realized the state of
living conditions and health education here when he saw a woman casually ladle
out a drink for herself from a metal basin in which she was bathing her baby.

"I heard it was bad, but I didn't know it was this bad all around," said Cpl.
Greg Riles, 22, of Riverside, Calif., as he shooed away a pack of kids who tried
to snatch food remains from a burning garbage heap. The kids evidently lived in
a ramshackle corrugated metal lean-to nearby.

The marines, supplied with M.R.E.'s -- meals-ready-to-eat -- have often been
reluctant to eat in front of Somalis.

"It gets so bad you won't eat on the top of your amtrak in front of the kids,"
said Lance Cpl. Jim Dufault, a 20-year-old amphibious track driver from
Haverhill, Mass. "I'd rather be inside the track with the flies. It makes me
feel really bad."

In some instances, a rapport is slowly building as sign language and the
Somalis' generally receptive attitude toward the troops bridge the language gap.

"No matter how badly they live, they are very proud," said Lance Cpl. David
Ferguson, 21, of Denver, Colo. "You can tell just talking to them. They not
afraid or intimidated by us."

Somalis have distinctly different reactions to black troops, who make up about
21 percent of the American force here.

Most Somalis seem to welcome the black troops and the order they have helped to
impose, although some of the young gunmen disarmed by the marines, perhaps in a
reflection of their bitterness, have been critical of the American blacks.

Black marines said they seemed to be regarded either as heroes or reviled for
fighting with a white-led occupying force. "When they saw me, they'd yell, 'Hey,
Mike Tyson,' " said Pfc. Walter Hughes, a 19-year-old cook from Detroit. "They'd
all be smiling."

But Cpl. Kerry Freeman, a 22-year-old rifleman from Sandersville, Ga., said
Somalis had lectured him about the mistreatment of blacks in America. They would
"tell me all about how blacks got to America as slaves," he said. "But then I'd
tell them about Malcolm X and Martin Luther King."

Lance Cpl. Allen Robinson, a 20-year-old machine-gunner from Amityville, N.Y.,
said: "They see me working side-by-side with white guys and many of them don't
understand. They think you're no good and that you're there to fight them.

"I tell them, 'I'm African-American and you're Somali, but we're the same.'
Still, it hurts when they say, 'You're no good,' and I'm here doing my job
trying to help them."

LOAD-DATE: December 27, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: A Marine on patrol in Mogadishu being greeted by children. Many
American soldiers did not expect the depths of poverty they saw. (Chris
Rainier/JB Pictures)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              415 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 27, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THE TRANSITION;
Clinton's Cabinet Choices Put Him at Center, Balancing Competing Factions

BYLINE: By THOMAS L. FRIEDMAN,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 22; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 3306 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 25


The most striking thing about President-elect Bill Clinton's Cabinet is not so
much the jobs he has assigned others, but rather the jobs he has reserved for
himself.

The way that Mr. Clinton has constructed his Cabinet is in keeping with how he
ran his campaign: he has included representatives of many views rather than
choosing between rival schools of thought within the Democratic Party. And
instead of naming conceptualizers to important economic and foreign policy
posts, he has chosen competent musicians and reserved the roles of composer and
conductor for himself.

"What that means," said Thomas E. Mann, director of governmental studies at the
Brookings Institution, "is that the success of the Clinton Presidency rests
squarely on the President and less on the rest of his Administration. If there
is a unifying theme to this Cabinet, it is Bill Clinton at the center -- someone
who will have to be, and clearly intends to be, very active, not passive."

By the nature of his Cabinet choices, Mr. Clinton has in effect assigned himself
the main roles of chief policy architect, articulator and arbiter.

Others before Mr. Clinton have played all three roles, but this has not been the
standard in recent years. Ronald Reagan delegated large areas of responsibility
to others, and often let rival factions fight it out. George Bush relied on
important aides, including Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d or Housing
Secretary Jack F. Kemp, to provide the "vision thing" for domestic and foreign
affairs.

'Working Things Out'

"I think the way Bill Clinton picked his Cabinet says a lot about how he will
make decisions," said Stan Greenberg, a poll taker for Mr. Clinton. "He did not
rely on some committee to make recommendations. It was Bill Clinton working
things out in his own head, in his own living room, mostly by himself. That is
how he will run the Cabinet. He will reach out for diverse points of view,
bounce ideas off of them, but ultimately the decision and the articulation will
come out of him."

The arrangement will put pressure on Mr. Clinton to signal clearly which path he
wants to follow out of the many approaches his Cabinet choices reflect, Mr. Mann
said. He will personally have to mediate the disputes he has set up by the
diverse nature of his team, and he will have to provide the vision in both
economic and foreign affairs.

Preview of Things to Come

The way that Mr. Clinton managed -- or did not manage -- the tensions involved
in building a Cabinet "that looked like America," as he put it, could be a
harbinger of his Administration. He had to negotiate a minefield of demands from
environmentalists, women's groups and minorities to get a Cabinet of the proper
mix, while at the same time not appearing to be a captive of special interests.

During his search for an Attorney General, organized women's groups, who were
determined to reserve that post for a woman, lobbied publicly and privately for
their favorites and coalesced around Brooksley E. Born, a Washington lawyer.
Although her selection appeared all but assured on Wednesday night, Mr. Clinton
suddenly chose Zoe Baird, whose name had not appeared on any of the lists of
women's groups. Her selection won high praise from legal experts, but it is not
clear whether it resulted more from her qualifications than from Mr. Clinton's
desire to demonstrate a degree of independence from the special-interest
advocates.

"Like most successful politicians, Clinton has a coalition in his brain," said
Ben J. Wattenberg, a former speech writer for President Lyndon B. Johnson. "You
can carve his cerebrum down the middle and there is his antiwar, Hillary
Clinton, liberal left lobe, and the 'New-Kind-of-Democrat,' advocating
responsibility, moderation and you-can't-get-something-for-nothing right lobe."

While Mr. Clinton shares the goals of many of the interest groups, he is also
acutely aware of the dangers of ceding certain parts of his Administration to
elements of the coalition that elected him. His tactic in shaping the Cabinet
was to try to satisfy them in general -- appointing a woman as Attorney General,
for instance -- but not in particular, by appointing his own woman.

Window to Tactics

When it comes to governing, however, Mr. Clinton will often not be choosing
between many options, but rather between rival, and very specific, policy
proposals embodied by the different wings of his Cabinet. The way he built his
team may be revealing of his tactics.

A less visible factor shaping Mr. Clinton's choices seems to have been his
application to Cabinet making of the principle that only Nixon could go to
China. Whereas many Presidents choose Cabinet members who will not be advocates
for the special interests that lobby their departments, Mr. Clinton has chosen a
number of such advocates, precisely on the assumption that only they will be
able to pacify their constituencies while pushing through Mr. Clinton's agenda.

That is the logic behind his appointment of the veteran legislators Senator
Lloyd Bentsen to be Treasury Secretary and Representative Leon E. Panetta to be
director of the Office of Management and Budget, both of whom are considered
vital to easing Mr. Clinton's economic agenda through Congress. It is also
apparent in his choice of Jesse Brown, director of the Disabled American
Veterans Organization, to be Secretary of Veterans Affairs and Hershel W. Gober,
director of the Arkansas Department of Veterans Affairs to be the deputy.

Similar concerns also showed in the selections of Carol M. Browner, an
environmentalist protegee of Vice President-elect Al Gore, to head the
Environmental Protection Agency and Hazel R. O'Leary, a Northern States Power
Company executive, as Secretary of Energy.

When Mr. Clinton was asked how he could choose two career advocates to run his
Veterans Affairs Department, he said, "One of the reasons that I hired them
both, is so they could tell these people and the people they represent all over
America the truth about what the facts are and engage them in a meaningful
dialogue about how to deal with the difficult questions."

Other Clinton nominees seemed to be not advocates of the agencies they are
taking over but rather infiltrators, who Mr. Clinton hopes will infect the
departments with new ideas. This would seem to apply most to Representative Les
Aspin, the former chairman of the House Armed Services Committee who is the
Defense Secretary-designate.

Mr. Aspin has been one of the strongest voices in Congress for using the
military to undertake limited action in places like Bosnia, precisely the sort
of limited intervention that the Pentagon has staunchly opposed. Mr. Aspin has
also supported a doubling of the military spending cuts proposed by the Bush
Administration over the next five years.

Republicans seem to be of two minds about Mr. Clinton's Cabinet. On the one hand
they note that his promise to appoint a Republican to give his team a bipartisan
air was ignored. On the other hand, Republicans almost seem relieved. They had
worried that Mr. Clinton might be immune to traditional Democratic Party
special-interest pleadings and break the mold of politics as usual by appointing
a Cabinet with entirely fresh faces chosen purely on merit.

"But when you look at his Cabinet," said Kevin Phillips, a Republican political
consultant, "it does not look like America. It looks like the 43 percent of
America who voted for Bill Clinton. I don't see Republicans or Perot voters
represented there at all, and one could argue that blacks, Hispanics and
left-wing ideologues are over-represented."

True, Mr. Phillips said, Mr. Clinton has opted for solid establishment figures
in the vital portfolios of economics, foreign affairs and defense, but if they
"don't deliver for him on the economy, and the peripheral Cabinet moves him to
the left, he could find himself in trouble with the mainstream."

Thomas F. McLarty 3d/Chief of Staff

Former chairman of Arkla, a natural-gas company. Mr. Clinton's friend since
childhood, Mr. McLarty, 46, is a self-described "facilitator" who promises a
team approach in managing the access and the flow of work to the Oval Office. He
has said he will take his lead from his boss rather than pursuing any agenda of
his own.




ECONOMIC TEAM



Lloyd M. Bentsen/Secretary of the Treasury

Chairman of the Senate Finance Committee. A sage, smooth-talking Washington
insider respected by his colleagues, Mr. Bentsen, 71, will help push some of Mr.
Clinton's liberal economic proposals through Congress. The four-term Texas
Senator is an expert on tax laws and a consummate deal-maker who has managed to
get people on both sides of the aisle behind the support of particular
legislation.


Leon E. Panetta /Director of Management and Budget

Chairman of the House Budget Committee. A master of the arcane budget process,
Mr. Panetta, 54, has often seemed to be the Democrats' conscience on reducing
the deficit. One of the few in Congress willing to raise taxes and cut popular
government benefits, Mr. Panetta once said that Congress liked to deal with the
"sugar" in economic packages, but hated to deal with the "vinegar" of the
deficit.


Robert E. Rubin/Chairman, National Economic Council (non-Cabinet)

Co-chairman of Goldman, Sachs & Company. Mr. Rubin, 54, showed talent managing
traders and deal makers at Goldman, Sachs and will need those skills to manage
the new National Economic Council and its interaction with the Council on
Economic Advisers. No ideologue, he is likely to balance concern about the
financial markets with economic and political reality.


Laura D'Andrea Tyson/Chairman, Council of Economic Advisers (non-Cabinet)

Economics professor at the University of California at Berkeley. A long-shot
choice over higher-profile economic heavyweights, Ms. Tyson, 45, is the first
woman to lead the Council of Economic Advisers. She wants to be tougher on trade
to help American manufacturers. One of her challenges will be to make sure that
the council is not overshadowed by the newly established National Economic
Council.


Robert B. Reich/Secretary of Labor

Lecturer in public policy at Harvard University. A close friend of Mr. Clinton
since their days together as Rhodes scholars at Oxford University, Mr. Reich,
46, provided the intellectual firepower for Mr. Clinton's campaign. His first
task will be to turn the Labor Department from a backwater into a place that
helps shape efforts to make the United States more competitive.


Ronald H. Brown/Secretary of Commerce

Chairman of the Democratic National Committee and partner at Patton, Boggs &
Blow. The first black appointed as head of the Commerce Department, a position
that Mr. Clinton said he wanted to make a "powerhouse," Mr. Brown, 51, will have
to turn his negotiating and deal-making skills to a department whose principal
focus has been promoting trade and forecasting the weather. The ultimate
pragmatist, Mr. Brown is known to submerge personal feelings to forge
compromises.


Mickey Kantor/United States Trade Representative

Partner at Manatt, Phelps, Phillips & Kantor. Chairman of Mr. Clinton's election
campaign, Mr. Kantor, 52, has little background in trade issues and is viewed as
having gotten the job as a political reward. One of his biggest challenges will
be to win Congressional approval for the North American Free Trade Agreement.




FOREIGN POLICY TEAM



Warren M. Christopher/Secretary of State

Chairman of O'Melveny & Myers law firm. A trusted adviser to Mr. Clinton,
respected more for his ability to manage rather than to conceptualize policy,
Mr. Christopher, 67, will be a team player and coalition builder who is likely
to emphasize pragmatism over ideology. He is expected to rely much more heavily
on the advice and expertise of assistant secretaries than did James A. Baker 3d,
President Bush's head of State.


Les Aspin/Secretary of Defense

Chairman of the House Armed Services Committee. One of Mr. Clinton's campaign
advisers on military issues, Mr. Aspin, 54, is expected to push for further cuts
in military spending and to be more aggressive on intervening in the fighting in
Bosnia. He sees his biggest challenge as maintaining global readiness in an era
of cutbacks. While he has long been fascinated by military issues and has deep
knowledge of the Pentagon, he is untested in managing a complex
multibillion-dollar organization and is likely to clash with Gen. Colin L.
Powell, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, who is wary of using American
troops abroad for political or diplomatic purposes.


W. Anthony Lake/National Security Adviser (non-Cabinet)

Professor of international relations at Mount Holyoke College. Considered a
pragmatist, Mr. Lake, 53, became a special assistant to Henry A. Kissinger in
1969 and resigned a year later to protest the invasion of Cambodia. He was a
director of policy planning in the Carter Administration. He is expected to
emphasize the views of career experts over particular ideologies. His close work
with Mr. Christopher on foreign policy during the campaign is expected to help
alleviate much of the bureaucratic rivalry that has marred relations between the
State Department and the National Security Council in the past.


R. James Woolsey Jr./Director of Central Intelligence (non-Cabinet)

Partner in the law firm of Shea & Gardner. A neo-conservative and another former
Rhodes scholar, Mr. Woolsey, 51, is an expert on arms control, spy satellites
and Pentagon acquisitions. He is close to Brent Scowcroft, who has been national
security adviser to President Bush. At a time of budgetary retrenchment, his
challenge is to make the Central Intelligence Agency relevant in a post-cold-war
era.


Madeleine K. Albright/United Nations Ambassador (non-Cabinet)

President of the Center for National Policy. Born in Prague, she is a Washington
insider who worked as a foreign policy adviser to Mr. Clinton, Ms. Albright, 55,
is a former professor of international affairs at the Georgetown University
School of Foreign Service. She was an adviser to Walter F. Mondale in 1984 and
Michael S. Dukakis in 1988. Her expertise in Russia and Eastern Europe is likely
to come in handy as she represents the United States on the Security Council.




DOMESTIC POLICY TEAM



Zoe Baird/Attorney General

Vice president and general counsel, Aetna Life and Casualty Company. A tough
negotiator who once forced the White House to back down when it wanted to fill
the Census Bureau with political appointees, Ms. Baird, 40, served in the
Justice Department's Office of Legal Counsel in the Carter Administration and
later in the White House counsel's office. She was an informal adviser to Mr.
Clinton on health issues in the campaign.


Donna E. Shalala/Secretary of Health and Human Services

Chancellor of the University of Wisconsin since 1988, Dr. Shalala served as an
assistant Housing and Urban Development Secretary in the Carter Administration.
An expert on urban finance, Dr. Shalala, 51, is considered a dynamic leader who
is as sensitive to politics as to policy. She prides herself on her ability to
cut through bureaucracy, a skill she will need in her new post, where she will
immediately be confronted with two intractable problems: health care and
welfare.


Henry G. Cisneros/Secretary of Housing and Urban Development

Former Mayor of San Antonio, where he gained national fame as the first Hispanic
mayor of a major American city. One of two Hispanic men in the Clinton Cabinet,
Mr. Cisneros, 45, displayed a commitment to the problems of cities as Mayor and,
by recruiting corporations, helped move San Antonio out of the shadows cast by
Dallas and Houston to become a major business center.


Jesse Brown/Secretary of Veterans Affairs

Executive director of the Disabled American Veterans. This former marine has
been an advocate for disabled veterans since an ambush in Vietnam left him with
a paralyzed right arm 27 years ago. Mr. Brown, 48, is expected to give veterans'
organizations a major voice in running the department but faces the challenge of
joblessness among veterans and maintaining their health-care benefits at a time
of budget cutbacks. Mr. Brown has campaigned vigorously against proposals to cut
veterans' benefits.


Richard W. Riley/Secretary of Education

Former Governor of South Carolina.  Though low key, Mr. Riley, 59, has a passion
for improving education and accomplished sweeping changes in elementary and
secondary schools in South Carolina in the mid-1980's. He is likely to urge that
the bully pulpit of the White House goad the nation into reforming its
educational system and adopting national tests and academic standards.


Federico F. Pena /Secretary of Transportation

Former Mayor of Denver. Elected mayor at 36, Mr. Pena, 45, overcame resistance
to his pet project: a $2.3 billion airport that will be the world's largest when
it opens next October. An avid jogger, he served on a state commission that
charted a 20-year transportation plan featuring mass transit and alternative
forms of transportation like bike paths and pedestrian walkways.




NATURAL RESOURCES/ENVIRONMENTAL POLICY TEAM



Hazel R. O'Leary/Secretary of Energy

Executive vice president at the Northern States Power Company of Minnesota,
where she has overseen the utility's legal and personnel departments,
environmental affairs, public relations and lobbying. An energy regulator in the
Ford and Carter administrations, Mrs. O'Leary, 55, became Mr. Clinton's choice
after retiring Senator Tim Worth of Colorado fell out of favor. She would be the
first Energy Secretary to have worked for an energy company, but her wide
experience does not include her new department's biggest job: cleaning up
pollution at the nation's nuclear bomb factories.


Carol M. Browner/Administrator, Environmental Protection Agency (non-Cabinet)

Secretary of the Florida Department of Environmental Regulation for the past two
years. A former Senate aide to Vice President-elect Al Gore, whose transition
team she has directed since November, Ms. Browner, 36, has been praised for her
political skills in setting a Federal lawsuit over pollution in the Everglades.
She also negotiated a trend-setting agreement with the Disney Company that
requires it to spend $40 million to improve a 13-square-mile ranch near Orlando
for wildlife.


Bruce Babbitt/Secretary of Interior

A partner at the law firm of Steptoe & Johnson, which has offices in Phoenix and
Washington. Mr. Babbitt is a former Governor of Arizona, where business
executives have generally spoken highly of him. An outdoorsman fluent in Spanish
and fond of unorthodox public policy, Mr. Babbitt, 54, ran for President in 1988
with a wit and sophistication pleasing to editorialists. Voters were less
impressed, and he withdrew after finishing fifth in the Iowa caucuses and sixth
in New Hampshire primary. Mr. Babbitt was also considered for the post of United
States Trade Representative. He is president of the League of Conservation
Voters, and his selection thrilled environmentalists.


Mike Espy/Secretary of Agriculture

Representative from Mississippi. The first black to represent Mississippi in
Congress since Reconstruction, Mr. Espy, 39, has often defied expectations.
Elected to Congress by a slim margin in 1986, he has been re-elected easily. He
has appeared in advertisements for the National Rifle Association and forged
strong ties with the conservative agricultural interests of the Mississippi
Delta. In filling a position typically filled by white men from the Middle West,
Mr. Espy will find friends and supporters among producers of cotton, rice,
peanuts, sugar and catfish.

LOAD-DATE: December 27, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos of Clinton Cabinet choices.

TYPE: News Analysis

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              416 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 27, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

John Melby, 79, Who Tied Ouster As a Diplomat to Hellman Affair

BYLINE: By RICHARD PEREZ-PENA

SECTION: Section 1; Page 41; Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 456 words


John F. Melby, a diplomat who was dismissed from the State Department during the
McCarthy era and attributed his ouster to an affair with Lillian Hellman, died
on Dec. 18 in Guelph, Ontario, Canada, where he lived. He was 79.

He died of a heart attack, family members said.

A book published in 1989 detailed how in the early 1950's, at the height of
anti-Communist fervor in the United States, the State Department investigated
whether Mr. Melby posed a security risk because of his relationship with the
playwright, who was reputed to be a former member of the Communist Party.

Ms. Hellman, who never publicly acknowledged belonging to the party, testified
before the department's Loyalty Security Board on Mr. Melby's behalf, but he was
dismissed in 1953. He attributed his ouster to his relationship with Ms.
Hellman, according to a book on the subject, "The Cold War Romance of Lillian
Hellman and John Melby," by Robert P. Newman (University of North Carolina
Press, 1989).

Mr. Melby, a native of Portland, Ore., graduated in 1934 from Illinois Wesleyan
University. He received a master's degree and a doctorate in political science
at the University of Chicago.

In Moscow During War

He joined the Foreign Service in 1937 and was assigned in 1943 to the American
Embassy in Moscow. In 1945 he was sent to China, where the Nationalist
Government was fighting Mao Zedong's army.

When the Communists won control of China in 1949, Mr. Melby was recalled to
Washington and assigned to write an analysis of the event. He produced the
influential study known as the China White Paper. Two decades later, he
recounted the era in "The Mandate of Heaven, a Record of a Civil War, China
1945-49" (Anchor Books, 1971).

In 1950, he was sent on one of the first American missions to gauge the
situation in Vietnam, where Communist insurgents were fighting French colonial
forces.

Ms. Hellman, who died in 1984, met Mr. Melby in 1944, when President Roosevelt
sent her on a cultural good-will mission to Moscow. Their affair lasted several
years, according to the book by Mr. Newman, a professor emeritus of the
University of Pittsburgh, though Ms. Hellman also continued her established
relationship with the writer Dashiell Hammett.

From 1956 to 1964, Mr. Melby taught at the University of Pennsylvania, where he
was the director of foreign studies. In 1966, he founded the department of
political studies at the University of Guelph, and served as its first chairman.
He retired in 1978.

He is survived by his wife, Roxana Carrier Melby, of Guelph; a son, Everett K.
Melby of El Paso, Tex.; a brother, Everett K. Melby of Varennes, Quebec, Canada;
a sister, Mary LeVar of Bala Cynwyd, Penn.; and five grandchildren.

NAME: John F. Melby

LOAD-DATE: December 27, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Biography; Obituary (Obit)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              417 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 27, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Thomas Gleason, 92, Who Led Longshoremen's Union, Is Dead

BYLINE: By DENNIS HEVESI

SECTION: Section 1; Page 40; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 828 words


Thomas W. (Teddy) Gleason, who as president of the International Longshoremen's
Association for 24 years held an iron grip on the docks of both the Atlantic and
Gulf coasts, only to see that grip pried open by containerized shipping, died on
Thursday at Cabrini Medical Center in Manhattan. He was 92.

Mr. Gleason, who lived in Manhattan, was in the hospital's coronary care unit
when he died. But a hospital spokeswoman, Gisele Roberge, could not provide the
exact cause of death.

A fireplug of a man at five feet, six inches and 180 pounds, Mr. Gleason was
alternately described during his heyday as "hard as nails" and "smooth as silk."
He could be gracious, pleasant and courteous or could uncork a torrent of
language suitable for the waterfront.

He always felt that his greatest achievement as president of the I.L.A. was the
guaranteed annual income he won for union members, beginning in 1964. This
allowed hundreds of longshoremen to collect as much as $32,000 a year for doing
no work after their jobs were eliminated by containerization, a process in which
goods are shipped in large containers so that the need for workers to load and
unload is substantially reduced.

'Everything We Fought For'

Although costly, the guaranteed income was preferred by both the shipping
industry and the union to the old shape-up when dock work was day labor, when 7
to 10 men would bid for each job each morning and who got the job was often
determined by kickbacks and violence.

When he went to work alongside his father in 1915, Mr. Gleason was paid 35 cents
an hour. By 1985, members of the I.L.A. were making a minimum of $17 an hour.
"We got everything we fought for," Mr. Gleason said at the time of his
retirement in 1987.

In 1915, Mr. Gleason walked down Charles Street, where the family lived in a
succession of cold-water flats, to sling bales on the docks alongside his
father. The oldest of 13 children, Mr. Gleason left school after the seventh
grade. He was one of the youngest full-fledged dockworkers in New York.

The son and grandson of longshoremen, he was one of the last of a generation of
trade unionists, including the Reuther brothers in the automobile industry and
James R. Hoffa of the teamsters, who developed their organizing and political
skills during the bitter labor conflicts of the 1920's and 1930's.

'Just a Gang of Rebels'

In 1919, Mr. Gleason joined the I.L.A., which was then, he said, "just a gang of
rebels." Over the years he worked as a checker, a billing clerk, longshoreman,
winch driver, truck loader and timekeeper. By 1932, he had advanced to dock
superintendent.

That year, in the depths of the Depression, he was blacklisted by the
stevedoring companies and the steamship lines because of his union activities.
To support his family, he took a job pushing a hand truck in a sugar factory
during the day and sold hot dogs at Coney Island at night.

With the coming of the New Deal and the legalization of union activity on the
docks, Mr. Gleason returned to both his trade and his union activities. Soon he
became president and business agent of Checkers Local 1346 of the I.L.A. Later,
the local merged with three others to form Local 1, with Mr. Gleason as
president.

In 1953, the I.L.A. was expelled from the American Federation of Labor over
corruption. The president, Joseph P. Ryan, resigned and Capt. William Bradley,
with Mr. Gleason's support, was elected president. Mr. Gleason was elected
general organizer. In 1961, he became executive vice president and two years
later was elected president after reportedly pressuring Captain Bradley to
resign.

Mr. Gleason served six consecutive four-year terms as president of the I.L.A.,
retiring in July 1987.

His Stubborn Side


 The world saw Mr. Gleason's stubborn side when in 1963 he opposed the Kennedy
Administration's proposal to sell surplus wheat to the Soviet Union. He relented
when the Government agreed that half of the grain ships would be American.

When the Johnson Administration reneged on that agreement, Mr. Gleason began a
dockworkers' boycott of the Soviet-bound wheat. He called it off after eight
days.

During the Vietnam War, Mr. Gleason made four trips to Saigon to help relieve
port congestion. Later, he performed similar duties at Mombasa in Kenya.

If Mr. Gleason seemed to have changed little since the days he traveled in a
bulletproof car and angered Presidents, by the time of his retirement the union
was a shadow of what it once was. It still represented dockworkers along the
Atlantic and Gulf coasts, but membership -- around 110,000 -- was less than half
of the 250,000 from before automation.

Mr. Gleason was a lifelong supporter of Irish-American causes, and in 1984, he
was named grand marshal of the St. Patrick's Day parade in New York.

Mr. Gleason's wife, Emma, died in 1960. He is survived by three sons, Thomas
Jr., John and Robert; 15 grandchildren, and six great-grandchildren.

NAME: Thomas Gleason

LOAD-DATE: December 27, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Thomas W. (Teddy) Gleason (The New York Times, 1980)

TYPE: Biography; Obituary (Obit)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              418 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 27, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Hometown Boy Takes Over Ft. Monmouth as Cutbacks Loom

BYLINE: By ARTHUR Z. KAMIN

SECTION: Section 13NJ; Page 1; Column 1; New Jersey Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1411 words

DATELINE: FORT MONMOUTH


"YOU'RE talking about a one-in-a-million chance," Otto J. Guenther said. The
slim, straight-as-a-ramrod 51-year-old was talking about the odds against an
officer's being chosen to command his hometown Army base.

But Major General Guenther, born in Long Branch and raised in Red Bank, beat the
odds when he was named commander of Fort Monmouth five months ago. And he has
spent the time since then coping with threatened cutbacks in the size and scope
of the fort's operations.

General Guenther presides over a sprawling 1,500-acre complex that is a city
unto itself, complete with post exchange, bank, theater, bowling alley,
gymnasium, library, day care center, newspapers, social service agencies, even a
Burger King. It is the headquarters of the worldwide Communications and
Electronics Command plus such institutions as the Army Chaplain Center and
School, the United States Military Academy Preparatory School and Patterson Army
Community Hospital.

The fort is occupied by 7,800 civilian workers, 2,300 military personnel and
3,800 Army family members, and it provides services for 35,000 military retirees
in the region. The yearly payroll: $312 million for civilian employees, $51
million for the military.

A visitor senses considerable tension among the military and civilian workers
these days, caused by the Government's decision to reduce the size of the
nation's military establishment.

Just before Thanksgiving, General Guenther announced that the Communications and
Electronics Command could lose 1,000 civilian jobs worldwide by next summer.
Army officials say voluntary early retirement, normal attrition and a hiring
freeze could cut that number to 650 -- with the direct impact on Fort Monmouth
still unclear.

Then, three weeks ago, the Army reported that the 513th Military Intelligence
Brigade, also based at the fort, might be moved to Fort Gordon in Georgia. That
could mean a transfer of 558 military and 31 civilian employees by Sept. 30 of
next year. A final decision is expected next month.

There have long been rumors that Fort Monmouth may be entirely shut down. But
when General Guenther is asked about them, his face tightens and he enunciates
his words with crystal-clear clarity. "They didn't bring me here for that," he
said.

On the other hand, he said, "there is no question we are going to downsize." He
added: "The Department of Defense will draw down approximately 25 percent in
both military and civilian strength over the next five years. And Fort Monmouth
will take its share of the personnel cuts."

If the base is to remain viable, he said, it will have to pass muster when it
undergoes the base-closing review process required by Federal law every other
year. "There is no such thing as a free lunch, no guarantees," he said, "but
that's the way it is today."

Both of the area's United States Representatives, Frank Pallone Jr., a Democrat,
and Richard A. Zimmer, a Republican, have declared their opposition to staff
reductions at the fort. And in 1990 there was a revival of the Save the Fort
Committee, which was organized in 1977 by Representative James J. Howard, a
Democrat, when the future of the base was similarly in jeopardy.

Of General Guenther, Representative Pallone said: "We are fortunate to have him
here at this critical time. He knows the area and the people."

General Guenther is also keeping a close watch on the Somalia situation. Three
logistics people from the Communications and Electronics Command are there, and
several others have been alerted. An emergency operations center at the fort is
in contact with troops in Somalia on a 24-hour basis. The 513th Military
Intelligence Brigade has sent 11 of its linguists there who are trained in the
language of that country. Other brigade elements are on alert.

Boyhood in Red Bank

The general grew up in a two-family house on Washington Street in Red Bank, and
he says he drives by every so often to recall his early years there. He
remembers helping his father make pickups and deliveries for the Little Falls
Laundry and playing his saxophone in the Red Bank High School band.

Recently General Guenther spoke at a Student Council induction ceremony at what
is now Red Bank Regional High School. "It meant a great deal to everyone," said
Dr. Robert Nogueira, the principal. "The general hasn't forgotten his old high
school and the positive impact it had on him."

Nor has he forgotten the stately United Methodist Church on tree-lined Broad
Street that his family attended. Chester Apy of Little Silver, a Red Bank lawyer
and a former State Assemblyman, recalled that, after young Otto Guenther's
graduation from high school, the family did not have enough money to send him to
college, and the church fathers eventually encouraged an anonymous member of the
parish to set up a scholarship assistance committee to help him out.

The committee has become a fixture at the church and has provided about $300,000
in scholarship aid to needy students over the years.

General Guenther is now the president of the church's board of trustees. "He's
very low-key," Mr. Apy said, "and passes the collection plate when asked, and
takes on a variety of other church duties."

At Western Maryland College, where he majored in economics, he enrolled in the
Reserve Officers Training Corps and entered the Army after his graduation in
1963. It wasn't long before he decided to make the military his career because,
he said, he liked the responsibility and the opportunity to motivate and work
"with people in all walks of life."

A Host of Assignments

Over the next decades, he had a host of assignments -- most of them in
administration and in the communications field, some of them overseas, including
Vietnam. He attended some of the Army's most prestigious professional and
command schools and received a Master of Science degree in procurement and
contract management from the Florida Institute of Technology.

He was a colonel when he was assigned to Fort Monmouth in 1987 but became a
brigadier general after serving as the program executive officer for
communications systems, a position in which he supervised dozens of projects in
such areas as satellite communications and airborne radar systems. He was little
known outside the military, he said, until his promotion to commanding general
of the fort and of the Communications and Electronics Command.

"That's when everybody started to make a fuss," he said.

The communications command is charged with anticipating the military
communications needs of the future and developing equipment that will do the
job, from the original concept to the finished product to the eventual
distribution of that equipment in the field.

General Guenther describes the command's research mission in these terms: "We
will continue to provide battlefield superiority to our soldiers, and that means
giving them the technological tools to own the night, own the spectrum, apply
software as a force multiplier and know the enemy."

Proceeding With Construction

Despite the proposed downsizing of the military in general, and Fort Monmouth in
particular, General Guenther is proceeding with a major construction program.
"We are known as an 'Army Community of Excellence,' " General Guenther said, a
reference to awards the base has won for its community services. "I want to do
everything possible to continue that."

The construction plan calls for extensive renovation of housing, a new youth
center and expanded day care services.

General Guenther and his wife, Jan, have two college-age daughters, and the
general has a younger sister, Barbara, who lives in Red Bank and is a history
teacher at Middletown North High School. It was Barbara Guenther who first
introduced her sorority sister at Trenton State, Jan Peterson of Caldwell, to
Otto Guenther.

One of his classmates at Red Bank High was John D'Amico Jr., the son of a
beautician, who went on to graduate from Harvard College and the Harvard Law
School and become a State Senator and, now, a Superior Court judge.

"I remember him well," said Judge D'Amico, a resident of Oceanport. "He was not
only a nice guy, but we all knew he would be a high achiever."

What stands out in Judge D'Amico's mind, he said, is how he and General Guenther
could move ahead so rapidly in a single generation. "But that's America, that's
Red Bank and that's Red Bank High School," he said. "The melting pot at work."

LOAD-DATE: December 31, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Maj. Gen. Otto J. Guenther outside the Fort Monmouth gate.
(Norman Y. Lono for The New York Times) (pg. 1); Photograph of Otto J. Guenther
in his Red Bank High School yearbook. Left, General Guenther with soldiers in
the Communications and Electronics Command area at Fort Monmouth. (Norman Y.
Lono for The New York Times) (pg. 4)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              419 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 28, 1992, Monday, Late Edition - Final

W. C. Trueheart, 74, Ex-Diplomat in Saigon

SECTION: Section D; Page 9; Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 253 words


William C. Trueheart, a former Ambassador to Nigeria and deputy chief of mission
in Saigon just before the American military buildup in Vietnam, died Thursday at
Sibley Memorial Hospital in Washington. He was 74 and lived in Washington.

Mr. Trueheart died of cancer, said his son, Charles Trueheart.

Born on Dec. 18, 1918, in Chester, Va., Mr. Trueheart received a bachelor's
degree from the University of Virginia in 1939 and a master's degree in
philosophy from there in 1941.

He was a civilian intelligence analyst in the Navy Department for a year,
starting in 1942, after which he served in the Army, rising to the rank of
captain. He joined the State Department in 1949 as an intelligence officer.

As deputy chief of mission in Saigon from 1961 to 1964, he was among the first
American diplomats to raise concerns about the ability of the corrupt Diem
government to survive a groundswell of public opposition, particularly when
Buddhist monks led protests. His concerns "let loose a floodgate of doubts,"
wrote David Halberstam in "The Best and the Brightest."

Mr. Trueheart was Ambassador to Nigeria from 1969 to 1971. Before that he was
director of Southeast Asian Affairs for the State Department from 1964 to 1966
and deputy director of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research from 1967 to
1969.

Besides his son, Charles, of Washington, Mr. Trueheart is survived by his wife,
Phoebe; another son, Joshua Trueheart of Nyack, N.Y.; a half-sister, Rose Wilson
of London, and four grandchildren.

LOAD-DATE: December 28, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              420 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 29, 1992, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

'Let's Do Lunch,' Clinton Says, Calculatingly

BYLINE: By RICHARD L. BERKE,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 987 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 28


Clearly convinced that his forays into McDonald's are not enough, and mindful
that Washington is perceived as short on ordinary Americans, President-elect
Bill Clinton plans to go all out to show that his will be an Administration of
and for the common people. He is shipping them to Washington for lunch.

Inaugural officials said today that they would fly more than 50 people here for
what is billed as an "intimate" lunch. Actually, the expense-paid trip for
people whom Mr. Clinton or Vice President-elect Al Gore or their spouses met
during the campaign will last a week and include admission to all the major
inaugural events. The trip will cost more that $500,000 and is being paid by the
inauguration committee.

Hardly a random sample of America, the guest list appears to be as calculated as
the diverse group invited to Mr. Clinton's last event where he mingled with the
people: the economic conference in Little Rock, Ark. The guests, from veterans
and teachersto preachers and people whose children have mental disorders, were
painstakingly picked to make political points.

The guest lists even includes two former Los Angeles gang members who now run a
youth organization; Charles Rachael is a former member of the Crips and Leon
Gullette is a former member of the rival Bloods.

Also invited are Louise and Clifford Ray, whose 15-year-old son, Ricky, died of
AIDS two weeks ago. Ricky's two younger brothers, Robert, 14, and Randy, 13, who
both carry the virus that causes AIDS, will also attend the week of activities.
The hemophiliac brothers were believed to have been infected by blood
transfusions.

Other guests include Patrick Murphy, a disabled Vietnam veteran from Las Vegas,
Nev.; Danny Kronenfeld, who runs the Henry Street Settlement, a neighborhood
outreach program, on the Lower East Side of Manhattan; Peter Madonia, a baker
from the Bronx; Michael A. Quercio, a teacher in Boston who has AIDS; Frank
Henderson, a former timber worker from Pleasant Hill, Ore.; Mary Poldruhi, who
runs a pirogi shop in Parma, Ohio; Ollie McLemore, an elementary school
principal on the South Side of Chicago, and Demitrios Theosanis, a hotel worker
in Manhattan.

While Mr. Clinton is not inviting his guests to the Georgetown parlor of Pamela
Harriman, who will be the host of the "A" list dinner parties for Democrats,
these guests and their families will not be dining on burgers and fries either:
Their lunch with the Clintons and Gores, on Jan. 18, will be at the Folger
Shakespeare Library.

Mr. Clinton's aides said the lunch was the President-elect's idea, and they
vigorously denied that it was a political stunt reminiscent of President Bush's
"points of light." The inaugural officials are calling the guests "Faces of
Hope."

Richard Mintz, press secretary for the inauguration, referred to the guests as
if they were senior Presidential appointees. "This is not some contrived event
to connect him with the people," he said. "He feels very comfortable with these
people and wants them to be part of his Administration."

Rahm Emanuel, the co-executive director of the inauguration, put it this way:
"It's not just a stop by. They are very much a part of the Governor's efforts at
renewal of this country."

The guest list was arrived at after an initial list of more than 300 people was
culled to those with the most compelling stories. It includes representatives
from every region and every ethnic and religious background. Some of the guests
were often mentioned in campaign speeches by Mr. Clinton.

Besides demonstrating his ties to ordinary Americans, the importing of people to
Washington appeared to be an effort by Mr. Clinton to temper the
ostentatiousness of inaugural week during a time of economic distress.

'I Called Him Bill'

To the delight of the public, and the frustration of his aides, Mr. Clinton was
often late to events during the campaign because he enjoyed hanging around to
chat with people. Some of those people hope to continue their conversations with
him in Washington.

Mr. Quercio, the teacher who has AIDS, said he introduced himself to Mr. Clinton
at a fund-raising dinner in October in Boston and was surprised that Mr. Clinton
was interested in hearing about how he was coping with the illness.

"Of all things, I called him Bill," recalled Mr. Quercio, 32. "We were in a room
full of people clamoring to be close to him and he held my hand for four or five
minutes and never took his eyes off me. I think it's really ironic that I've
never been in Washington before to consider that my first visit is one in which
I'll be honored by the President-elect."

Another emotional moment was described by Mr. Murphy, the Vietnam veteran, who
recounted his conversation with Mr. Clinton about the high suicide rate of
veterans. "His eyes were glassed over and he started to choke up and he hugged
me three times," Mr. Murphy recalled. "Three days later he wrote me and said it
was one of the most emotional moments of the campaign."

Mr. Henderson said Mr. Clinton was riveted when he told him how he had been laid
off from the timber industry in Oregon, went through a retraining program and
opened a plastics welding business.

"He was really interested in thermoplastic welding," Mr. Henderson said. "He had
never heard of it before. I went with the kids back to his hotel and I probably
talked to him off and on for three and a half hours."

Ms. Poldruhi, who runs the pirogi shop, said she expected to talk at length with
Mr. Clinton about the plight of small businesses, and with Mr. Gore about the
environment. She also made the point that her trip to Washington would have
emotional and financial rewards.

"Our business picked up dramatically since Clinton visited here on the bus
tour," she said, adding that she expected more attention after her visit to
Washington. "A little 30-second spot on the news does wonders for a small
business."

LOAD-DATE: December 29, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Who's Going To Lunch: Louise Ray -- With her children Robert,
Randy and Candy, Mother of Ricky Ray, 15, who died of AIDS. (Joe Skipper for The
New York Times); Danny Kronenfeld -- Head of Henry Street Settlement, a
Manhattan neighborhood outreach program. (Ed Quinn for The New York Times);
Patrick Murphy -- Disabled Vietnam veteran from Las Vegas, Nev. (John Gurzinski
for The New York Times)(pg. A1); Michael A. Quercio, a teacher in Boston who has
AIDS, is one of more than 50 people being flown to Washington to have lunch with
President-elect Bill Clinton. (Evan Richman for The New York Times)(pg. A10)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              421 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 29, 1992, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

U.S. Group Sets Vietnam Trip

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section D; Page 17; Column 4; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 189 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 28


About 50 American business leaders will visit Vietnam in February to explore
investment opportunities under the auspices of a newly formed Vietnam-American
Chamber of Commerce, the group said today.

Irwin Robinson, president of the New York-based group and a partner at the law
firm of Phillips, Nizer, Benjamin, Krim & Ballon, said the mission would be the
first by Americans to be formally the guests of the Hanoi Government.

Members of the chamber include the publishing company R. R. Donnelley & Sons,
the computer company Honeywell Inc., IMC Fertilizer Inc., the Leon D. DeMatteis
Construction Corporation, the Newmont Gold Company, Northwest Airlines, United
Airlines and the accounting firm KPMG Peat Marwick.

In a significant easing of a United States embargo, the Bush Administration
recently authorized American companies to sign contracts to do business in
Vietnam, contingent on an eventual lifting of the decades-old trade ban.

The move was in response to what the Administration called expanded Vietnamese
cooperation in determining the fate of American servicemen unaccounted for from
the Vietnam War.

LOAD-DATE: December 29, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              422 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 29, 1992, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Kay Boyle, 90, Writer of Novels and Stories, Dies

BYLINE: By ERIC PACE

SECTION: Section A; Page 13; Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 928 words


Kay Boyle, a short-story writer and novelist renowned for her deft and powerful
style and her keen insights into human nature, died on Sunday night at the
Redwoods, a retirement community in Mill Valley, Calif. She was 90 years old and
lived at the Redwoods, where she had moved from San Francisco several years ago.

She had been in declining health for a year, said her son, Ian von Franckenstein
of Kentland, Calif.

Miss Boyle wrote four dozen books, including many works of fiction, seven books
of poetry and four books for children. But it was for her short stories, which
were published in The New Yorker, Harper's and elsewhere, that she was
particularly acclaimed. Some critics have called "The White Horses of Vienna"
(1936) an especially fine collection of her stories.

She won two O. Henry Memorial Awards for short-story writing, one for the title
story of that 1936 collection and one for "Defeat" in 1941. She also won a
Guggenhiem Fellowship in 1934.

The Lady as Radical

The writer Stephen Vincent Benet once described Miss Boyle's style as being "as
bright as an icicle and light as the bones of a bird." And the critic Louis
Kronenberger once contended that the fineness of her insights was "such as no
other writer of our time, in English at least, can match."

Her work, which also included essays and translations, commanded admiration from
critics for more than half a century. It was colored by years of living in
different parts of Europe -- she moved to Brittany in 1923, then lived in Paris
and elsewhere -- and by social and political concerns. Her 1936 novel "Death of
a Man" contained material from her life in Austria in the mid-1930's.

Late in her life, Miss Boyle wrote that she saw herself "as a dangerous
'radical' cleverly disguised as a perfect lady." She reported that she could not
remember a time beyond the age of 6 when she had not been committed in favor of,
or opposed to, something. Her activities ranged from helping the families of
conscientious objectors in World War I to supporting human-rights causes and
demonstrating against United States involvement in Vietnam. But she also had
passionate and abiding literary concerns.

Reviewing a 1988 collection of her short stories, "Life Being the Best & Other
Stories," edited by Sandra Whipple (New Directions), Ann Hornaday wrote in The
New York Times Book Review that the book celebrated her "enduring artistic
discipline.'

At Home in Europe

"Unlike some of her better-known peers," Ms. Hornaday wrote, Miss Boyle
"survived the halcyon days of Paris in the 1920's," and although she "is not as
notorious as some of the other Moderns -- those intrepid expatriate writers who
set out to change language, mesh literature and social context and expose the
dissonance of contemporary life -- she evokes these tensions with a gossamer
fineness."

Miss Boyle was born in St. Paul on Feb. 19, 1902, the daughter of Howard P.
Boyle and the former Katharine Evans. She spent much of her childhood in Europe
and then returned to the United States, where she attended school in Washington
for a time.

After financial problems, the family moved to Cincinnati. Miss Boyle took violin
lessons at the Cincinnati Conservatory of Music and attended the Ohio Mechanics
Institute from 1917 to 1919, intending to go into architecture.

With her first husband, Richard Brault, a French engineer whom she had met in
Cincinnati and married in 1923, Miss Boyle briefly lived in New York City, where
she attended Columbia University. The couple then went to Europe, where Miss
Boyle stayed for almost 20 years, living in England as well as France and
Austria, and taking a fellow American expatriate, Laurence Vail, as her second
husband in 1931 after she was divorced from her first.

In that period, she looked more kindly on Europeans than on her compatriots and
on many of her fellow female writers. "I like to be with people who work --
English, French, or any foreign working people," she wrote, but "I am ill at
ease with Americans."

She observed that most women "do not write simply or violently enough for my
taste." She added, "I should like my prose to be lucid, direct and lean."

A Poet in Later Years

Miss Boyle and Mr. Vail returned to the United States in 1941. They later
divorced, and in 1943 she married Baron Joseph von Franckenstein.After World War
II she was a correspondent in Europe for The New Yorker for a time. She went on
to become a professor of English and creative writing at San Francisco State
University from 1963 to 1979.

Her son said her last new book to be published was was "Words That Must Somehow
Be Said: Selected Essays of Kay Boyle" (North Point Press, 1985).

Reviewing "50 Stories," a collection of her work published in 1980, Vance
Bourjaily wrote in The New York Times that the stories included such techniques
as "literary simplification, rhythmic repetition, the mixing in of vernacular,
stream of consciousness, density of impressions, radical imagery and experiments
with surrealism." The collection was republished this year by New Directions
Books.

Mr. Von Franckenstein said Miss Boyle had continued to write and that most of
her recent work was poetry, some of which had been published.

In addition to her son, an actor whose stage name is Ian Swift, she is survived
by a sister, Joan Detweiler of Sarasota, Fla.; four daughters, Sharon Cowling of
Vezenobres, France; Kathe Vail, who lives outside Paris; Clover Vail of New York
City, and Faith Gude of Boston; 17 grandchildren, and six great-grandchildren.

NAME: Kay Boyle

LOAD-DATE: December 29, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Kay Boyle (Terrence McCarthy, 1984)

TYPE: Biography; Obituary (Obit)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              423 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 29, 1992, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

The Best Case for the Pardons

SECTION: Section A; Page 14; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 570 words


Surely, reasonable people have said to themselves in the days since President
Bush shocked the country with his Iran-contra pardons -- surely the President
must have had good reasons. Surely he would not wish to live forever in history
as the President who in effect pardoned himself. Surely he must have some
plausible arguments for exonerating Caspar Weinberger even before his trial, and
other officials after theirs.

There are justifications; some even sound plausible; yet on inspection, they
fail. The arguments are lame, even misleading, and in the end the pardons
reverberate with the clank of outrage.

Mr. Bush and others advance four justifications for the pardons. Sophisticated
students of international affairs offer one, sotto voce: There are times when
senior officials simply have to take chances, cut corners, violate the technical
letter of the law, even if that horrifies fussy purists. That argument answers
itself: The laws here were violated both in letter and spirit.

Mr. Bush does not make that argument, even though he may believe it. Instead he
describes the pardons as honorable, decent and fair because the defendants were
patriotic, long-suffering public servants who sought no financial gain. Their
actions, he says -- "right or wrong" -- were chiefly policy differences
mischaracterized as crimes.

That contention is mistaken or irrelevant. Iran-contra involved much more than a
policy dispute:

Congress outlawed weapons sales to terrorist countries; indeed, the Reagan
Administration had identified itself with that policy, and against hostage
ransom. Congress also prohibited aid to the contras, and the White House said it
was complying in letter and spirit. And as wrong as it was to disobey both laws,
it was more clearly wrong for the President's men to lie to Congress. In this
system of checks and balances, true patriots in one branch do not snicker and
hide the truth from another.

A third argument made for the pardons is that they are required to offset the
howling zeal of Lawrence Walsh, the Iran-contra independent counsel, and his
out-of-control staff. Indeed, Mr. Weinberger charges them with trying to extort
from him lies against two Presidents.

That charge, like other vituperation against Mr. Walsh, ignores his record. He
was Deputy Attorney General in the Eisenhower Administration, a Nixon envoy to
Vietnam peace talks and for years a capable Federal judge. He is no less a
Republican patriot because he feels a duty to investigate perjury in high
places.

What of Mr. Weinberger's accusation that Mr. Walsh tried to "coerce false
testimony" against colleagues in exchange for a misdemeanor plea?  Mr.
Weinberger's own notes, which he concealed for three years, show that what Mr.
Walsh was after from Mr. Weinberger is his true testimony. A trial, which the
pardon aborted, might have settled his veracity and the prosecutor's legitimacy.

The President's own long-withheld notes may now shed more light, but the record
is fairly clear: George Bush was in the loop of informed officials.

The final rationale is Mr. Bush's contention that, after six years, it is time
to get Iran-contra behind us and get on with current business. It's a worthy
wish, but pardons are an unworthy way of sweeping suspected subversion of law
under an already lumpy rug. One day and one way, the truth will out; these
pardons can only prolong the wait.

LOAD-DATE: December 29, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              424 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 30, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

U.N. Says the Khmer Rouge Killed 12 Ethnic Vietnamese

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 379 words

DATELINE: PHNOM PENH, Cambodia, Dec. 29


United Nations officials accused Khmer Rouge guerrillas today of killing 12
ethnic Vietnamese in the deadliest violation of the Cambodian peace accord.

Four children were among the victims of the raid on Sunday night on Kompong
Tralach, a fishing village in central Kompong Chhnang province, a United Nations
spokesman said. Two Cambodians were also killed and 14 people wounded.

Khmer Rouge soldiers arrived in the village in two boats, the spokesman, Eric
Berman, said. They apparently fired a few rockets.

"They asked villagers to identify the Vietnamese," he said. "Those identified
were summarily executed." Six were female and six male.

"There's very strong evidence that indicates the attack was racially motivated,"
Mr. Berman said.

Warning Leaflet Left

A leaflet written in Khmer was left at the scene. A preliminary translation
indicated that it was a warning to the local population with references to the
United Nations Transitional Authority in Cambodia, Mr. Berman said.

Khmer Rouge publications consistently accuse ethnic Vietnamese settlers in
Cambodia of carrying out a plan by Vietnam to colonize its smaller neighbor.

Soon after signing a human rights accord in the presence of SecretaryGeneral
Boutros Boutros-Ghali in April, Khieu Samphan, the Khmer Rouge president,
threatened violence against Vietnamese living in Cambodia.

Last week three Vietnamese fishermen, their throats cut, were found floating in
the Mekong River. In July eight Vietnamese, including a baby, were slain in a
southern village.

The Khmer Rouge cite the Vietnamese presence in Cambodia as the main reason they
refuse to comply with the peace accord they signed in 1991 with two allied
guerrilla factions and the Vietnamese-backed Government in Phnom Penh.

Vietnamese troops invaded Cambodia to oust a brutal Khmer Rouge Government in
December 1978 and stayed in support of a pro-Hanoi Government until 1989.

The Khmer Rouge charge that soldiers remain, although peacekeeping troops have
been unable to find any.

The Khmer Rouge refuse to disarm and allow United Nations peacekeepers free
access in their zones. They have also stopped United Nations teams from
registering civilians under their control for elections scheduled for May.


LOAD-DATE: December 30, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              425 of 425 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 31, 1992, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Alex Quaison-Sackey, Ghanaian Official, 68

SECTION: Section B; Page 6; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 249 words


Alex Quaison-Sackey, the first diplomat from a black African nation to serve as
President of the General Assembly of the United Nations, died Monday at Korie Bu
Hospital in Accra, Ghana. He was 68 and lived in Accra.

Mr. Quaison-Sackey died of a pulmonary embolism, said a son, Dr. Egya
Quaison-Sackey of Baltimore.

Alex Quaison-Sackey was a diplomatic troubleshooter for Kwame Nkrumah, Ghana's
first President, from the moment of Ghana's independence in 1957. He was First
Secretary at the Ghana High Commission from 1957 to 1959 and served as the
country's representative at the United Nations from 1959 to 1965.

Born to a family active in politics in the coastal town of Winneba, Mr.
Quaison-Sackey was politically active as an undergraduate at Achimota College,
near Accra, from which he graduated in 1948, and while earning an honor's degree
at Oxford University in 1952.

Mr. Quaison-Sackey was elected President of the General Assembly in 1964 and
served until 1965.

Mr. Quaison-Sackey remained close to President Nkrumah and was with him on a
peace mission in Vietnam in February 1966, when the Nkrumah Government was
overthrown by the army.

From 1978 to 1980 Mr. Quaison-Sackey served as the country's Ambassador to the
United States.

In addition to his son Egya, Mr. Quaison-Sackey is survived by his wife, Elsie;
two daughters, Awo, of Cheshire, Conn., and Yaaba, of Accra; two sons, Kweku
Bondzie of Philadalphia and Nii, of San Diego, and three grandchildren.

LOAD-DATE: December 31, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company
