
                               1 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   July 1, 1991, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Books of The Times;
Collected Odds and Ends From Graham Greene

BYLINE: By CHRISTOPHER LEHMANN-HAUPT

SECTION: Section C; Page 14; Column 3; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1039 words


Reflections
By Graham Greene
Selected and Introduced by Judith Adamson
325 pages. Reinhardt Books in association with Viking. $19.95.

It isn't easy to find a thread of continuity among these six dozen brief pieces
by Graham Greene, written over the span of half a century for various newspapers
and journals. The volume's editor, Judith Adamson, who teaches English at Dawson
College in Montreal, cites in her introduction the many travel pieces she has
included, and suggests that we look to them for the reality that later was
transformed fictionally into the "unique vision" of Greene, who died in April.

This is fair enough, especially if you have the enterprise to read these pieces
alongside such novels of Greene's as "The Quiet American," "Our Man in Havana,"
"The Comedians" and "Travels With My Aunt."

But this reader was immediately sidetracked by the first selection, "Impressions
of Dublin" (1923), in which the 19-year-old Greene describes a train-compartment
scene in which a mother leaves her little boy behind while she goes to retrieve
her forgotten luggage, and the child becomes hysterical when the mother fails to
return immediately.

What is astonishing about the piece (although unremarked by Ms. Adamson and,
presumably, the editors of The Weekly Westminster Gazette, where the piece first
appeared) is that Greene neglects to tell us whether the mother ever did return.
Unless this sentence is supposed to clear up the mystery: "At last everything
was settled comfortably, as in a popular novel, and the train started." It
doesn't for this reader.

So the questions linger: Why would Greene not bother to include such a vital
piece of information? Does the peculiar omission have any connection to Greene's
famously eccentric personality, which he himself characterized by its love of
escape through travel and the sort of risk taking most dramatically evident in
his youthful period of playing Russian roulette?

"Reflections" is not exactly a minefield of answers to these questions. Indeed
it is difficult to make any generalizations about a collection as diverse and
uneven as this one was bound to be, with its film and book reviews, speeches,
travel pieces, reflections on the novel, introductions to other writers' books
and scraps of ideas for unrealized projects.

The better pieces are sharp and amusing. "The best autobiographies are written
by old ladies," Greene begins a review of Wyndham Lewis's "Blasting and
Bombardiering," "malice trained over the tea tables, the sharp eye for foibles,
and a nostalgic memory of the days when top hats were worn to church." There is
a hilarious account of Greene's abrasive relations with his fellow travelers
during a 1957 sojourn through China ("A Weed Among the Flowers"). The less good
pieces -- the majority, unfortunately -- are dull and obscure.

But the shock of that missing mother echoes in the reader's mind. So one keeps
an inner ear tuned for the hidden side of Greene. In a way, he fends off such a
reading of the unconscious with trivializing references to the psychoanalytic
implications of travel and the Freudian interpretation of dreams about
second-hand bookstores.

But then in a speech on Shakespeare, he faults "the greatest of all poets" for
not being a rebel against the state, and adds, surprisingly: "We grow a little
tired of the artificial problem of the Prince of Denmark (a mother's incest and
a father's murder is not an experience we can easily share) and a young suicide
is unlikely to brood so deliberately in the Wittenberg manner on the dilemma 'To
be or not to be.' "

Here, one suspects, lies the heart of the matter. Graham Greene, one gets the
feeling, embraced the act of rebellion against the state more passionately than
he did the causes of rebellion. As he writes in a parallel vein, "I am not a
fanatic for punishment -- I may even have a prejudice in favor of the criminal
classes if they confine their activities to stealing from those who are richer
than themselves."

The richest and most powerful state in Greene's experience was of course the
United States of America, and many of the countries he wrote about and explored
were smaller nations that had in common their being objects of American
intervention, to which Greene was always vehemently opposed: Vietnam, Cuba,
Haiti, Chile, Panama and Nicaragua in particular.

How might Greene himself have explained his interest in these countries? They
also have in common a strong Roman Catholic tradition, and as a Catholic convert
himself he was always concerned with the survival and fate of what he called
"Christian civilization."

In one of the longest and most eloquent pieces in "Reflections," an address
given at a 1948 Catholic conference in Brussels, which he entitles "The Last
Pope" after a story he intended at the time to write, he attempts to define what
a Christian civilization might be. He writes: "My conviction that the Christian
conscience is the only satisfactory sign of a Christian civilization is
reinforced by the fact that this trait was completely lacking in the pagan
powers that so recently reigned over the world. . . . The totalitarian state
contrives, by educating its citizens, to suppress all sense of guilt, all
indecision of mind."

But then, some 40 years later, in a speech given in Moscow in 1987, he observes:
"There is no division in our thoughts between Catholics -- Roman Catholics --
and Communists." Citing what he sees as cooperation between Marxists and
Catholics in the Sandinista leadership of Nicaragua, he arrives at the following
overgeneralization: "There is no longer a barrier between Roman Catholics and
Communism." From all the evidence in "Reflections," it is hard to resist the
judgment that a hidden psychological agenda was operating in Graham Greene's
thinking.

Of course, none of this explains precisely why he neglected to tell us whether
that mother in that train compartment ever came back to her child. That I leave
to more audacious Freudians with a fresher recollection of Greene's own unhappy
childhood.  But the incident does serve to catch the reader's attention. And to
provide an interesting subtext to what is otherwise a basically humdrum
collection.

LOAD-DATE: July 1, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Graham Greene (Amanda Saunders/Viking)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                               2 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 2, 1991, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Chalmers B. Wood, 74, Foreign Service Officer

SECTION: Section D; Page 18; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 219 words


Chalmers Benedict Wood, a retired Foreign Service officer who served as an
adviser to the South Vietnamese Government, died on Thursday at the Medical
Center of Princeton, N.J. He was 73 years old and lived in Princeton.

He died of a brain hemorrhage, the funeral home said.

Mr. Wood, a 1940 graduate of Harvard College, joined the Foreign Service in 1947
after serving in the Army Air Force from 1940 to 1945. He was stationed in
Brussels and Manila before going to Washington to serve as the State
Department's officer for Greece.

In 1957, he was named second secretary at the United Statges Embassy in Saigon
and from 1959 to 1963 was in charge of Vietnamese affairs at the State
Department. From 1964 to 1966 he served as first secretary in London and the
next year directed the Cyprus office at the State Department.

Mr. Wood was then senior adviser for Binh Dinh province in Vietnam from 1967 to
1969. He returned to the State Department in 1970 with the office of Philippine
affairs and from 1971 to 1974 served in the American Embassy in Wellington, New
Zealand, as deputy chief of mission and charge d'affaires. Then he became a
consultant on energy research and development.

He is survived by his wife, Patricia; two sons, Ramsay and Chalmers, and two
daughters, Felicity and Penelope.

LOAD-DATE: July 2, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                               3 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 3, 1991, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Vietnam Veterans to Get Benefits For Ailment Tied to Agent Orange

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section B; Page 6; Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 421 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 2


The Department of Veterans Affairs said Monday that Vietnam veterans exposed to
the herbicide Agent Orange could receive disability benefits for a certain nerve
disease, but that it did not find a link between the herbicide and lung cancer.

The department also put off a decision on whether diabetes is linked to Agent
Orange exposure. It said it was waiting for a National Academy of Sciences
study, which is not expected to be concluded for another year.

Agent Orange was sprayed by American troops in Vietnam from 1965 to 1971 to
destroy jungle areas used as bases and hide-outs by North Vietnamese and
Vietcong soldiers. More than 30,000 Vietnam veterans have filed claims for
service-connected disabilities, saying exposure to the herbicide, which contains
dioxin, was responsible for cancers, birth defects in their children and other
ailments.

Last February, Congress voted to award permanent disability benefits to Vietnam
veterans suffering from two types of cancer -- non-Hodgkin's lymphoma and
soft-tissue sarcoma -- that the veterans asserted had been caused by Agent
Orange.

Ruling on Peripheral Neuropathy

In the announcement on Monday, the department proposed rules granting disability
status for peripheral neuropathy, a nervous system condition that causes
numbness and tingling.

It said the decision was based on a committee's findings of "a significant
statistical association" between Agent Orange and the disease. But the findings
were limited to those who contracted the disease within 10 years of their
service in Vietnam.

Edward J. Derwinski, the Secretary of Veterans Affairs, said the proposals were
"a mark of progress in helping to resolve some of the lingering concerns felt by
Vietnam veterans and their families."

But John Minnick, a spokesman for the Vietnam Veterans of America, objected to
what he called the department's piecemeal approach. He said the Veterans
Advisory Committee on Environmental Hazards, which recommended the latest
decision, "was not a friend to people exposed to Agent Orange."

Veterans groups also criticized the committee's finding that there was not
enough evidence to link Agent Orange to lung cancer. The committee said many
studies do not account for smoking.

Mike Christian of the American Legion called the finding "an age-old excuse." He
also said the 10-year limit for claiming benefits for peripheral neuropathy was
unfair.

The veterans department said Monday's rulings would become official after a
period for public comment.

LOAD-DATE: July 3, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                               4 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 3, 1991, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1137 words



INTERNATIONAL A3-8

Slovenian and Yugoslav forces fought in several areas of Slovenia, shattering a
brief cease-fire. The Yugoslav Army, seeming to act on its own, vowed to destroy
the Slovenian independence drive. Page A1

News analysis: Yugoslavia's center comes apart A6

Support for the territorial unity of Yugoslavia is collapsing in the West.
Germany and Austria are considering proposing to other Western nations that they
accept the independence of Slovenia and Croatia. A6

Palestinian guerrillas were routed at their major strongholds in southern
Lebanon after a fierce daylong battle with the Lebanon army, the Lebanese
Government said. A3

Military restrictions on the press during the Persian Gulf war amounted to "real
censorship" and confirmed "the worst fears of reporters in a democracy," a
report by 17 news executives says. A4

U.N. team to leave Iraq after a failure on arms inspection A4

The new Soviet opposition movement received an oblique blessing from President
Gorbachev, whose spokesman said it was "a positive fact" as long as it stresses
cooperation and not confrontation. A7

Anti-Semitic taunt at Wiesel talk in Romania A8

The African National Congress convened its first full conference in South Africa
in three decades with a call from Nelson Mandela for the organization to gird
itself for tough negotiations with the Government. A3

President Bush and President Roh met for a talk about defining Seoul's role as
an emerging Pacific economic power, and its concerns over North Korea's weapons
programs. A4

A plan to track weapons sales around the world will be proposed by Japan at the
coming meeting of industrial powers in London, Tokyo said.  A4

Osaka Journal: Huge airport has its wings clipped A4

NATIONAL A14-16, B6, D18

Clarence Thomas's abortion views seem to have been indirectly revealed in a 1987
speech in which he praised an essay arguing that a fetus had an inalienable
"right to life." A1

Clarence Thomas has been affected by a complex set of influences, including
Franciscan nuns, Malcolm X and Ronald Reagan. Friends say he is not the
one-dimensional conservative caricature that some news accounts have portrayed.
A1

Senate panel plans to press Supreme Court nominee D18

A string of telephone breakdowns affecting about 10 million customers around the
country has perplexed telephone company officials and Federal investigators. A1

Redistricting plans were blocked by the Justice Department, which said that both
Mississippi's and Louisiana's plans discriminated against blacks. A1 Postal
governors reject new rates A15

NASA plans mission to repair Hubble Telescope A14

Protocal chief at White House to resign post B6

Report says F.A.A. pilots gave lessons to Skinner A15

The smuggling of illicit war booty, including Iraqi bayonets and pistols, by
troops returning from the Persian Gulf is a growing problem for Customs
inspectors.  A14

A university commencement speech attacked the decline of morality in American
culture. But the speech, by a dean at Boston University, repeated virtually word
for word portions of an article by a PBS film critic. A14

New weapon against western fires: send a bill A16

Vietnam veterans to get benefits for ailment linked to defoliant B6

REGIONAL B1-5

Governor Weicker's latest attempt to impose the first income tax ever in
Connecticut went down to defeat -- again -- when the Senate killed an
exhaustively negotiated tax plan. Mr. Weicker has begun shutting down state
offices. A1

News analysis: Governor Weicker, in his battle for an income-tax plan, has
emerged as a bare-knuckled idealist with the idiosyncratic goals of a maverick.
A1

Monitoring of the city's finances by the state's Financial Control Board will be
stricter to assure that the painful budget cuts announced by New York City are
actually made, according to the board. B5

News analysis: The city budget is hardly final B5

As clock ticks, Cuomo and lawmakers seek compromises B5

Republicans criticize Florio over borrowing plan B4

H. Carl McCall was elected to lead the New York City Board of Education in an
atmosphere of disharmony that may cloud his efforts to shape the board into an
effective policy-making body. B1

A school's tests are investigated for tampering B3

New York plans speedier justice for physicians B2

Alimony must be paid by Frederica von Stade, the mezzo-soprano, a New York State
appeals court ruled, in a test of the premise that a husband or wife who aids in
a spouse's rise to fame is entitled to a share in the value of that celebrity.
B1

A livery cab driver was indicted on charges of killing three young people, all
of whom were from the same area of the South Bronx, the Bronx District Attorney
announced. B1

Melee follows protests against police slaying B3

The use of a popular running track has led to a verbal war between residents of
Bronxville, the affluent Westchester suburb, and residents in neighboring
communities. B1

BUSINESS DIGEST D1

The Living Section

Biggest and most and devoured in the U.S.A.  C1

Time on your hands? It may be increasing C1

Back manipulation gains respectabilityC1

Metropolitan Diary C2

A dish made for baby pleases big bambinos C4

Eating Well C6

Santa Fe galas: lightning for 'Traviata,' rain for 'Figaro' C7

Arts/Entertainment

Some cultural funds restored C11

Theater: A chat with happy co- stars C11

Film: New "Terminator" C11

"Marquis," lighthearted romp C12

"The Miracle" C12

Music: Pop Life C16

Word and Image: Fighting it out with fists, pies and slime C11

Courtrooms on cable C17

Revolutionary war history C17

Book Notes C17

Education Page A17

Grad school applications up amid dismal job market

A year after restructuring, Kentucky looks at its schools

Labor Dept. releases job skills report

Sports B7-13

Baseball: Yanks beat Indians B7

Yankee success starts with relievers B9

Sandberg injured as Pirates rout Cubs B8

Mets top Expos on Magadan's hit B10

Basketball: Ewing files for arbitration B7

Columns: Vecsey on Agassi B7

On Baseball B10

Football: N.F.L. admonished on steroid policy B7

Alzado warned in '82 on steroid use B13

Tennis: Edberg eliminates McEnroe B11

Obituaries D19

Lee Remick, actress

Editorials/Letters/Op-Ed

Editorials A18

The godfather and the Kurds

Is the party over in Moscow?

The City Council comes of age

Topics: Blinders off justice

Letters A18

Anna Quindlen: Weighing the victim A19

Leslie H. Gelb: Why the political mess?  A19

Terry Eastland: Bush and the politics of race A19

Graham Allison and Grigory Yavlinsky: Different drummer, different market A19

LOAD-DATE: July 3, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                               5 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 4, 1991, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

After War, Patriotism Unfurls for Fourth of July

BYLINE: By ISABEL WILKERSON,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 8; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1460 words

DATELINE: LINCOLN, Neb.


Vera Sautter, a volunteer at a senior citizens' center in this parched prairie
town, remembers when people bought war bonds and followed serials on the radio
and when grown men took their hats off when the flag passed by in a parade.

Those were the days before Vietnam and Watergate and assorted crises surrounding
anything from oil to the hostages in Iran, the days when people were not
embarrassed to say they were American and patriotism was right up there with
Hula Hoops and apple pie.

Now radio has largely given way to television, grown men are more likely to wear
earrings than hats and protesters are as quick to condemn the flag as others are
to salute it. But the Persian Gulf war and its afterglow have revived a 1940's
kind of patriotism among many and made what was perhaps mawkish and unthinkable
20 years ago acceptable, comforting, even fashionable, as Americans celebrate
the country's independence for the 215th time.

Parading Again

In Lincoln, a city in the nation's midsection whose name alone evokes
patriotism, residents will parade down the main street for the first time in
years in a belated welcome home to the town's Persian Gulf veterans, a very
Midwestern Fourth of July affair with bunting and banners, Boy Scouts, color
guards and a hot air balloon in the shape of a cow.

All of this is a kind of deja vu for people like Mrs. Sautter, who gets
misty-eyed at the thought of the Stars and Stripes and has a vague, all-purpose
definition of patriotism. "It's doing the right thing, following the rules and
doing a little sacrifice for your country," the 65-year-old Mrs. Sautter said.
"My heart goes pitty-pat and I get tears in my eyes when the flag goes by. It
means that much to me."

There are perhaps as many definitions of patriotism as there are Americans.
Calvin Coolidge called it, "Looking out for yourself by looking out for your
country." The playwright William Inge considered it a suspect emotion that
ranges "from a noble devotion to a moral lunacy."

Interviews with a few dozen Lincoln residents suggested that most people fall
somewhere in between. They generally speak not of a rabid,
wrap-yourself-in-the-flag jingoism, but rather a sense of general affection and
loyalty to the country, tempered by a substantial dose of skepticism about
flag-peddling politicians.

A Tempered View

"I can absolutely hate the Government and love the country," said Steve Enerson,
a 46-year-old newletter publisher. "Patriotism is the love of the land, the
country, the people. It's our bond with the past and an appreciation of a whole
way of life. Patriotism is making the country great from within, not being tough
with the rest of the world. That's a crappy, empty, chest-thumping kind of
patriotism that doesn't help anybody."

Even some of the most patriotic residents here said that the war, as successful
as they saw it, did little to improve their opinion of the Government. Some made
clear distinctions between the White House and the Pentagon, as if the military
was some independent contractor to the Government rather than an appendage of
it.

"I don't feel any more confident about Washington than I ever did," said Richard
Baeder, 32, an aircraft mechanic who is a former Marine sergeant. "I feel more
confident about the military and I feel George Bush made a good, solid decision
to go. But there are still too many scoundrels in Washington for my comfort."

Still he counts himself among the more patriotic of Americans. "It's standing up
for the rights that your country was built on and doing it proudly," he said.

Like Mr. Baeder, a great majority of Americans consider themselves patriotic. A
New York Times/CBS News telephone poll of 1,424 adults nationwide conducted June
3-6 found that 92 percent considered themselves "very patriotic" or "somewhat
patriotic" and 54 percent fly the American flag on holidays.

But 65 percent of all adults in the poll also expressed skepticism about
flag-waving politicians, saying that when elected officials or candidates for
office talk about their patriotism, most of them just do so as a way of winning
votes. The poll had margin of sampling error of plus or minus three percentage
points.

'Americans Are More Willing'

There is something distinctly American about this cleaving to patriotic
abstractions that is somewhere between pride and arrogance and drives the rest
of the world crazy. "Americans are more willing than people in other countries
to say that they are patriotic," said Karlyn Keene, a resident fellow at the
American Enterprise Institute in Washington, a research and policy group. "This
is one of the ways we are different."

Even during the seeming dark days of patriotism during the 1960's, Americans
still did not lose that basic geographic loyalty, she said, they only appeared
to. "Opinions were buffeted by the way system was performing," she said. "But
the underlying confidence has been strong, abiding and deep. It's a very
powerful impulse in Americans."

Of course, how Americans act on that impulse has almost everything to do with
where they live. Brass bands and bunting are seen as more heartland than
coastal, more Main Street than Park Avenue. "Among limousine liberals, being
patriotic was always a little tacky," said Stephen Hess, a senior fellow at the
Brookings Institution who specializes in governmental studies. "That was
something that was Kiwanis. That's Jimmy Stewart, a bit of Norman Rockwell. You
think of it as especially small town."

But the gulf war has made the tacky suddenly trendy. It has made public displays
of patriotism socially acceptable even in the big cities where caps with the
words "Desert Storm" and imitation Jasper Johns flag T-shirts are the fashion of
the moment among the purple crew-cut set.

Time to 'Take Pride'

"Desert Storm was one of the times when you could take pride in the idea of a
national community," Ms. Keene said. "This was something that truly seemed to
unite Americans early on and contributed to the afterglow and length of the
afterglow."

There are people still glowing in Nebraska's capital city, where just about
everybody knew someone stationed in the Persian Gulf and where nearly every
house had a yellow ribbon tied around the nearest tree. For each trickle of
troops returning home from Saudi Arabia, there was an impromptu rally at the
airport. And ribbons, by now worn and bedraggled, still flutter from the
occasional front porch or car antenna here, making Lincoln and small towns
across the nation's midsection look more like a college campus a week after
homecoming.

Step into the squat bungalow that serves as the Nebraskaland Flag shop and find
any kind of flag you want: desktop, porchfront, lapel-size, room-size,
polyester, rayon, nylon, with or without the gold fringe. The shop will even
order the 20-by-30-foot flag, for $895.

Business has doubled since the war. "Desert Storm got closer to everybody than
anything I can think of," said Don Johnson, the flag shop's owner. "There's been
a demand for everything."

Buy-American Types

His customers are the people who look for the union label, buy American cars no
matter what the consumer guides say and get a chill when they hear the first
strains of "The Star-Spangled Banner."

But these are also people who are suspicious of Rambo patriotism and the
fair-weather patriots who need a war or a holiday to make them stand up for the
country. "Waving the flag on the Fourth of July is like going to church on
Easter," said Steve Jones, a 34-year-old nursery foreman.

At Lincoln's American Legion Club, a vast hulk of a building with neon letters
right out the 1950's on the outside and wood paneling and fake ferns on the
inside, some of America's staunchest patriots kick up their heels to Billboard
hits of the 40's.

Mickey Messineo, a 77-year-old World War II Army veteran, has been coming every
weekend for 20 years. Ask him if he is patriotic and he'll give you a hearty,
"You betcha." He owns two flags, both of which flew outside his house every day
throughout the war, right next to the yellow ribbon that flapped from his screen
door. "We kept them up until we thought all our Nebraska boys were home," he
said.

This is a man who thinks that patriotism is next to godliness, that flag-burning
is immoral and that driving a foreign car "is just not right." He drives a
Buick, thank you. This is a "love it or leave it" American who has not a
disparaging word for those chosen to run the country. "I have faith in the
people I vote for," said the retired storeowner. "Otherwise I wouldn't put them
there."

He is a Patrick Henry kind of American. "If I was called by my country," Mr.
Messineo said, "I'd be willing to do anything."

LOAD-DATE: July 4, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Don Johnson: Owner of a flag shop - "Desert Storm got closer to
everybody than anything I can think of. There's been a demand for everything.";
Vera Sautter: Volunteer at center for the elderly - "My heart goes pitty-pat and
I get tears in my eyes when the flag gos by. It means that much to me."
(Photographs by Ted Kirk for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                               6 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 4, 1991, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Mixed Reviews on 5th Ave. To Veterans' Peddling Curb

BYLINE: By ERIC PACE

SECTION: Section B; Page 3; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 497 words


Late Tuesday in Albany, the New York Legislature voted to amend an 1894 law that
allowed disabled veterans to work as sidewalk peddlers in New York City
regardless of municipal rules. Yesterday afternoon on Fifth Avenue, Charles E.
Story, a disabled veteran peddling T-shirts, called the vote "an absolute
outrage."

But the Greek-born hot-dog vendor nearby who said her name was Stella said it
was only fair. And a peddler of books who called himself Nikolai said in his
Russian accent, "I don't care."

Amending the 1894 statute is meant to let the city regulate all street peddling
in certain areas, like Fifth Avenue, where critics contend peddlers clutter and
blight the cityscape.

Exemption for City Voted

The original 1894 statute applied to the entire state. It provided for
unrestricted peddling privileges for disabled veterans on any commercial street
or in any park anywhere in the state.

The amending legislation would change the 1894 statute by exempting New York
City from those provisions. "It enables the city government to determine under
what circumstances there should or not be any peddling on a given street," said
Assemblyman Steven Sanders, a Manhattan Democrat who championed the legislation.

He said it would now go to Governor Cuomo, "and we have every reason to think
he'll sign it into law."

Senator Roy M. Goodman, the Manhattan Republican who was also a champion of the
legislation, said in an interview yesterday afternoon that its passage was "a
real victory for all caring citizens of New York."

Mr. Goodman said the Fifth Avenue Association had offered jobs to all currently
licensed disabled veterans. They can work for retail concerns and get at least
twice the minimum wage, he said.

Veterans 'Deeply Hurt'

But Dick Wannemacher, senior vice commander of the Disabled American Veterans
organization in New York State, said in another interview that his and other
veterans' groups "are deeply hurt by the decision of the Assembly and the
Senate."

"Disabled veterans have historically been able to sell legitimate goods on the
sidewalks of New York," he said, and under the new legislation, "they will not
be able to -- which shows that the State of New York does not have concern for
the sacrifices that these men and women made in time of war."

The 1894 statute had been upheld by two recent court decisions, despite the
existence of municipal rules that let vendors sell only printed materials and
things to eat at some congested sites, including Fifth Avenue and the Broadway
theater district.

And so the gaunt Mr. Story, whose T-shirts were not exactly printed and
definitely not edible, said it was outrageous "that disabled veterans are going
to be denied a means of earning a living."

He told a visitor to his stand on the corner of 44th Street and Fifth that he
had been gravely injured in a shipboard accident as a Navy seaman during the
Vietnam war,

"I have no other marketable skills," he said."

LOAD-DATE: July 4, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                               7 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   July 5, 1991, Friday, Late Edition - Final

An Old-Fashioned Day of Patriotism

BYLINE: By MAUREEN DOWD,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 9; Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 974 words

DATELINE: GRAND RAPIDS, Mich., July 4


President Bush wanted the day to be a special celebration for the Persian Gulf
troops. It was to be a day filled with the "good, old-fashioned kind of
patriotism," with teen-age drum majorettes and middle-age Shriners, with
flag-bedecked babies and yellow-beribboned grandmothers, with horses and cows
and antique cars and red wagons, with unicycling clowns and hoop-jumping dogs
and beauty queens in convertibles and Rotary Club members atop lawn mowers.

President and Mrs. Bush got all that and more today, as they attended two Middle
Western Fourth of July parades.

In his speeches, the President reflected the nation's ambivalence about war. On
the one hand, he told thousands who attended a parade this evening in Grand
Rapids: "I saw a sign in the parade: 'War is not great.' Of course, it's not
great. We aren't here to glorify war." On the other, he basked in America's
swift, lopsided victory over Iraq last winter.

At a parade in Marshfield, Mo., the President saluted with delight as troops
from Fort Leonard Wood marched by holding a purloined Iraqi street sign,
lettered in Arabic and American, that pointed the way toward Baghdad.

'Brought Honor to Our Nation'

He told the Marshfield residents that American troops had "brought honor to our
nation" and "transformed" the American heart.

He cited what Sgt. Richard Mann, a local resident who was in the crowd today,
had said, "I think God took a whole generation of Americans out in the desert
and showed them a miracle."

"That's something else wonderful that's happened," Mr. Bush said. "Desert Storm
has at last brought the recognition and honor to our sons and daughters who
served in Vietnam."

He continued: "We're proud of you. Welcome home. A little late, but welcome
home."

Mr. Bush said the war had made everyone in the country proud to say "I am an
American and I love my country and let's not be embarrassed to say so." "

"We belong to a great and fortunate family," the President told the Missouri
audience.

In Grand Rapids later in the day, Mr. Bush struck a more somber note.
"Tragically, people sometimes must shed blood to defend simple decency and
justice," he said. "But we must never feel bashful about supporting the values
that bind us."

Saying that "victory provides no comfort for war's victims," Mr. Bush thanked
"our fighting men and women of this war -- of all our wars" as " solace to those
whose loved ones fell in defense of principle.

Praise for Court Nominee

As he praised the American character, he slipped a line into his Missouri speech
in praise of Clarence Thomas, his nominee to replace Justice Thurgood Marshall,
who is retiring from the Supreme Court.

"You can find that same character in self-made Americans like our nominee to the
Court, Judge Clarence Thomas," he said, reminding the audience that Mr. Thomas
had worked for Senator John C. Danforth, a Missouri Republican who was also on
the reviewing stand. "Judge Thomas says that when he was growing up, and here
were his exact words -- God, school, discipline, hard work and right from wrong
were of the highest priority."

Mr. Bush was accompanied by a large entourage of advisers.

Local politicians were so excited by the President's visit, and the chance to
get splashed on local and national television, that they could barely contain
themselves.

Wendell Bailey, the state treasurer, who is a Republican candidate for governor,
marched by the reviewing stand and looked at one side of the road, where he saw
the President and Mrs. Bush, Gov. John Ashcroft (who is not seeking re-election)
and Wayne Plunkett, Marshfield's Mayor and fire chief.

Focusing on the Cameras

Then Mr. Bailey looked on the other side of the road, where he saw the lineup of
network cameras.

"Excuse me, Mr. President," he told Mr. Bush as he turned his back to him and
smiled at the assembled lenses. "Cameras."

When he spoke after the parade, Mr. Bush commended Mr. Bailey, "who modestly
turned to the cameras and turned his back on those of us on the stage there."

The President seemed to be having a fine time roaming about the Middle West.

He started the day with a visit to the Bass Pro Shop in Marshfield, where he
examined what was reputed to be the biggest largemouth bass in captivity, Ethel,
who resembles a small whale and weighs 17 pounds 10 ounces. He also bought a
$280 tent and had it mailed back to Kennebunkport, Me., for his grandchildren.

Although the chief White House physician, Dr. Burton Lee, walked behind him, Mr.
Bush seemed in fine health as he strode a few blocks in the Marshfield parade,
jogging the few steps to grasp hands in the crowd, sign baseball caps and smooch
thrilled ladies.

On the reviewing stand, he smiled, waved, saluted and gave the thumbs-up sign.
He seemed to enjoy the endless march of Shriners topped by fezes, bands, horses
and one recalcitrant cow who took so long to be dragged past the reviewing stand
that the President finally left.

Of Taylor and Broccoli

Recalling that Marshfield's is reputed to be one of the oldest Independence Day
celebrations in the country, Mr. Bush noted that July 4, 1950, was the day
President Zachary Taylor fell ill. "It's a little-known fact, not disproven when
they dug the poor guy up the other day and put him back, that his last words
were: 'Please pass the broccoli,' " said Mr. Bush, who has no love for the
vegetable. President Taylor's body was exhumed last month for tests that ruled
out poisoning as the cause of death.

Mr. Bush waved over a teen-age drum majorette who wanted to give him a flag. He
kissed her and kept the flag in his shirt pocket for the rest of the parade.

He seemed particularly interested in a pink Cadillac that paraded by in the
antique car portion of the parade, calling out a question about what year that
"baby" was.

LOAD-DATE: July 5, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: President Bush spent Independence Day roaming the Midwest,
taking part in two Fourth of July celebrations. The President and his wife,
Barbara, marched in the parade at Marshfield, Mo. (Reuters)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                               8 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   July 5, 1991, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Economic Scene;
U.S. Will Press Plan for Growth In London Talks

BYLINE: By Leonard Silk

SECTION: Section D; Page 2; Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1171 words


IN an interview on Wednesday, the Treasury Secretary, Nicholas F. Brady, said
that at the London economic summit conference of the seven major industrial
countries later this month, the United States would press for a "three-pronged
strategy" to lift the world economy out of stagnation and help rescue the
economies of the fledgling democracies of Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union.

At the end of the meeting of the rich industrial countries, Mikhail S. Gorbachev
will arrive for talks on reconstruction, trade and aid, first with President
Bush and then with the other Western leaders.

These are three elements in the United States strategy for the meeting that Mr.
Brady described:

* A more dynamic monetary policy aimed at bringing down real interest rates --
what money really costs borrowers after allowing for inflation -- to stimulate
economic growth and yield more employment, income and a higher rate of capital
formation for a world desperately short of capital.

* An international trade policy focused on the successful completion of the
current round of negotiations under the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade.
The talks are aimed at opening markets in all countries and breaking down
regional barriers to the flow of goods, including agricultural products and
textiles, as well as services and intellectual property.

* The elimination of structural rigidities hampering job creation and
productivity growth within countries, whether capitalist, socialist or still
struggling in the transition from Communism to a market economy.

In describing his overall strategy, Mr. Brady said, "When I first raised it last
April, I was cast as a Johnny one-note." The "one note" heard by his critics in
the United States and abroad was his call for lower interest rates. Foreign
governments and publications said the United States had shown itself to be, as
The Economist put it, "incapable of wise leaderhip." Many blamed Mr. Brady for
trying to force monetary expansion at the risk of reigniting inflation.

Now Mr. Brady is seeking to put his quest for lower interest rates in a broader
context and to reply to the charge that he is soft on inflation. "The economists
always insist that we must have non-inflationary growth," he said, while he
prefers to talk in terms of low-inflationary growth.

Mr. Brady is doubtful, as was the late Prof. Sumner Slichter of Harvard in the
early post-World War II period, that zero inflation and vigorous growth are
compatible. Like Professor Slichter's position, Mr. Brady's is regarded by many
conservatives as not just heretical but, far worse, undeliverable and unstable.
The acceptance of even low inflation is likely to lead to a much higher rate of
inflation, the critics say.

In the 1950's and early 1960's, however, low inflation -- by Professor
Slichter's definition, 2 percent a year -- did prove consistent with strong
economic growth in the United States. In the 15 years from 1950 through 1964,
real economic growth in the United States averaged 4 percent a year. With the
escalation of the Vietnam War in the mid-1960's and the failure of the Johnson
Administration to cut domestic spending or raise taxes to pay for the war and
the Great Society, the compatibility of low inflation with high growth was
shattered.

Mr. Brady believes that the world's economic leaders need greater confidence and
should concentrate on positive goals, like growth and open world trade, rather
than being hamstrung by negatives like fear of inflation and unemployment.

He did not try to defend all the policies that had produced economic growth and
financial boom in the 1980's. On the contrary, he was highly critical of the
wave of leveraged buyouts of corporations in the United States and excessive
debt creation.

"The banking system is less strong," he said. "Are certain banks in trouble? Of
course. Bigger banks? Yes!" But the mistakes of the 1980's, he said, should not
deter us from moving ahead, "so that we're creating jobs, increasing
investment."

Affirming that "a strategy of hope is important," Mr. Brady drew a comparison
with what he is proposing for the world economy and with the policy taken
vis-a-vis Mexico, which, he said, is moving ahead economically "by marrying the
Brady Plan for reducing Mexico's foreign debt with President Salinas's progress
in opening up markets."

He said that in convincing Mexicans, including expatriates as well as
foreigners, that Mexico meant business and that debt reduction would work, what
critics regarded as the missing element in the formulation of the plan -- money
-- was flowing into the country. Mr. Brady said the inflow to Mexico of
expatriate capital would rise this year to $14 billion from $4 billion last
year.

Mr. Brady said he believed other governments were "getting the message" that he
has been trying to deliver for a comprehensive growth-oriented strategy,
including reductions in interest rates. He called attention to the Bank of
Japan's half-point cut in its discount rate, its benchmark rate of interest, to
5.5 percent on Monday. Japan had been holding interest rates high to wring
inflation out of the economy.

Mr. Brady said he also saw evidence that Britain, Italy, Spain and Denmark were
moving to lower-rate policies. He was more equivocal about Germany, where
Karl-Otto Pohl has resigned as head of the Bundesbank to be replaced by another
monetary hard-liner, Helmut Schlesinger. Timothy Deal, a member of the National
Security Council who is helping to prepare the United States position for the
London summit meeting, said he thought the Germans were still adamant about
their rate policies.

Mr. Brady's line on the urgency of growth appears to be gaining international
support. This week, the United Nations World Economic Survey for 1991 predicted
that global economic growth this year would be zero and would rise in 1992 to
only 2 percent -- barely enough to keep pace with population growth. And the
U.N. declared: "In various industrialized countries, the monetary authorities
feel that output growth over 2 or 3 percent a year would be inflationary and
must be restrained. As long as this view prevails, these nations cannot serve
their historic role as an engine of world economic growth."

The survey concluded that the present mix of monetary and fiscal policy seems to
express political priorities in which unemployment is an acceptable price for
containing inflation, "and high real interest rates are welcomed even at the
expense of growth, at least in the short term." If such policies continue, the
report said, "the more dynamic international economic environment needed for a
shorter adjustment in the developing countries and a less costly transition in
Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union will not materialize."

This will be not only the United Nations' but the United States' line at the
summit meeting in London. Mr. Brady said that as he saw it, a strategy for
regenerating growth is the most important item on the summit's agenda.

LOAD-DATE: July 5, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Part of the United States strategy at the London economic summit
meeting will be to call for lower interest rates, according to the Treasury
Secretary, Nicholas F. Brady. (Paul Hosefros/The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                               9 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   July 5, 1991, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Ellis Island: All Too Like The Old Days

BYLINE: By PATRICIA LEIGH BROWN

SECTION: Section C; Page 1; Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 2014 words


ON a drizzly morning 10 years or so ago, I took a trip to the ruin that was
Ellis Island. At that time, the National Park Service was giving limited tours
of the site, and the cobwebs of history clung like moss to the vaults of the old
Registry room. Then, it was a moody, somber place in which my only touristic
companions were echoes and ghosts.

So it was with a sense of expectation and promise that I made my way recently to
Castle Clinton in Battery Park about 9:30 one weekday morning to visit the
10-month-old Ellis Island Immigration Museum.

The mood was decidedly upbeat among the visitors waiting in line, who had to
brave a multitude of souvenir souks selling Operation Desert Storm cigarette
lighters and Big Apple forget-me-nots.

"Cheese or sex, which is it?" said a woman from Howard Beach, Queens, coaxing
Polaroid-perfect smiles from her cronies. A merry band of gymnasts -- nonsalted
human pretzels -- distracted the crowd.

My mission was to see how visitors who are flocking to the city this summer are
experiencing one of New York's most highly acclaimed landmarks. In what should
be poetic -- but is not -- the Ellis Island tourist experience begins and ends
on a boat. The only way to get to the island from Manhattan is on the Circle
Line, which docks just outside Castle Clinton. At 10:05, I boarded the 9:30 boat
and took the 10-minute trip across the harbor. It was a breezy, beautiful
morning in the Port of New York.

At 10:15, when I disembarked, there was already a crowd on the island waiting to
catch the boat back to Manhattan. I should have taken it as an omen. I wondered
what they were doing there, and a group of 90 teen-agers from Coady Middle
School in Bourne, Mass., who'd spent only 15 minutes at the museum, enlightened
us. Since their boat was late getting over, they had to go directly back to
Manhattan. Otherwise, they would miss out on a more compelling historical
phenomenon: lunch at the Hard Rock Cafe.

Though unintentionally, arrival by water turns out to be more evocative of the
historic Ellis Island experience than one might expect. Upon entering the
Baggage Room, now the entrance to the museum, I was confronted by huddled
masses, their din reverberating through the hallways, and a line so long it
actually snaked through the lobby and out the door. As a tourist, I was being
processed not for hookworm, tuberculosis or diphtheria, but rather for free
tickets to the film "Island of Hope, Island of Tears," which serves as
orientation for the museum. It was a portent of things to come.

Waiting and Waiting. . . .

Like immigrants marked with the letter X, which stood for mental impairment, I
waited while a chalk board informed us that all seats for the 9:40, 10:10,
10:40, 11:10, 11:40, and 12:10 films were already filled. (Between 500 and 1,000
people disembark at a time, according to the National Park Service; the 2
theaters have 140 seats each.) Clutching precious tickets to the 12:40 show, I
made my way to the elevator. I reminded myself that the great legacy of America
is tolerance as I ignored the myriad young people with headphones who were
running and sliding on the floor.

In the elevator, I encountered a boisterous group from Liberty View Tours of
Springfield, N.Y. "Pull in your tummy," one woman said as the doors closed.
Their pack leader, wisely, came equipped with a gold bullhorn so her words could
be heard above the commotion. "Are we all here?" she said, booming the tour
guide's credo.

Documents and Artifacts

I began my own tour of the exhibition space with the "Ellis Island Chronicles"
display, which documents the island's history in words, photographs and models.
From there, I proceeded to "Treasures From Home," which contains many moving
artifacts, from letters to clothing, passed down through immigrants' families.
Unfortunately, most of the accompanying oral histories, which are supposed to be
listened to via a telephone receiver, were "temporarily out of order," and this
was also true in many other areas of the exhibition space. (Diana Pardue, chief
of museum services for the Statue of Liberty and Ellis Island National
Monuments, says new phones are due any day now.)

In interviews with tour guides and park personnel, there was an awareness of the
logistical problems associated with getting to and from the museum and concern
about ironing out the kinks to make the trip to the island easier for visitors.
Of the technical glitches, for example, a park ranger later explained, "What
that means is, we're not done yet."

In a way, it is refreshing to find a museum in which visitors are encouraged to
find their own way around, without an umbilical connection to a pre-recorded
movie star. Unfortunately, many of the exhibits at Ellis Island are down narrow
tiled hallways off the main spaces and are difficult to locate and navigate.
Park rangers are not omnipresent, and, despite the waves of independent bus tour
guides, official National Park tours take place only in the wintertime, by
reservation. Because of the boat schedules, which actually makes one yearn for
the Long Island Rail Road at rush hour, many tourists also seem to miss the
introductory documentary film.

A Roomful of History

The heart of the museum is the great, vaulted Grand Registry Room, which today
serves as a gathering point and place of reflection. Visitors who are willing to
eavesdrop, or simply study clothes and faces, can pick up fascinating bits of
contemporary immigration history among many of the tour groups who have been
flocking here. On my first of two trips to the museum, I encountered 120 Soviet
Jews from the Brighton Beach section of Brooklyn, many of whom had been in the
United States less than 10 years. Sitting in the Great Hall on the same stark
rows of benches that served as way stations for generations of immigrants, they
listened -- or tried to -- as Gregory Druker, their tour guide, gave a lecture.
("Judging today by the noise, you can imagine the chaos," he told them.)

As at the Vietnam Veterans Memorial in Washington, many visitors to Ellis Island
have stories to tell. "The Island of Tears -- the same thing now is in Moscow,"
said a man in Mr. Druker's group. Many were visibly moved to be on the island.
"I have been here 10 years," said Berland Itta, a retired Soviet engineer,
referring to the United States. "I am citizen."

The diversity of Ellis-goers is also evident during "Stump the Ranger," a
five-minute question-and-answer session led by a ranger and given before the
film. The film is intended, as the ranger said, "to give you all the emotion you
can't get from reading a panel." The experience might be even more poignant if
there were an organized program, enabling visitors to share their own stories.

Ms. Pardue said that the museum did have an ad hoc oral history program in which
people who passed through Ellis Island can tell their stories for the museum's
oral history archives. Ms. Pardue added that the museum was trying to start a
volunteer program that would recruit Ellis Island immigrants to help guide
visitors around the island.

The ranger, who, naturally, was unstumpable, also gave a brief run-down of the
current procedure for beginning genealogical research. She explained that the
museum's much-talked-about computerized listing of immigrants' names was as yet
unavailable, "because it's going to cost at least $15 million, and we don't have
it." (Manny Strumpf, a spokesman for the National Park Service, said that the
genealogical research center will be in operation by 1992.)

Not surprisingly, many visitors seemed visibly confused by computers in the
entrance hall, which are there for calling up names on the "Wall of Honor," the
copper sea wall in front of the museum. Many didn't realize the names are not of
all immigrants who passed through Ellis, but only those whose families
contributed $100 or more to the Statue of Liberty-Ellis Island Foundation.
Confusion also reigned in the "America's Family Album" exhibit, sponsored by the
Eastman Kodak Company, where many found the computers totally uncooperative.

The average immigrant spent three to five hours at Ellis Island. During that
time, according to those who lived through it, there was a feeling of
helplessness mixed with hope because of the uncertainty of not knowing whether
one would make it to America.

After downing a grilled chicken teriyaki sandwich at the restaurant (fast-food
only) and ducking into the (somewhat schlocky) souvenir shop (an "I Love New
York" troll or official Ellis Island refrigerator magnet, anyone?), I made my
way out of the museum to catch the 2:30 boat back to Manhattan. What I should
have bought at the gift shop was the $1.59 packet of Maalox Plus.

The time was 1:45. The sun -- unrelieved by any sort of canopy to shade
visitors, including many older people -- was brutal. There was no crowd control.
People pressed against one another in the heat, and the only benches were on the
wrong side of the barricade.

With hundreds of people lined up in front of us, it was no surprise when the
2:30 boat came and went. By the time the 3:00 boat showed up at 3:15 -- again
leaving without me -- I was feeling desperate. People from bus tours, scheduled
to leave Battery Park at 4, were panicking. Visitors were fanning themselves
with subway maps, old-world lace fans and Russian newspapers, which might have
been charming in other circumstances.

A sense of besieged camaraderie began to envelop the crowd. As the air grew more
suffocating and sweatier, black humor -- and the inevitable comparisons to "the
first time" in steerage class -- helped keep people calm. Patrick Elia, from
Brook Haven, Pa., mentioned he had come to Ellis Island from Italy as a 6
1/2-year-old in 1924 and spent three days there. "My sister had a fever," he
recalled. "It comes back to you as you walk through those hallways. To walk the
same steps as my family! Half of them are gone now."

But the jovial mood with which they had begun their day had for many been
replaced by frustration, anger and alarm. At 3:35, I finally boarded the boat,
and at 4:05, well over two hours after leaving the museum, I pulled into Battery
Park.  (Mr. Strumpf said the Circle Line had ordered two additional boats.)

As I walked down the gangplank at Castle Clinton, I was greeted by a barrage of
hawkers selling "New York Joe Cool" T-shirts and faux Movado and Gucci watches.
Here, at what was the original immigration station for the Port of New York, I
finally understood the meaning of "kesl-gartn," an American Yiddish expression
for chaos.

Getting There

The Ellis Island Immigration Museum is open daily from 9 A.M. to 5 P.M. Circle
Line ferries leave Battery Park at the southern end of Manhattan every half-hour
from 9:30 A.M. to 4 P.M., making a stop at Liberty Island. One boat a day,
scheduled for 9:15 A.M., goes directly to Ellis Island. The last ferry off the
island departs at 5:45 P.M.

The Circle Line also runs boats to Ellis Island from Liberty State Park in
Jersey City.  The boats run from 9:30 A.M. to 3:30 P.M.

The Circle Line cuts off the lines if the number of visitors exceeds the
island's capacity of 4,500 to 5,000 people.

Round-trip fares from both Manhattan and Jersey City are $6 for adults, $5 for
the elderly and $3 for ages 3 to 17. Admission to the island and museum is free.
Information: (212) 269-5755.

Surviving The Trip

Here are some tactics for braving Ellis Island in summer:

*Go to the dock early. The first boat leaves at 9:15 A.M. (That's the only boat
that bypasses the Statue of Liberty and goes directly to Ellis Island, saving
about half an hour.) Arrive by 8:45.

*Be prepared to spend several hours on the island, and budget time for the lines
to avoid disappointment.

*Wear comfortable walking shoes and a hat for shade. A canteen of water and an
umbrella for shade don't hurt, either.

*Consider going by way of New Jersey. Seventy-five percent of visitors leave
from Manhattan.

*Visit on a weekday. If possible, wait until winter.

LOAD-DATE: July 5, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: A boatload of visitors nearing Ellis Island in New York Harbor.
After disembarking, inset photos, visitors walk to the 10-month-old Ellis Island
Immigration Museum, where the display "Ellis Island Chronicles" documents the
island's history using photographs. (pg. C1); Visitors in front of a photograph
of the Great Hall at Ellis Island. (pg. C18) (Photographs by Sara Krulwich/The
New York Times)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              10 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   July 7, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

How MTV Plays Around the World

BYLINE: By Peter Nichols

SECTION: Section 2; Page 22; Column 5; Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 148 words


Asia

Will Iraq Rock And Singapore Swing?

MTV in Iraq? Iran? Mongolia? MTV Asia, a new venture, plans to begin satellite
broadcasts in September in these unlikely places and 27 other countries
stretching from Saudi Arabia to South Korea. Also on the list are Afghanistan,
India, Cambodia, Vietnam and Kuwait, but Tom Freston, chairman of MTV Networks,
said early emphasis will be on the major markets of Hong Kong, South Korea,
Malaysia, Singapore and Taiwan. Programming, in English, will originate in Hong
Kong.

How to satisfy tastes in 31 diverse countries? The music will be a mix of Asian
rock-and-roll and Western superstars. "We'll feature video music and MTV
pop-culture news hosted by Asian personalities," Mr. Freston said. "Right now,
there's a lack of local video product in these countries, so at first we'll be
playing less Asian music than we'd like."

LOAD-DATE: July 7, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              11 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   July 7, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

About Men;
Forgiveness

BYLINE: BY PETER D. BAIRD;  Peter D. Baird is a lawyer living in Phoenix.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 8; Column 3; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 1158 words


The sound of the twin turboprop engines dropped an octave, and the 18-seat
Jetstream nosed downward through a winter cloud layer and toward a rural airport
in northern Idaho. When the Snake River became dimly visible in the gray,
December overcast, I took the letter out for a last read.

"You will notice some major changes in your father," his wife had written.
"Although he is very excited about seeing you after all these years, please
understand that he gets confused and frustrated these days." She added: "We will
pick you up at the airport. Plan to spend the night with us."

Connected by a wife and mother who had died 30 years ago, my father and I had
not seen each other in nearly 15 years, largely because he was an alcoholic and
often violent. He and I had gone through one battle after another, until we
finally parted with such fury and hurt that the break seemed irreparable.

Yet there I was, walking across a snow-specked tarmac, looking for him through
the windows of the small, glassed-in reception area and wondering what the
protocol should be after years of strained silence. A handshake? A hug? What
about "How've you been?" Never, even in the best of times, had we ever said
anything to each other resembling "I love you."

Once inside the gate, I saw him. Always a big man who carried his heft as if he
were well exercised and who projected an intimidating confidence through a
powerful and resonant voice, he was now strikingly different. At 81 years, he
had lost height, gained girth and become an untoned slab of tired flesh. After
bringing me gradually into focus, he moved stiffly with a cane in my direction
and, swallowing the back half of each word, said something that I did not
understand.

At close range, he resolved the protocol issue, extended his right hand as far
as his arm would push it and put on that disapproving expression he always
reserved for his only child. Shaking his hand, I mumbled something that had the
word "sir" in it and wondered whether we were about to climb back into the ring
for another round of father against son or, from his perspective, son against
father.

In retrospect, our incompatibility was probably inevitable. He was born into
poverty, deprived of a mother by a doctor's clumsy overdose of chloroform,
delayed from reaching medical school by the Depression, drafted into World War
II during the early days of his marriage and shot in his surgeon's hand while
with the Army in the South Pacific. Once discharged from the service, he
confronted exclusionary bonds forged between me and my mother during the war and
became a workaholic physician who suffered from periodic bouts of alcoholism,
depression and aggression. He could never really accept his son. His disapproval
culminated during the Vietnam War, when he lobbied the local Selective Service
Board to have me drafted and, as he saw it, fight for freedom the way he had.

After our awkward encounter inside the terminal building, his wife and I loaded
his arthritic weight into the passenger side of the front seat, drove to their
home overlooking the Snake River and settled in for an apprehensive afternoon
and evening. As we diplomatically made our way through some stiff drinks and a
late lunch, then exchanged small talk about the darkening clouds over the river,
it slowly became apparent that a change was in progress and that, at least for
now, there would be no more battles, rages or hurt.

At the same time, something about my father was wrong, off-center, even crazy.
Time after time, he slipped off the rational track, losing the conversation and
confusing me with a deceased surgeon he had often scrubbed with in the past. He
could not find the mustard jar that was right in front of him. When he raised
his glass, I saw that he wore two wristwatches. In the men's room of a nearby
country club, where we went for dinner, he turned away from the urinal and,
while still unzipped and conspicuous, attempted to introduce me to a startled
stranger who had just walked through the door.

"The doctors are hedging," his wife explained when he was out of the room, "but
they believe that your dad probably has Alzheimer's disease. The last time your
father was examined, he actually told the doctor that Harry Truman was still
President. Unfortunately, he refuses to go to any major medical center for
further evaluation, and he erupts with anger whenever we press the issue." She
went on to elaborate that the condition had been getting progressively worse for
about two years and that, in addition to the mental disorientation, the disease
had caused incontinence, rage and almost total dependence. Increasingly, his
wife was a victim, too; 15 years younger than he and still active, she was
forced into housebound seclusion as a round-the-clock nurse and housekeeper.

But whatever was disrupting his nerve cells was also generating an unprecedented
flow of paternal behavior. He asked about the 10-year-old granddaughter he had
never seen and about the college-student grandsons he had last seen when they
were in preschool. Though he could not keep the two grandsons straight, he pored
over the photographs I brought, enthralled. He genuinely wanted to know about
me, my work, my marriage. Indeed, as the afternoon wore on, he actually
ministered to me in some touching but bewildering ways: pouring me a new drink
when I already had a fresh one; writing out unintelligible prescriptions for
maladies that I didn't have and that he had just invented.

Guarded, bewildered, I apparently had something that I could never get from
tears, anger, therapists or antidepressant medication: a father, a real one. But
how to reconcile the present reality of this sick but caring man with that awful
time when I was paralyzed and he refused to examine me? Instead, he denounced my
paralysis as malingering and stormed out of the house, leaving me to lie
helplessly on the floor and my mother to call in another country doctor from 30
miles away to diagnose polio. Even more to the point, how to act and talk at
last like a forgiving and loving son?

Outside, the December darkness fell early as it does at that latitude and, from
the arc lights on the grain elevators across the Snake, we could make out a few
windless snowflakes and some patchy reflections on the river. As time passed,
our conversation ebbed into a long quiet while my father stared out the window
at the headlights of a freight train on the opposite shore. Slowly, he turned to
me and, with an expression that I had never seen before but that I later took to
be love, said: "I know that I wasn't much of a father to you, Pete, and that I
made a lot of mistakes. I want you to know that I am very sorry." Astonished and
moved by the warmth of this December thaw from an implacable man with whom I had
fought all my life for approval, all I could think to say was: "That's all
right, Dad. It really is O.K."

And it was, finally.

LOAD-DATE: July 7, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              12 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   July 7, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

IN SHORT: NONFICTION

BYLINE: By ALLEN BOYER

SECTION: Section 7; Page 16; Column 3; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 219 words



GENTLEMAN REBEL
The Memoirs of H. Stuart Hughes.
Ticknor & Fields, $24.95.

The early chapters of "Gentleman Rebel," the autobiography of the historian H.
Stuart Hughes, read like a subplot left over from "War and Remembrance." The
story breaks easily into vignettes. Grandson of Charles Evans Hughes, Chief
Justice of the United States; schoolmate of John F. Kennedy. Expensive prep
schools, Amherst College, Harvard University; trips to Europe by liner;
Heidelberg and Munich under the Nazis, and Paris on the eve of war; wartime
service in the Office of Strategic Services. Later chapters paint a broad-scale
portrait of life in the academy. Harassment by Red-hunters. Teaching positions
at Stanford and Harvard. A friendship with Edmund Wilson. Marital problems,
drinking problems, psychoanalysis. Antinuclear campaigning. Student protests and
the Vietnam War. Scandals buried behind Harvard's ivy. A tenured position at the
University of California, San Diego, where he now is professor emeritus of
history. The focus is on self, not work; Mr. Hughes says little about his dozen
books. And his urbane self-awareness often slips into cozy self-delight, even on
matters of divorce and nepotism. It is for its portrait of an era, rather than
its portrait of a man, that this book will be remembered.

LOAD-DATE: July 7, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              13 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   July 7, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

The Walking Wounded

BYLINE: By Patricia Hampl;  Patricia Hampl, the author of "A Romantic
Education," a Prague memoir, teaches at the University of Minnesota and is a
MacArthur Fellow.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 5; Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1375 words



THE FORESEEABLE FUTURE
By Reynolds Price.
253 pp. New York:
Atheneum. $21.95.

Less than a generation ago, the short story, having lost its home in America's
popular magazines, seemed also to have lost its place in contemporary writing.
The New Yorker was the only weekly still publishing and paying well for short
fiction, along with monthlies like The Atlantic and a handful of women's
magazines. The baleful warning of the Visiting Writer comes back, telling a
short-story-writing class: "The market has dried up." The year was 1969. His
advice to the room filled with graduate students with thin piles of short
fiction before them on the seminar table: "Write novels."

But dried-up market or no, the short story refused to bite the dust. Maybe the
popular magazines that seemed to sustain the short story earlier in the century
were not real friends, after all. True, they paid well and they had readers. But
they imposed restrictions of style and length that stifled voice and even
material. The essentially poetic, even spiritual, tendencies of the genre were
suppressed in favor of narrative action. But left to its own devices, short
fiction has resurfaced now as a narrative genre with keen meditative and
retrospective powers.

Reynolds Price, in this graceful collection, "The Foreseeable Future," presents
three long stories that display this contemplative aspect of the form with
dignity and beautiful gravity.

Only the final story (also the shortest), "Back Before Day," has much built-in
suspense, and even that is quickly abandoned. Instead, each story exhibits an
intense respect for the characters' inner lives. These modest but passionate
people spend their days largely in a silence punctuated by intense exchanges
with men and women as isolated as themselves. The introspection and the interior
lives of these figures provide them with a method of survival in the ordinary
world, and even a kind of salvation.

Interestingly, although there are interior monologues, none of the stories are
written in the first person, that much-favored voice of current short fiction.
This is a wise, if unfashionable, choice. In the first two (and best) stories,
in particular, the third-person narration creates an intimate atmosphere that a
first-person voice might easily have made merely introspective or oppressively
confessional.

"The Fare to the Moon" and the book's title story are set late in World War II
near Raleigh and in the Carolina low country. They have the faint aura of period
pieces about them without, however, being at all nostalgic. Both stories seem
drenched in a time as well as a place. The fatefulness of wartime becomes an
active presence in the characters' lives (something missing in "Back Before
Day," which is set in a less specified post-Vietnam War present).

Leah, in "The Fare to the Moon," is the black true love of white (and married)
Kayes Paschal. As the story begins, she has risen early to see her lover off to
the Army. He has been drafted -- at one level a deliverance from a desperate
social situation, but more deeply a separation tragic beyond their ability to
discuss.

This story is not the longest in the collection, but it is the most novelistic.
Mr. Price manages to shift point of view from Leah to Kayes, to Kayes's brother,
to his embittered wife and finally to his estranged son, Curtis. He even deftly
works in vignettes from the shared childhoods of Leah and Kayes that serve to
underscore the inevitability of their attachment.

Mr. Price accomplishes all of this without rushing, keeping that meditative
voice that attests to the necessity of telling the story in the first place.
Tone is everything for these carefully nuanced characters. "Easy, child," Leah
says to Kayes's brother toward the end, when he mistakes her bravery for
lightheartedness. "We're all too sad. Let's show some respect."

Kayes Paschal goes off to war, and in "The Foreseeable Future," the collection's
centerpiece, Whit Wade has just returned. His problem is an inability to feel
quite alive since he was wounded in France. The doctors told him, he says, "for
practical purposes, I was dead when they found me."

Whit has come home to his devoted wife, June, and adored child, Liss, in
Raleigh, and to his job as an insurance adjuster. Using the frame of Whit's
workweek on the road settling claims, Mr. Price lays out the story's chapters as
days of the week, sending his hero away from home and safety where he battles
wrecked, suicidal sensations. "Nothing," he says early in the story, "tastes
good to me but the sight of my child."

The story moves from day to day in a vivid series of encounters with people
adrift in their own loneliness, some of them touching Whit's early life, while
others are strangers almost occult in their capacity to comprehend his
life-and-death passage. Most of these characters -- women especially -- offer,
as Whit says, "kind thoughts -- sweet cheer, maybe lies." They also offer him
their own versions of feeling alive and yet dead, their wounds as serious as
his, if more subtle than those inflicted in war.

Late in the week, deep "out here in the beautiful lonesome sticks," Whit meets a
frail man old enough to have opened the door to a Union officer. This "scared
old boy with a mind like a blade, pushing ninety and ready for more," provides
him, almost casually, with "the secret visible truth."

But in fact, each of the real and yet fabulous figures Whit meets along his way
offers a paradoxical truth about how to keep on keeping on. None of these people
are chummy, none wish to buttonhole an audience or even a listener.

That is part of the power of the book's overall effect and the source of its
gravity: these people have stories because they have lives. They must recount
them in order to live on, past the wounds and dislocations of their histories.

They are speaking, then, to themselves, yet everything they say has to do with
the love they bear -- or are unable to bear -- others. It seems entirely right
that these are people who have the habit of praying, for what is this kind of
urgent interior voice but prayer?



SEEING THE DEAD IN CHURCH

Whit was raised a Methodist but had always enjoyed the Episcopal church on the
few occasions he worshiped there. What he liked was not so much the candles,
vestments and bowing and scraping that seduced some others but the spooky mist
in their sanctuaries. . . . Invisible but cleanly rank and somehow kin, in
Whit's mind at least, to the Holy Ghost, the secret breath of God's present
spirit as it waits to strike with help or pain. The one word thanks slipped from
Whit in a murmur, and he sat near the back on the hardest pew he'd yet
encountered in a lifetime of pews. All the other people knelt as they entered
and said silent prayers. . . .

Whit started again to see the dead he knew from one day's battle. Men and boys
he trained with, real and respectful in the church here around him as in any
crap game at Fort-damned-Jackson or drinking warm beer in a pub near Dover. None
of them faced him with blame or fear. But again they clustered with well-meaning
calm and brotherly respect, saying just four words -- We bought you this. It was
only the truth and, no way left in all his life could he half repay them.

The sight, and the slow transaction at the altar, held Whit so close he forgot
the woman he saw outside. . . . And only toward the end of the service did his
eyes drift rightward and catch the woman's face again, the great dark fall of
her lustrous hair. In the series of sick wards Whit occupied, he often struggled
at night for reasons to live, awake, through one more day. And tonight as he saw
this woman, he thought I wish I'd known this, just this picture.

Even as a child he cared a good deal for beautiful sights -- mostly trees and
the arrowheads he found, a rare deer or bird. He saved them up as other boys
save baseball cards or agate marbles to tide them over. And when he was old
enough to save the sight and smell of beautiful women, it was not always as a
goad for sex, sights to rub his body against, but as frank reminders of the
world's amazing tendency to please. -- From "The Foreseeable Future."

LOAD-DATE: July 7, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              14 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   July 8, 1991, Monday, Late Edition - Final

THE MEDIA BUSINESS: AD SCENE;
When Agencies and Clients Produce the TV Programs

BYLINE: By Randall Rothenberg

SECTION: Section D; Page 6; Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 951 words


LOOK closely the next time you see a television program with no advertising on
it. An advertising agency may still lurk behind it.

Next week, public broadcasting stations around the country will begin
rebroadcasting "The Civil War," the acclaimed 11-hour documentary by Ken Burns
that in its first go-round last September became the most-watched public
television program of all time.

Critics exhausted their thesauruses praising Mr. Burns and the Public
Broadcasting Service. Few took notice of a third party without which the series
would not have been made: Ayer U.S.A., the advertising agency.

Seven years ago, Mr. Burns was introduced to Richard N. Prince, a senior vice
president of Ayer in Detroit, who has served for years as a program scout for
the General Motors Corporation. Mr. Prince, in turn, brought Mr. Burns and his
project to the attention of General Motors, which was impressed enough with "The
Civil War" to provide about $3 million to finance it.

But if the program was born of a marriage made on Madison Avenue, rest assured
that altruism had little to do with it. Despite the lack of commercials on PBS,
commerce is often the point.

"The more cluttered the airwaves get with commercials and the more fragmented
the audience gets, the more difficult it becomes to get a message through to the
consumer," said Marcella Rosen, Ayer's executive vice president and media
director. "So if we can't get a good match between a television program and a
client's needs, we create it."

From the beginning of broadcasting, advertising agencies created many programs
on which their clients advertised. Jack Benny's Sunday evening radio show, to
cite a famous example, was actually produced for years by an ad agency, Young &
Rubicam, on behalf of General Foods' Jell-O dessert.

But as the historian Erik Barnouw noted in his 1978 book, "The Sponsor," the
networks chafed at the ad agencies' control over program content and scheduling,
especially after television supplanted radio. So, beginning in the early 1950's,
the networks began producing their own programming and selling spots to various
advertisers.

Sponsored programming, as advertiser-created shows are called, did not die:
D'Arcy Masius Benton & Bowles still produces soap operas for the Procter &
Gamble Company. But sponsored programs diminished in importance -- except at
agencies like Ayer, which specializes in finding quality programs for its
clients to produce.

The marketing theory behind sponsorships, particularly specials on the networks
and PBS, is simple: They can bring companies to the attention of consumers who
are otherwise hard to reach, especially men.

"The basic marketing purpose is obviously image enhancement, against a group of
consumers who aren't normally exposed to a great deal of advertising --
higher-income, better-educated thought leaders and influence leaders," said
Philip Guarascio, the executive director of G.M.'s marketing and advertising
programs.

Beneath the umbrella of quality programming are careful sponsorship choices.
General Motors wants to create a sense of well-being about America, so its "Mark
of Excellence" presentations, on which Ayer has worked since 1983, focus on
"events in the American experience," Mr. Guarascio said.

Last year, the agency and the company helped produce "Separate but Equal," a
dramatization of the Supreme Court's 1954 ruling that desegregated schools,
which ran on ABC.

The American Telephone and Telegraph Company, on the other hand, wants to appeal
to younger executives who buy telecommunications equipment for their companies
and homes.

So the company, for which Ayer works, sponsors programs that "tend to feature
younger men in heroic situations," said Aaron Cohen, the director of the
agency's national broadcasting and programming department. Last year, A.T.&T.
sponsored "Last Flight Out," an NBC movie on the departure of Americans from
Vietnam.

Most sponsorship arrangements are ad hoc. When a big television network is
involved, a marketer or its ad agency can license a program that the network
owns and pay a fee that covers both some production costs and advertising time
on the program.

Sometimes, a marketer will develop the entire project itself and buy the network
time to run it. While more expensive than simple licensing, this gives the
sponsor an opportunity to recoup its costs by selling home-video or foreign
rights.

General Motors paid $1 million toward the production of "The Civil War" -- more
than a third of its production costs -- and some $2 million more to promote it
to viewers and in schools, Mr. Burns said. In return, the company received
credits in the program and the opportunity to call the show a "G.M. Mark of
Excellence" production.

The series' strikingly high viewership -- an 8.8 average rating for five nights,
or about 8.19 million viewers each night, compared with PBS ratings that
normally hover around 2 points -- has led to further collaborations between G.M.
and Mr. Burns.

The auto company is the sole corporate sponsor of his "Songs of the Civil War,"
which will be broadcast next month on PBS, and of two forthcoming Burns
documentaries on the history of radio and the history of baseball.

Mr. Burns, whose programs have no commercials, nevertheless has a few words for
his sponsor.

"Traditionally, ad agencies have been anathema to public television producers,"
he said. "It is seemingly not in their best interest to recommend to clients
that they make a public television 'buy,' " he said.

"But Ayer played an extraordinarily important matchmaking role here. Ayer and
G.M. understood that public television is a tremendously good and effective
buy."

LOAD-DATE: July 8, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              15 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   July 8, 1991, Monday, Late Edition - Final

American Voices: Aiding the Soviets;
Compassion and Pragmatism on Help for Moscow

BYLINE: By FELICITY BARRINGER,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 2398 words

DATELINE: GARY, Ind.


F. Brannan Jackson's face hangs heavy with doubt as he contemplates the prospect
of American aid to the Soviet Union. When he turns his thoughts into words, the
pastor of the Calvary Institutional Baptist Church speaks like a Samaritan.
"We've heard the stories of economic distress over there," he says. "I think we
should help the Soviet Union."

He goes on: "We can do it. We have the kind of economic structure that we do the
things we want to, when we want to, where we want to. It is a risk. But if we
can achieve stability within Russia, there may be an opportunity to achieve a
peaceful relationship with them."

Then the 67-year-old Dr. Jackson pauses, as if to consider the decaying city
that lies beyond his own neat neighborhood, the deserted housing units along the
dunes of Lake Michigan and the empty mall where the signs have crumbled and
boards over store windows are weathered white. "Where are we going to get the
money from?" he asks. "I don't know."

In mid-July the Soviet President, Mikhail S. Gorbachev, is to meet with
President Bush and the other leaders of the seven major industrialized
democracies in London, where he is expected to seek commitments of Western aid
to help transform the sclerotic Soviet economy from central control to a market
system.

A Deep Ambivalence

Interviews with scores of Americans, from the union halls of Cleveland to the
farms of Iowa, reveal a deep ambivalence about the idea of a Soviet bailout
financed in part by the United States Treasury. Many interviewed on a drive
across the Midwest had thought little if at all about the subject, but many
others in the Midwest and in corners of the nation from Florida to Tennessee to
California tended to favor aid.

All, however, wondered whether America could afford a high-stakes gamble on
Soviet reform. They wondered whether the gamble would pay off in terms of
stability in the Soviet Union and, consequently, stable Soviet-American
relations that could enable the United States to reduce its military spending
for years to come.

History has taught these Americans that their country can change the world, but
their lives have taught them that change is costly.

"I have mixed emotions," said Clarence Davis, 54, president of District 54 of
the International Association of Machinists and Aerospace Workers in Cleveland.
"Certainly, I wouldn't want to see that country with their large military
presence taken over by some of the right-wing generals that are standing in the
background waiting for the revolution to fail.

"But I certainly wouldn't want to steal from this country the funds that are
necessary for so many things we need to do. We can't afford a national health
plan for this country. I don't know what we can do for some other folks."

Among the 60 or so people who were interviewed or who refused to be interviewed
were those who made it clear that they were too consumed with their own
financial constraints to worry about another country's troubles. Many answered
with variations on the theme most succinctly stated by Aaron K. Bilyeu, a
40-year-old Vietnam veteran from Auburn, Ind.: "It's a good idea -- maybe."

Most often, their answers came in the form of questions: Is the Soviet Union
worthy of help? Would American aid make any difference? Would it hurt us to help
them?

Are They Worthy?
Caution Lingers As Fear Recedes

Along highways and subdivisions from Cleveland to Des Moines to Los Angeles,
yellow ribbons hang on street lamps and doorways like talismans of faith in the
United States' new-found military might. In these places the fear of nuclear war
with the Soviet Union is barely mentioned: if it hasn't vanished, it has been
put in a bottom drawer.

Yet the end of fear has not meant the end of caution. Looking at the shifting
Soviet political currents, the ethnic strife, the empty shelves and the rivalry
between reformers and hard-liners, some favor aid to promote stability and
peaceful change. But others argue that the aid would fall into the wrong hands.

"Neglecting them will make things worse," said Linda Masuku, 32, an immigrant
from South Africa now working as a secretary at St. Paul's Church in Grinnell,
Iowa. "The United States should help get rid of this Communism. Things change.
There are things you can cure. What's happening in the Soviet Union is a
long-term thing that needs to be cured."

John Chiang, 28, a Los Angeles lawyer, favors aid to the Soviet Union, but with
strict conditions. "I'm not concerned about reverting to the cold war in the
classic sense," he said, "but I do think there could be tremendous antagonism if
they don't restore their own internal order. We should be working with them on
their banking system, their infrastructure, advising them how the money should
be spent, and provide technical assistance."

But a recent immigrant wants to see changes before aid, not after. "The leaders
of the Soviet Congress are still the old-fashioned hard-headed Communists," said
Miklos Szucs, who was born 29 years ago in Hungary. Now, with his American-born
wife, he sells his spicy homemade sausages at the Dohar's Meats stand at the
West Side Market in Cleveland.

"A country that wants to spend more on keeping an army than harvesting the grain
isn't worth a penny," he said. "They need at least five years to get the people
who were in power out of power. Otherwise, they're going to put the money in the
same place they put it before -- in their pockets."

Diane Lambert, manager of the Chester/ Valcom Computer Center in Bourbonnais,
Ill., grew up in Kankakee and was 9 years old in 1959, when she saw Nikita S.
Khrushchev in a parade in a nearby town. She was excited, but didn't like him:
"a funny fat man with a button nose." Now 41, she is fascinated by the changes
in the Soviet Union, but still does not trust them.

"I've got conflicting feelings," she said. "How can you kick someone when
they're down? But in my heart I don't think it's fair. We'd be helping them
become more powerful. For every dollar we give them, we'd have to give another
dollar to our own defense."

Would Aid Help?
Few Illusions On Quick Fixes

Can the command economy become a market economy? Can the Soviet Union become
something different? In the restaurant of the Morris Inn on the University of
Notre Dame campus in South Bend, Ind., a group of five professors lifted their
voices over the easy-listening music and spoke about history, opportunity and
risk.

Two views emerged from that conversation and from later interviews. The first
was that aid, given in moderate amounts or in kind, with many conditions
attached, could be instrumental in changing the Soviet system. The other was
that the Soviet economy is so large and so ossified that any aid would be money
down the drain.

"What the Soviet Union is facing is comparable to unscrambling an egg," said
Roger B. Skurski, a professor of economics at Notre Dame. "There's no way to
really do it. They can't start with a clean slate. You have to deal with the
mind set they have first."

"If we offer them help, we would have to do it very carefully," he added,
suggesting scholarships for Soviet economics students, technical advisers and
more academic and professional exchanges between the countries.

A Necessary Gamble?

V. Paul Kenney, a professor of physics who has traveled to the Soviet Union and
stays in touch with Soviet scientists, would like to see a more broad-based
effort at aid, linked to the country's progress down the road to democracy and
free markets. A large investment is a necessary gamble, he said.

"It seems like an awful lot of money's been put into the cold war," he said.
"Talk about billions of dollars -- you can get up to trillions over the years.
If all of the effort that was put into the cold war was a security issue, then
surely doing what we can to keep the whole thing from blowing apart was also a
security issue."

But he added: "It's going to be very expensive to solve things. Americans like
quick fixes. I'm not sure there is a quick fix here. I'm not sure there's
anything to do but to ride along with things and watch as they try to work
themselves out of a hole. What I would do at this moment of crisis is try and
grease the skids."

Others said large-scale aid in the near future would be a palliative, with
little impact on the basic economic structure. Jon Huntsman, chairman of the
Huntsman Chemical Corporation in Salt Lake City, has embarked on several joint
ventures with Soviet partners, including plants making chemicals and plastic
bottles.

"We should participate in joint ventures and help train their people, by
teaching them how to fish but not providing them with fish," he said. "I don't
agree with pumping money into their system without the proper exposure to our
open-market system."

But John B. Attanasio, a Notre Dame law professor, said he doubted that private
enterprise would want to lead the way in aiding the Soviet Union. "There has to
be Government aid, considerable amounts of it, with a lot of it in kind," he
said.

And with conditions, said Howard L. Lasher, a New York State Assemblyman whose
district includes the large colony of Russian immigrants in Brighton Beach.
"When you give economic aid, you have to look at individual rights and civil
liberties," he said. "Otherwise, you'll just be building up another
dictatorship."

Is It Affordable?
Keen Awareness Of Needs at Home

Where would the aid come from? That concern, more than any other, was on the
minds of those Americans interviewed. Many were afraid that the Soviets' gain
would be their loss. "Take it from the defense budget; don't take it from the
poor or the inner cities," said Dr. Jackson of Gary. And Mr. Bilyeu at the
American Legion post in Auburn, Ind., said: "Not from the veterans. Let's be
damn sure they don't take it from lower-class and middle-class America."

And while many others suggested that the investment in stability should come
from military spending, a few, like John Alger, a 32-year-old Florida vegetable
farmer, demurred. "I wouldn't strip defense back a dime," he said. "That's going
to keep them in line."

Luis A. Sanchez, 25, a Cuban-born high school social studies teacher in Miami,
said: "I think we should give the Soviets as much as we can as long as it
doesn't hurt us. We want to open up new markets for ourselves, but we are not in
a position to be so generous that we can be their savior. We have to look out
for ourselves at the same time."

In Iowa, many people still have keen memories of Khrushchev's visit to Roswell
Garst's farm in Coon Rapids in 1959. Iowa's interests often coincide with the
Soviet Union's, as they did in June, when Mr. Bush announced $1.5 billion in
grain credits for the Soviet Union. But there is also keen awareness of the
consequences of overextending a budget.

Drought and Debt

Gary and Susan Davis raise corn, soybeans and hogs on a farm in Newburg,
population 50. Thanks to friends at the United States Information Agency, they
have many foreign guests, and they say the visits have made them appreciate the
good that American aid can do.

But after a decade of watching drought and debt bankrupt their overextended
neighbors, the Davises, who are in their early 50's, are queasy about taking
more money from the Treasury to bail out the Soviet economy.

"I'd rather do that than some of the things our leaders spend their money on,"
Susan Davis said. "If we could do it, it would be a grand investment. But we're
a distressed world power, and so are they. We have economic problems in our
country, and so do they. Should we help them?"

"You ought to start with 'Can we help them?' " her husband interjected. "Maybe
we could take it from defense spending, though I'd rather see the government
bureaucracy pruned." He paused. "But if the Soviets had to come up with the
money themselves, they'd have more incentive to do things right."

'It's Not Our Job'

Up the road in Marshalltown, Delbert Kellogg, Gary Davis's high school
contemporary and fellow farmer, had no ambivalence. "It's not our job," he said.

It's just not our job. Their problems are something they're going to have to
work out by themselves." He would rather see investments by American businessmen
than by the American Government. After all, he added, we don't want to create
another Japan.

The belief that American generosity in foreign economic aid had come back to
haunt American businessmen was mentioned again and again. John Dwan, director of
communications for the Health Sciences Center at the University of Utah, argued
that Germany and Japan, not the United States, should be the ones to help the
Soviets.

"They're today's sugar daddies," said Mr. Dwan, a retired colonel in the Marine
reserves. "The Soviet Union needs a Marshall Plan, but it should be a Russian
plan financed with marks and yen."

If there was a common ground in all the responses, it was the undertone of
anxiety -- anxiety in part about the future of the Soviet Union, but in greater
measure about the future of the United States.

'They Know Better Now'

Most seemed to feel, as did Ellis Rivers Sr., a 64-year-old Memphis tailor, that
the Soviets were "hip now."

"They were just trying to change the world to the way they thought," he said.
"They know better now."

George Drake, a history professor who is stepping down as president of Grinnell
College in Iowa, said: "Security is the biggest pot of gold at the end of the
rainbow. Yes, maybe we'd be throwing money down a rat hole. But I'm an optimist.
I say it's worth a try." But he had his own caveat: Give them aid, he said.
Condition it. But don't make them feel like a supplicant.

"In a peculiar way, we're closer to the Soviet Union than to any other country,
because we're so preoccupied with them," he said. "We haven't known enough about
them, but they are in the waking thoughts of people here and have been for as
long as I can remember. Our relationship with them will always be more intense
than with other countries.

"It is similar to a love-hate relationship with human beings. To the extent that
the relationship is not equal, there will be more difficulties with it than
otherwise. They don't want to be beholden to us. How things play out now depends
not just on what we do, but on how we do it."

LOAD-DATE: July 8, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Diane Lambert, Computer center manager, Bourbonnais, Ill. --
"How can you kick someone when they're down? But in my heart I don't think it's
fair. We'd be helping them become more powerful."; Delbert Kellogg, Farmer,
Marshalltown, Iowa -- "It's just not our job. Their problems are something
they're going to have to work out by themselves.; F. Brannan Jackson, Pastor,
Gary, Ind. -- "If we can achieve stability within Russia, there may be an
opportunity to achieve a peaceful relationship with them." (pg. A1);
Miklos Szucs, Owner of homemade-sausage stand, Cleveland. -- "A country that
wants to spend more on keeping an army than harvesting the grain isn't worth a
penny."; Gary Davis, Farmer, Newburg, Iowa, shown with his wife, Susan. -- "You
ought to start with 'Can we help them?' Maybe we could take it from defense
spending, though I'd rather see the government bureaucracy pruned."; Linda
Masuku, Secretary, St. Paul's Church, Grinnnell, Iowa -- "The United States
should help get rid of this Communism. Things change. There are things you can
cure. What's happening in the Soviet Union is a long-term thing that needs to be
cured." (pg. A10) (Photographs by Andrea Mohin for The New York Times)

TYPE: A special report.

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              16 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 10, 1991, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Lima Journal;
Bars Do Not a Prison Make, but What of Dogma?

BYLINE: By NATHANIEL C. NASH,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 4; Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 959 words

DATELINE: LIMA, Peru, July 5


The line forms early Sunday morning outside Lima's maximum-security prison,
Canto Grande. It is visiting day.

After passing three checkpoints, getting fingerprinted and searched, friends and
relatives of the inmates pass through a labyrinth of corridors that reek of
human waste and are filled with male prisoners, many in tattered clothes,
shouting catcalls and begging for handouts.

But arriving at Cell Block 1A, there is a drastic change. Young women, smiling
and friendly, with makeup and jewelry, and dressed in neat clothes, some in high
heels, greet the visitors with a handshake. Their cell block is immaculate,
organized and bustling with activity.

They do not give their names to strangers, and they refuse to talk about
themselves because, they say, they are engaged in an internal war for control of
Peru. Red banners calling for the masses to rise up against oppression hang in
their cells. Murals saying "Long Live President Gonzalo" and portraits of Marx,
Lenin and Mao adorn the courtyard.

Jailed for Killings

This is the home for more than 100 women who are members or supporters of Latin
America's most dangerous and secretive subversive group, the Shining Path. A few
hundred feet away, 340 men who are part of Shining Path have their own cell
block, as orderly and clean as the women's.

For Shining Path members, their two cell blocks in Canto Grande prison are
showcases of revolutionary discipline, order and management. Several years ago
they persuaded the prison authorities to let them run their cell blocks without
guards, to administer chores and to do their own cooking. They refuse prison
food and rely on relatives and friends for supplies.

Some are here because they are suspected of sympathizing with the guerrilla
group, others because they carried out killings of elected officials, union
leaders, military officers and policemen. It is here in this bizarre prison of
two worlds, where one can talk face to face with the Shining Path and try to
understand how a group of 5,000 hard-core guerrillas could pose a threat to the
Government of President Alberto Fujimori.

"We know there will be a lot of bloodshed, but imperialist forces will not yield
power without it," said a woman who would identify herself only as Janet. "We
are also very patient. If we blow up a factory, reactionary forces are likely to
come back and rebuild it. But we will just keep blowing it up again and again.
President Gonzalo has a very long-term plan. We can wait for years."

President Gonzalo is Abimael Guzman, the mystical and elusive leader of the
Shining Path, who as a philosophy professor in the 1960's visited China and came
back to form a movement that reveres the Cultural Revolution of Mao. Shining
Path members assert that the current Chinese leaders have compromised Mao's
state. They also reject the Soviet Union, Cuba, Vietnam and all other Communist
countries for having established ties with what they call "revisionist" and
imperialist forces like the United States.

They contend that corrupt governments in Peru have exploited the masses for
years, creating such endemic poverty that 60,000 children die each year before
their first birthday.

22,000 Dead in War

"If through revolution we can save these children, the bloodshed is justified,"
said another woman, who declined to give her name. So far their 11-year war has
claimed 22,000 lives.

The inmates say their targets are any group or person allied with the
Government, including industry, elected officials and the military. They say
they have to destroy the present structure to build a new socialist state. They
say North American "reactionaries" like church and peace groups and social
workers can be targets if they are found to be working against the revolution.

Though Shining Path thinking may seem passe in a world where hard-line Communist
Governments have collapsed, here in Canto Grande prison, as throughout most of
Peru, it is a living force. The women show extraordinary zeal and commitment,
avidly quoting Mr. Guzman's sayings and Communist doctrines.

For more than a decade, the Peruvian military has been seeking Mr. Guzman.
Though it came close to capturing him in a series of raids on Shining Path
hideouts last February, he got away. To save face, the Government broadcast a
videotape of Mr. Guzman, apparently intoxicated and dancing what it called his
Zorba the Greek dance with followers.

President Fujimori went on national television depicting Mr. Guzman as drunk,
betraying the discipline and tenets of his movement. Janet said instead of
causing disenchantment, the tape made women in the prison dance. "Some of us had
never seen a picture of him before," she said. "Others were concerned he had
died. It made us very happy."

'We Have Emotions'

The women in Cell Block 1A contend that they do not like to kill, and that they
were not born "with a thirst for blood." They say they are engaged in a war
where casualties are inevitable. "We have emotions," one said. "We have families
we love, and children. But if we spare our enemy because he seems like a nice
person, we are jeopardizing the revolution."

They say they hope to show with their cell block the kind of order that would
exist in the new Peru. They also say that since they can cook their own food and
lead a generally autonomous life that includes morning exercises, singing
revolutionary songs, their life is not unbearable.

Though some inmates have been sentenced to many years in prison, they do not
expect to serve out their entire sentences. "President Gonzalo has said that the
90's is the decade we will take power," Janet said with a beaming smile. "So the
most I have to wait is nine more years."

LOAD-DATE: July 10, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Members of the Shining Path guerrilla movement during a session
devoted to revolutionary slogans at Canto Grande, the maximum-security prison in
Lima, Peru. The mural, saying "Long Live President Gonzalo," is a reference to
Abimael Guzman, the mystical and elusive Shining Path leader. (Vera A.
Lentz/Black Star)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              17 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 10, 1991, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Peter Kalischer, 76, CBS Correspondent

BYLINE: By The Associated Press

SECTION: Section B; Page 5; Column 4; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 171 words


Peter Kalischer, a former CBS News correspondent and Loyola University
professor, died on Friday at Southern Baptist Hospital in New Orleans, where he
lived. He was 76 years old.

Mr. Kalischer was born and brought up in New York City. From the end of World
War II until 1952, he was a United Press correspondent in Japan and Korea.

He joined CBS in 1957, and won the Overseas Press Club award in 1963 for best
television reporting on the fall of Ngo Dinh Diem, the South Vietnamese
president who was killed in a military coup.

Mr. Kalischer was named chief correspondent in 1966 for the network's coverage
of Western Europe, Poland, the Middle East, Greece and Turkey. From August 1966
to January 1978 when he left CBS News, Mr. Kalischer served as Paris
correspondent.

He joined the faculty of Loyola University as an associate professor of
communications, a position he held until 1982.

He is survived by his wife, Gloria; two sons, Peter Mark of Manila and David
Murray of Kyushu, Japan, and one grandchild.

LOAD-DATE: July 10, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary (Obit)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              18 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 10, 1991, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Review/Television;
Looking at the Excesses In New York City Traffic

BYLINE: By WALTER GOODMAN

SECTION: Section C; Page 18; Column 3; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 692 words


People who do not have to drive in New York City may get a kick out of "Driven
to Extremes," tonight's edition of "48 Hours" at 10 on Channel 2. New Yorkers
may feel that the kick in the report on Manhattan traffic is to where they live,
but they are famous for bearing the unbearable when they aren't shooting one
another over a parking space.

The program moves a lot faster than the 880,000 vehicles that it notes enter New
York every day, bringing the total to four times as many cars, vans and trucks
as parking spaces. The vignettes are well chosen and sharply delivered. Viewers
find themselves with a woman whose morning commute takes an extra half-hour
because an oversize tractor-trailer has to be backed off a bridge, which diverts
traffic to the tunnel she depends on to enter Manhattan; with a brown-uniformed
traffic officer who writes 45 tickets a day ("They hate us with a passion," he
says of his fellow New Yorkers); with busy tow trucks ("All of New York City is
a tow-away zone," says an official, and one tow jockey boasts he would tow away
his momma).

There are visits to the city's traffic-control center, where news that an
airplane has landed on Broadway is taken as a "not unusual" event; the Parking
Violations Bureau, where accused violators arrive in high dudgeon and with
farfetched tales ("It's hard to believe," an official tells one man, "that all
six summonses fell off your car").

There are rides in an Emergency Medical Service ambulance whose siren and
flashing lights are ignored by other drivers; with Manhattan residents going
through the ritual of moving their cars from one side of the street to the other
so that the sweeping machine can make a pass at the curb, the longest journey by
car some of them will make during the week (Bill Geist, the "48 Hours" reporter,
calls it an alternate life style); with aspiring taxi drivers learning to speak
English, in a manner of speaking, and with a cabbie cum stand-up comic whose
sit-down comments on street life crackle right along even while he is stalled in
traffic.

Listening to the nonstop yakking of that stop-and-go navigator of streets
clogged with double-parked trucks and avenues undergoing incessant repair, New
Yorkers can identify proudly with his ability to endure daredevil drivers,
suicidal bicycle messengers and nearsighted pedestrians day after nutty day. And
even those who disdain such consolation may eke out a laugh at the sight of a
Rolls-Royce being towed from in front of a disco.

William F. Buckley Jr. has been at it for a quarter-century, presiding over what
is billed as "the longest running public affairs program on television with the
same host." The achievement is celebrated on "25 Years and Still Going Strong,"
tonight's edition of "Firing Line," at 10 P.M. on Channel 31, as Michael
Kinsley, of The New Republic, leads Mr. Buckley through bits of interviews past.

There, from April 1966, is Norman Thomas, America's longtime Socialist leader
and Mr. Buckley's very first guest, denouncing the Vietnam War as cruel,
inhumane and very stupid. Mr. Buckley confesses he really didn't like Mr.
Thomas, whom he says he found self-righteous. He calls Timothy Leary, the LSD
guru glimpsed in a 1967 visit, "an amiable phony." Mr. Buckley's memory is
kinder to the other guests recaptured on videotape tonight: Muhammad Ali ("a
nimble mind"); Clare Booth Luce ("seductive"); Margaret Thatcher ("a historic
figure"), and Ronald Reagan and George Bush, before their elevations to the
White House.

Mr. Kinsley points out that "Firing Line," which was deemed by many critics to
be "almost unbearably contentious and rude" when it started, nowadays seems like
"an island of civility and reflectiveness in the sea of television theatrics."
That may be taken as a comment on American television, on American politics and
on Mr. Buckley himself, that American institution.

48 Hours
Driven to Extremes

A CBS News report; Judy Tygard, senior producer; Andrew Heyward, executive
producer; Dan Rather, anchor. Tonight at 10 P.M. on CBS.

WITH: Erin Moriarty, Richard Schlesinger, Bill Geist, Robert Krulwich.

LOAD-DATE: July 10, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: A scene from "Driven to Extremes," tonight on "48 Hours."
(WCBS-TV)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              19 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 11, 1991, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Home Video

BYLINE: By Peter M. Nichols

SECTION: Section C; Page 20; Column 4; Cultural Desk; Word and Image Page

LENGTH: 1224 words


When "Ninja Turtles II: The Secret of the Ooze" is released this month, the
cassette jacket will carry a logo with the notation "Copy Protected," and the
tape will have an eight-second message before the movie saying: "In order to
insure that the program you are viewing is an original and of the highest
quality, this videocassette is protected by the Macrovision anticopy process."


A study last year by Macrovision , a video security company in Mountain View,
Calif., estimated that 41 percent of American VCR households (or some 25
million) had illegal copies of cassettes.

The company's notice and the standard Federal Bureau of Investigation warning
about copying addresses the problem. But Hollywood has been reluctant to send
the message. While about 70 percent of all new movie releases use the
Macrovision anticopy process, only one film, "Total Recall" from LIVE, has said
so on the tape.

"It's a widely held view among the studios that they don't want to say anything
about the anticopy process because they think consumers would be infuriated and
actually try to challenge it," said Bill Krepick, a vice president of
Macrovision.

Last year, Mr. Krepick said, 100 million of 235 million cassettes of all kinds
produced in this country had anticopy protection. Using its own computers in
tape-duplicating plants, Macrovision inserts invisible electronic pulses between
the picture frames on the tape. When the tape is played on one VCR, the pulses
send a signal to the second VCR making the copy.

Like a radio with an automatic volume control, a VCR adjusts itself to the
strength of an incoming signal. "The Macrovision process fakes out the VCR
making the copy into thinking there's a very hot, high-level video signal coming
in," Mr. Krepick said.

The VCR over-compensates for the decoy, resulting in a weak, distorted image on
the copy. Colors become saturated and can eventually turn to black and white.
The picture can start rolling and tear apart.

Mr. Krepick said that in a Macrovision survey, 97 percent of those polled after
seeing the taped warning said they wouldn't attempt to copy a protected tape.
Viewers of "Total Recall," he added, had no adverse reaction to the message.
Other studios, he said, are reconsidering their positions.

But Hollywood remains cautious. Disney, for example, uses anticopy protection on
all its tapes but does not include the message. Tania Steele of Disney said the
studio was more interested in stopping major pirates than in foiling the
individual. "It's not our intent to get the consumer," she said.

Ms. Steele added that copy protection insures that viewers are getting genuine
tapes and thus is as valuable in protecting quality as it is in preventing
copying. "Disney's objective is to protect our image," she said.

New Video Releases

Misery
1990. Nelson/ New Line . No suggested price. Laser disk, $34.98. Closed
captioned. 2 hours. R.

Injured in a car crash, the romance writer Paul Sheldon (James Caan) finds
himself in the care of Annie Wilkes (Kathy Bates, who won the Oscar in the
role). A rapturous devotee of Sheldon's syrupy "Misery Chastain" romance series,
Annie is decidedly put off by the fate he plans for the heroine. As punishment,
she mashes Sheldon's bones and whittles his limbs. Rob Reiner's film "depends
not on unexpected twists that surprise, but on sadism that shocks" (Vincent
Canby).

Once Around
1991. MCA/Universal. No suggested price. LD, $34.98. 1:55. CC. R.

A sheltered, not very self-sufficient young woman, Renata Bella (Holly Hunter)
takes up with the loud, ostentatious Sam Sharpe (Richard Dreyfuss). This is
disturbing news to her parents (Gena Rowlands and Danny Aiello), but Sam isn't
the predator they feared, just a compulsive tycoon who never knows when to keep
his mouth shut. Ms. Hunter and Mr. Dreyfuss perform with with gusto, but "not
much about the Bellas seems truly convincing" (Janet Maslin).

Not Without My Daughter
1990. MGM/UA. $92.98. LD, $29.98. 1:56. CC. PG-13.

Sally Field is Betty Mahmoody, the parochial American wife of an Iranian doctor.
On a visit to Teheran, he falls under his family's Muslim influence and refuses
to let her leave with their daughter. A serious situation isn't improved by the
self-righteous Betty, who turns up her nose at all things Iranian. With a few
minor changes, Brian Gilbert's film "might have become a hilarious in-law joke"
(Canby).

The Best of Nature
Wolfgang Bayer Productions , Jackson Hole, Wyo. 12 cassettes. 53 minutes each.
$24.95 each or $259.95 for the set. (800) 338-7110.

Several tapes in this series by the wildlife photographer Wolfgang Bayer have
been broadcast on PBS's "Nature" and "Nova" series. The five new titles are "The
Wild Colorado," "Amazonia: A Burning Question," "Land of the Llamas," "Grand
Teton Wilderness" and "America's Wild Horses." Ponderous narration (of the
beaver: "once again, marks of the busy architect of the West may be seen upon
the land") sometimes sanitizes the natural drama, but the photography is superb
and the production masterful.

Look Who's Talking Too
1990. RCA/Columbia. $91.95. LD, $34.95. 1:21. CC. PG-13.

In "Look Who's Talking," Mikey the baby had the voice of Bruce Willis. In the
sequel, Julie, another baby and the daughter of James (John Travolta) and Mollie
(Kirstie Alley), has the voice of Roseanne Barr. A lot of the jokes are about
toilet training so the toilet is played by Mel Brooks. "For the most part, the
voices are a lot funnier than the dialogue" (Maslin).

Top Rentals

During its first eight weeks in the stores, "Ghost," the 1990 box-office hit
released on tape last March by Paramount, displaced "Batman" as the second
most-rented movie of all time. (In first place, by a score of 34 million rentals
to the 32 million of "Ghost," is "Pretty Woman.") With "Ghost" now running
anywhere from No. 8 to the mid-teens in the rankings, here are some of the newer
films now atop various best-renter lists.

KINDERGARTEN COP: Arnold Schwarzenegger is a natural in the classroom. 1990.
MCA/Universal. $91.95. Laser disk, $34.95. 1:51. Closed captioned. PG-13.

 GOODFELLAS: Sometimes it's fun to be in the mob. 1990. Warner. $94.99. LD,
$29.98. 2:26. CC. R.

 MERMAIDS: Cher packs up the kids and moves to Massachusetts. Orion . $94.98.
1:41. CC. PG-13.

 THE GRIFTERS: Anjelica Houston slips into a hardboiled melodrama. 1990. HBO.
$92.99. 1:54. CC. R.

 POSTCARDS FROM THE EDGE: Meryl Streep survives drugs and mother (Shirley
MacLaine). 1990. RCA/Columbia. $91.95. LD, $34.95. 1:51. CC. PG-13.

 PREDATOR 2: He roams Los Angeles flaying people. 1990. CBS /Fox. $92.98. 1:45.
CC. R.

 GREEN CARD: Andie MacDowell wants an apartment; Gerard Depardieu doesn't want
to be deported. 1990. Touchstone. $92.95. 1:47. CC. PG-13.

 JACOB'S LADDER: A Vietnam veteran lands in a hellish dream. 1990. LIVE .
$92.95. 1:56. CC. R.

 THREE MEN AND A LITTLE LADY: As in "Three Men and a Baby," Tom Selleck, Steve
Guttenberg and Ted Danson live in a child's paradise. 1990. Touchstone. $92.95.
1:43. CC. PG.

 MR. DESTINY: A junior executive, James Belushi, thinks his life might have
turned out better if he hadn't struck out in the big game. 1990. Touchstone.
$92.95. 1:50. CC. PG-13.

LOAD-DATE: July 11, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: "Total Recall," with Arnold Schwarzenegger, has anticopy
message. (Tri-Star Pictures); Richard Dreyfuss in a scene from "Once Around."
(Jim Bridges/Universal Pictures)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              20 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 11, 1991, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Weiss, Unflinching Still, Facing Conservative Ire

BYLINE: By LINDSEY GRUSON,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 922 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 10


The most hated member of the New York Congressional delegation, in the eyes of
many conservatives, is Ted Weiss.

"He's an embarrassment to his district, the city and the state," said Howard
Lim, New York county chairman of the Conservative Party.

"He's a symbol of everything that's wrong," said Michael Long, the party's state
chairman. "He's certainly the most liberal member of the delegation and probably
the runner-up in the country."

Depth of Animosity

Housing Secretary Jack Kemp, once a Congressional colleague, provided a telling
glimpse of the depth of the animosity when the two men bumped into each other
once outside the members' dining room of the House of Representatives. Mr. Weiss
cordially greeted Mr. Kemp; the secretary gave him the back of his neck.

Unlike scores of other Liberal Democrats who have almost identical voting
records in Congress but who have formed friendships with conservatives, Mr.
Weiss draws particular scorn from conservatives because of what they see as his
grandstanding and his stubborn, uncompromising adherence to his own ideology.

Forty other Congressmen receive almost the same liberal political rating as Mr.
Weiss, a 63-year-old eight-term Congressman from Manhattan's West Side who has
long been a thorn in the side of many, and a special lightning rod to
conservatives.

But not only do conservatives resent his constant brand of liberal politics, but
they also have a special resentment for what they see as political stunts: Mr.
Weiss called for the impeachment of President Reagan after the 1983 invasion of
Grenada.

Once Mr. Weiss took on the entire House in a dispute over the Child Protection
Act, which increased penalties for child pornography and made it easier to
prosecute pornographers.

Most representatives welcomed the legislation as politically safe, allowing them
an opportunity to go on record denouncing pornographers. Mr. Weiss saw the bill
as a Trojan horse, a thinly veiled attack on civil liberties and an invasion of
privacy, though he convinced no one. The bill passed 400 to 1.

'Conscience of the House'

"It's the kind of thing you test yourself on," Mr. Weiss said. "You know you're
going to come in for some hassle. But you have to do it."

To some supporters, Mr. Weiss is the "conscience of the House."

They say he enriches the national debate and that it is a mistake to judge him
by short-term parochial standards.

"The problem in politics is the focus on what happens in the last three months,"
said Representative Sam Gedjenson of Connecticut. "He hangs in there working,
working. And that moves the system."

Mr. Weiss arrived in Congress in 1977, exuding exuberance at the "unlimited
potential," after 14 years as a New York City Councilman.

Mr. Weiss, who commutes to his West End apartment to spend weekends with his
second wife, Sonya, routinely wins 80 percent of the vote in his overwhelmingly
Democratic district, an ethnically diverse tract snaking along the West Side
from the docks of the Hudson River past Hell's Kitchen to Riverdale.

Damn With Faint Praise

And what irritates conservatives has apparently struck a chord in the district,
one of the most liberal in the country. Still, even Representative Weiss's
supporters tend to damn him with faint praise when it comes to identifying
concrete achievements, even while he earns high marks for integrity,
intelligence and tenacity.

In days of continuing financial problems for the city and the state, questions
about the effectiveness of Mr. Weiss and the rest of the New York Congressional
delegation have taken on urgency. Critics note that the New York delegation
wrote the country's legislative agenda from the New Deal through the 1970's. But
as the city's finances have become more desperate, the value placed on
traditional constituent service has jumped.

By most standards, that is one of the New York delegation's weaknesses. The
state is a big loser in the scramble for Federal dollars, sending $23.7 billion
more to Washington than it receives. That's a deficit of $1,319 a New Yorker.
Only five states do worse.

Mr. Weiss dismisses questions about his impact by challenging the way
effectiveness is measured. He noted he was a major impetus in gaining Federal
help for victims of Agent Orange, a defoliant used during the Vietnam War, and
helped lead the opposition to Westway, the Manhattan highway project.

"If you have a commitment to issues, if you do things right, that's more
important than if you dominate a meeting," he said, explaining his philosophy of
government. "It isn't just how much money you get, but whether you're willing to
risk political capital."

A graduate of Syracuse University and law school, Mr. Weiss ran in 1966 as a
peace candidate against Representative Leonard Farbstein, who was backed by a
traditional Democratic organization, and narrowly lost. He was defeated again
two years later. When Bella S. Abzug, who had defeated Mr. Farbstein, ran for
the Senate in 1976, Mr. Weiss won nomination to her seat.

As head of the Human Resources and Intergovernmental Relations subcommittee,
which oversees the Food and Drug Administration, Mr. Weiss has pushed for
tougher testing of food additives and has been an outspoken advocate for
veterans and for more Federal financing of reasearch into AIDS.

Despite recent illnesses, including heart bypass surgery, Mr. Weiss retains much
of his enthusiasm. "It's a challenge," he said of his job, "an opportunity to
have impact."

NAME: Ted Weiss

LOAD-DATE: July 11, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Representative Ted Weiss (Ruby Washington/The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              21 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 12, 1991, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Bonior of Michigan Is Picked as 3d-Ranking House Democrat

BYLINE: By RICHARD L. BERKE,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 10; Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 681 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 11


House Democrats today elected Representative David E. Bonior of Michigan as
whip, marking the fourth major shift in the Democratic Congressional leadership
in five years.

After weeks of intense, behind-the-scenes campaigning, Mr. Bonior, a low-keyed
insider tactician who served four years as chief deputy whip, defeated
Representative Steny H. Hoyer of Maryland, chairman of the House Democratic
Caucus. The vote, by secret ballot in a closed meeting of the Democratic caucus,
was 160 to 109.

Mr. Bonior, 46 years old, will succeed Representative William H. Gray 3d of
Pennsylvania after Mr. Gray leaves, probably in September, to head the United
Negro College Fund. The whip is the third-ranking leader in the House, and the
position has sometimes been a stepping stone to the posts of majority leader and
Speaker.

In a preview of his role as a more visible Democratic spokesman, Mr. Bonior
attacked the Bush Administration. "There is a tremendous frustration out there
in this country," he said. "The frustration of a country in a deep -- and it is
deep -- and prolonged recession, faced with an Administration whose only
response to this is: It's no big deal." He also assailed the Administration for,
in his view, not confronting the issues of health care, unemployment and the
proportion of children living in poverty.

The choice today is not seen as having any particularly ideological
implications. Both candidates are rather liberal, and the principal issue
dividing them was Mr. Bonior's opposition to abortion. The race turned on more
personal and political factors, from friendships to regional loyalties.

Mr. Bonior (pronounced BON-yer), a Vietnam veteran who is the son of an
automobile worker, built on the 97 votes he received in 1989, when he was
defeated by Mr. Gray in a hard-fought race for whip. He began campaigning for
the job earlier than Mr. Hoyer, when speculation first arose that Mr. Gray was
planning to resign, initially to seek the Pennsylvania Senate seat left vacant
by the April death of Senator John Heinz in a plane crash.

At a news conference with other members of the leadership, Mr. Bonior recalled
that the "the last couple of years have been difficult years for me." He noted
his unexpectedly narrow re-election victory of 53 percent in 1988, as well as
his loss to Mr. Gray.

"Out of those experiences," said Mr. Bonior, who is in his eighth term
representing Mount Clemens, a Detroit suburb, "I learned something. I went home
to my district nearly every weekend. I went to town hall meetings, to barbecues,
to rotary clubs -- after 20 years in politics went back to knocking on doors."

Speaker Thomas S. Foley of Washington commended both candidates. "I think that
we are a stronger party and a better focused and organized party and a more
confident party because of this leadership contest," Mr. Foley said. "And this
is an unusual thing to be able to say, frankly."

Beginning with the retirement of Speaker Thomas P. (Tip) O'Neill of
Massachusetts in 1986, House Democrats have weathered turnovers in leadership.
Mr. O'Neill was succeeded by Jim Wright of Texas, who resigned in 1989 after
questions about his financial practices, and was succeeded by Mr. Foley. About
the same time, Representative Tony Coelho of California resigned as whip rather
than face an investigation of his investments. Representative Richard A.
Gephardt of Missouri was elected to succeed Mr. Foley as majority leader in June
1989, when Mr. Gray was elected whip.

Mr. Gray, the first black to serve in the House leadership, presented his
successor with a whip today, telling him, "May you whip all those votes into
line and pass all the legislation that's important to the leadership."

Mr. Bonier proved his skill at counting votes. He has predicted for days that he
had support from about 160 colleagues. Mr. Hoyer had insisted that the race was
neck and neck.

Mr. Hoyer said after the vote that the Democrats "were fond of us both and
respected us both." He added, "They felt that Dave Bonior was the better
candidate for majority whip."

NAME: David E. Bonior

LOAD-DATE: July 12, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: David E. Bonior of Michigan after he was elected House majority
whip yesterday. At left was Richard A. Gephardt, the majority leader. (Paul
Hosefros/The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              22 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 12, 1991, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Tourist Killing Tied to Gang Fight

BYLINE: By JACQUES STEINBERG

SECTION: Section B; Page 3; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 307 words


The gang dispute that led to the fatal shooting of a Maryland tourist in
Chinatown last week concerned a Vietnamese immigrant who recently had been
thrown out of the gang because he was suspected of using drugs, the police said
yesterday.

Officers said that they had been unable to locate the immigrant, whom they
identified as Hung Liu, 29 years old. The police said they believe that Mr.
Hung's presence on a crowded Chinatown street corner on the Fourth of July led
to the dispute, but added that they had not determined whether he fired the
bullet that struck and killed the tourist who was passing by, riding with
friends to a restaurant.

"We want to talk to him to see what his involvement was in the dispute that
night," said Chief Joseph G. DeMartino of the Manhattan Detectives. "At this
moment we're seeking him as a witness. We're not going to comment on whether he
was the shooter or not."

Mr. Hung, an illegal alien who is a longtime member of the Ghost Shadows gang,
had recently fallen out of favor with its other members, Chief DeMartino said.

"There's some suspicion that he was a drug user and they didn't like the idea of
him being in Chinatown," the Chief said. "Recently he was told not to come
around any more."

Though Chinese smugglers dominate the city's heroin market, Chinatown gangs
frown upon the use of drugs by their members, police officials said.

Vietnamese refugees like Mr. Hung began appearing in Chinatown gangs about three
years ago, law-enforcement officials have said. The Chinese at first enlisted
them as enforcers but later shunned many of them, saying they were too violent.

Last week, the tourist, Rhona Lantin, 29 years old, was shot as she and her
friends drove through the intersection of Bayard Street and Mulberry Street,
where the dispute was unfolding at 11:30 P.M.

LOAD-DATE: July 12, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              23 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 14, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

PEACE'S PROSPECTS IN CAMBODIA GROW

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHENON,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 9; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 857 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, July 13


After more than a decade of unrelievedly vicious fighting and months of stalled
peace talks, there is now a possibility that the end of the Cambodian civil war
is imminent.

Probability is not the word, at least not yet. The Cambodian Government and
rebels seeking to overthrow it have accused each other of violations of the
cease-fire they agreed to only last month, and Western and Asian diplomats have
been embarrassed before in predicting a quick end to the war.

Some diplomats say they still do not understand how there can be peace in
Cambodia as long as there is the threat of a return to power by the Khmer Rouge,
the Communist guerrillas whose radical attempt to remake Cambodian society
resulted in more than a million deaths in their four-year reign in the 1970's.

But later this month, China, the patron of the Khmer Rouge, is scheduled to
sponsor a new round of peace talks in Beijing that will bring together
representatives of the Vietnamese-backed Phnom Penh regime and the three major
rebel factions.

Shifts by Hanoi and Sihanouk

Chinese leaders are thought to be ready to use their influence at the talks to
insist on new progress toward peace in Cambodia, a nation whose reputation
acquired over centuries as a land of bounty and of a gentle grace has been
sullied in a war often fought between soldiers young enough to be considered
children.

There are other elements to the new optimism about prospects for a lasting
settlement in Cambodia.

One is the Government of Vietnam, which seems willing to give up much of its
influence in neighboring Cambodia in order to improve its relationship with
China. There is also the stated desire of the exiled Cambodian leader Prince
Norodom Sihanouk to die in peace in the land he ruled as a god-king until 1970.

"I want to die on Khmer soil," the mercurial 68-year-old Prince told a news
conference last month in the Thai beach resort of Pattaya, where he was host of
what may have been the most fruitful round of peace talks since the Vietnamese
launched their invasion of Cambodia in 1978.

The Go-Ahead From Beijing

At the Pattaya talks, the Cambodian Government and the three major rebel groups
-- the Khmer Rouge, the followers of Prince Sihanouk, and a faction faithful to
former Prime Minister Son Sann -- agreed not only to an indefinite cease-fire,
but also to a cessation of foreign arms supplies.

The agreements were reached under a framework drafted last year by the five
permanent members of the United Nations Security Council.

"The progress last month in ending this stalemate is due directly to the actions
of Sihanouk," said a Western diplomat in Bangkok. "It appears the Chinese have
given him the go-ahead to make peace, and his willingness to set aside past
differences was the magic of Pattaya."

Temperamental, impishly charming and a man of shifting loyalties, the Prince
remains a revered figure to many in his homeland, and diplomatic observers and
Cambodian participants described the air of reconciliation fostered by Prince
Sihanouk at the talks as remarkable.

Air of Reconciliation

For example, during earlier negotiations, the leader of the Vietnamese-backed
Government in Phnom Penh, Prime Minister Hun Sen, and the Khmer Rouge
negotiator, Khieu Samphan, were said to barely acknowledge the presence of each
other in the same room.

But at Pattaya, Mr. Hun Sen, who rose to power in Phnom Penh after defecting
from the Khmer Rouge, turned to Mr. Khieu Samphan at one point and described him
as "my beloved excellency."

To an extent not yet clear, the success of the Cambodian talks was being
determined hundreds of miles away, in Vietnam's capital, Hanoi, where the
governing Communist Party was meeting the same week in its first party congress
in five years.

While pledging continued support for the Government in Cambodia, the party made
clear its desire for closer ties to Beijing and its intention to put an end to
military interventions like the 1978 Cambodian invasion.

Reining In the Khmer Rouge

In what appeared to be a signal to China, the party ousted Vietnam's Foreign
Minister, Nguyen Co Thach, who had long been seen in Beijing as China's chief
adversary in Hanoi.

"I think the Chinese feel that with Thach gone and with the Vietnamese bowing
out as the sponsors in Phnom Penh, it's time to restore some sort of peace in
Cambodia," said an Asian diplomat. "You'll see China willing to rein in the
Khmer Rouge."

The other superpowers are playing a more limited role in forging a peace
agreement in Cambodia.

The United States has provided what is officially described as nonmilitary aid
to Prince Sihanouk's followers and the Son Sann faction, and it has put pressure
on Vietnam to end the war in exchange for normalized relations with Washington.

The Soviet Union has aligned itself diplomatically with Vietnam and with the
Cambodian Government but, consumed by its internal problems, the Kremlin has
indicated a desire to end all military involvement in Indochina.

The intentions of the feared Khmer Rouge remain the principal mystery in the
peace negotiations.

LOAD-DATE: July 14, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              24 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 14, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

A Plague Awaits

BYLINE: By Steven Erlanger;  Steven Erlanger, until recently Bangkok bureau
chief for The Times, is being transferred to the Moscow bureau.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 24; Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 3842 words



If you don't see the coffin, you shed no tears. -- Thai proverb.

FOUR THAI MEN, CIGARETTES IN hand, sit on a rough bamboo bench, staring across a
packed dirt floor.

Five young women in casual clothes sit opposite them on similar benches, but
behind a display window of cheap glass. They chat among themselves, brushing
each other's hair or playing with the brothel dog.

In the unshaded light of a pink fluorescent tube, their makeup looks coarse,
their lipstick purple. One young woman wears a "Snoopy and his friends" T-shirt
dress. Over her breast is a blue, heart-shaped pin with a number. Some women
wear yellow pins. These are price tags.

In this establishment, with its chatty mama-san, shrine to the Buddha and small
table of snacks for indecisive clients, a half-hour of sex with a woman with a
blue pin costs 65 baht, or $2.60; with a yellow pin, $2.

These young women live at the brothel, a shabby building of bamboo and thatch,
roofed with tin, in the Thai city of Chiang Mai. They are always on call, and
each has between 10 and 20 customers a day. In this area, in this kind of
brothel, four of five women carry the AIDS virus.

Thailand is in the grip of a hidden AIDS epidemic. On average, in testing done
in December for the Government's semiannual survey of AIDS, 17.3 percent of
brothel prostitutes nationwide carried the virus, an increase of 26 percent over
June. Some 4.2 percent of "indirect prostitutes," those who solicit in massage
parlors, go-go bars and the like, are infected nationwide, while in Bangkok, 7.9
percent are. In June 1989, 3 percent of Bangkok's brothel prostitutes were
infected; by last December, 18 months later, the figure was 20.6 percent.

But the disease, spread by the brothels, is by no means confined to them. At
least 14 percent of the young men here in northwest Thailand, ages 20 to 24 --
like the ones in this brothel -- carry the virus, too. Within six years, the
World Health Organization estimates, half of those infected will be dead. In
time, since AIDS is always fatal, the others will die as well. So the sexual and
commercial transactions in this brothel, common throughout Thai society at every
level, are a form of indirect murder or suicide.

The eerie quality of the raging AIDS epidemic in Thailand is its invisibility.
Doctors and scientists estimate that at least 300,000 Thais are infected with
AIDS, and thousands more are being infected every month. By 1997, according to
W.H.O., between 125,000 and 150,000 Thais will have died from AIDS. This is a
conservative estimate. The Population and Community Development Association of
Thailand estimates that AIDS could infect as many as 5.3 million by the year
2000, with more than a million dead by then.

But the disease is still so new here that very few Thais have died or even
fallen sick, and only a tiny number of those infected know that this modern
plague is already killing them. So sexual behavior has hardly begun to change.

Dr. Surasing Visrutaratna, the assistant chief medical officer of Chiang Mai
Province, points proudly to a sign on the brothel window: "We welcome only
guests using condoms." Showing rare initiative in centralized, hierarchical
Thailand, he has made this his singular, urgent effort to diminish the tidal
wave of death that Thai doctors know is coming, but that many politicians and
bureaucrats don't seem to want to see.

There is another sign in Thai: No foreigners allowed. Surasing laughs a little.
"They still think foreigners bring AIDS," he says. "But it is already here."

It is also out of control.

Prostitution is illegal in Thailand, but it is practiced everywhere. Thousands
of brothels, massage parlors, bathhouses, bars, clubs, teahouses, coffee shops
and even barbershops serve as fronts for the selling of sex. Some of these
establishments are for tourists, especially in parts of Bangkok, Pattaya and the
southern city of Hat Yai, near Malaysia. And some foreigners still arrive on
packaged sex tours, especially from Germany and Japan.

But Thailand's AIDS epidemic is now a Thai-Thai affair, and it is raging in
cheap brothels like this one and in thousands more like it in the countryside,
where 80 percent of Thailand's 56 million people live. According to reliable
surveys of sexual behavior, every day at least 450,000 Thai men visit
prostitutes. More than 75 percent of Thai males have been to prostitutes, and 75
percent of them go to the cheapest brothels, where the AIDS infection is most
prevalent. Then they spread it to their lovers, wives and unborn children.

Yet the Government is only slowly waking up to the severity of the epidemic.
Indeed, many in the bureaucracy still want to minimize the problem for fear of
hurting Thailand's expanding tourist industry, already the country's largest
source of foreign exchange.

The dimensions of the Thai AIDS epidemic approach those of the more publicized
disaster in Uganda, where the Ministry of Health estimates that about 1.2
million Ugandans out of a population of 17 million are infected and more than 80
percent of prostitutes carry the disease.

In the United States, a country with more than four times the population of
Thailand and where AIDS has been a decadelong experience, the Public Health
Service estimates that AIDS infects about a million Americans, with deaths put
at about 100,000.

But the AIDS epidemic in America is not a heterosexual one on the African model,
and it has already prompted significant behavioral change on the part of
high-risk groups like homosexuals and intravenous drug users. More important,
America does not share the Thai appetite for commercial sex.

"It will be horrible, utterly horrible," says Dr. Vicharn Vithayasai, director
of immunology at Chiang Mai University's Faculty of Medicine. "But I'm afraid
that for behavior to change, we need many more Thais to die."

THE EPIDEMIC IS MOST ADVANCED in the provinces of northwest Thailand, which are
said to have the country's most beautiful women and to which Thai tourists go
for sex. According to a survey by Vicharn in late 1989, 72 percent of the
prostitutes in Chiang Mai's cheapest brothels carry the AIDS virus. At the
cheapest brothels, he said, "they're nearly all HIV positive now."

According to the Royal Thai Army, which is now testing 20,000 young male
recruits a year, 14 percent of the young men from Chiang Mai Province, aged 20
to 24, are HIV positive. Moreover, 3 to 4.5 percent of pregnant women tested
randomly at prenatal clinics in Chiang Mai Province are also HIV positive, an
extraordinary finding. Pregnant women are significant because, of all the groups
in the Government's survey of AIDS, they are regarded as the most representative
of the general population.

"This is the problem of Thailand," says Vicharn. "It's the fault of our Thai
behavior, and our behavior will destroy Thailand. Thai men go to prostitutes at
every level of society. Half of boys by 16 have been to a prostitute. And if the
prostitutes are so infected, everyone's at risk."

Aren't these brothels a form of indirect murder? Vicharn lifts his eyes to the
ceiling. "Of course," he says. "But we think for now we should keep these women
in the brothels, where we can check them and teach them to use condoms.
Otherwise, they will go underground and spread over the country, infecting many
more."

CHIANG MAI, A CITY OF ONLY 250,000 people, has nearly 3,000 prostitutes in two
brothel districts. In the older one, Kampaeng Din, near the commercial district,
is the Angel Cafe. There is a bar, tables with chairs, roses on the tables.
About 25 young women sit on stepped benches with a backdrop of horses running
through a field. They watch television while the patrons, all university
students, watch them through the glass.

There are four price tags here: yellow, $4; blue, $8; red, $12; clear, $20. At
such prices, these prostitutes have far fewer partners than the women in the
cheap brothels. Still, according to Vicharn, nearly one in five is HIV positive.

Some of the students are drunk, laughing among themselves, but most seem quiet,
intent on the women, their drinks or their cigarettes. From time to time,
someone will saunter over to talk to the manager. A few minutes later, behind
the glass, a young woman will shrug and stand, gathering up a little purse, and
exit through a small door in the back. Often, the women will turn back to catch
a last glimpse of the show on TV.

In Thai universities, there is a traditional initiation called ruen pee, ruen
nung, or upperclassmen, lowerclassmen, in which older male students take younger
ones to a brothel and buy them prostitutes.

In one indication of changing attitudes, students at Khon Kaen University, in
northeastern Thailand, abandoned the practice last year, citing AIDS. But the
tradition continues at other universities, including those in Chiang Mai. "If
you refuse to go along," one young man says, "they call you gay or reject you."

A young Thai woman, 24 years old, speaks unusually frankly about her sexual
life. While a university student, she had a boyfriend, she says, and slept with
him, taking birth control pills. Did he ever go to the brothel? She pulls her
hair in front of her face and runs her fingers through the ends. "Yes," she
says, "once a month, with his friends." Did she ask him to use a condom with
her? "No," she says, "I couldn't. Then I couldn't even say the word."

PRIME MINISTER ANAND PANYARACHUN, the head of an interim Government installed
after a military coup, is trying to explain Thai behavior. While Thai men will
wear condoms for family planning, he says, they object to them with girlfriends
and prostitutes. Of the 450,000 Thai men who go to prostitutes every day, he
says, only half wear condoms.

Condom use is increasing, but most doctors believe Anand's percentage is too
high. A 1990 survey by a Thai market research company, Deemar, found that 59
percent of Thai men say they never use a condom, 26 percent had multiple sex
partners in the last six months and 86 percent think there is very little chance
of getting AIDS.

"This is a very permissive culture, where sanuk, or fun, is a prime virtue,"
says Werasit Sittitrai, director of the Institute of Population Studies at
Chulalongkorn University. Thai men think it is their right to have cheap sex, he
says, and there are enough poor Thai women to make it possible.

This has been true for many years, even going back to the time of Kings Rama III
and IV in the 19th century. The Thai tradition of "minor," or secondary, wives
is also longstanding. The Vietnam War and the popularity of Thailand as a
rest-and-recreation center for American soldiers made the sex industry both more
important and more obvious. The Americans also introduced coyer fronts for sex,
like go-go bars, clubs and massage parlors.

Nowadays, Thai businessmen and officials do a lot of entertaining in massage
parlors and private clubs. When their superiors visit from Bangkok, etiquette
still dictates the offer of an attractive prostitute or a visit to a sex
establishment. Senior officials are often presented their pick of provincial
beauty contestants. When Thai men travel, many do not feel they have visited a
province unless they have slept with a local girl.

"When they come to Chiang Mai," says Surasing, "first they go to the temples.
Then they taste the food, and then they taste the girls."

How does a young Thai woman, normally very shy, dance naked in front of
strangers or sleep with them? "You make yourself very empty," says Noi, a former
prostitute who now sells cosmetics. Tonight she is visiting old friends at the
bar where she used to work.

Would she ever go back to the bar, where she could make about four times what
she makes now? "No," she says, but then points to one of her friends, sitting on
a customer's lap. "They say, 'Why work in a factory for 2,000 or 3,000 baht a
month [$80 to $120], when one man for one night is maybe 1,000 baht?' "

Maybe it means dying, too. "Yes," she says, "maybe."

THE THAI EPIDEMIC HAS HAD THREE main phases. The HIV virus arrived here
comparatively late, brought by Thai homosexuals returning home from the West,
sometimes to die, and by foreign tourists and drug users who came to northern
Thailand for sex and cheap heroin. The first Thai to die from AIDS, in 1984, was
a homosexual who had lived for some years in the United States.

This first phase, before 1987, was largely among homosexuals and intravenous
drug users. From 1987 to 1989, the epidemic exploded among drug users in
Bangkok, who commonly shared needles. Many of these drug users also had sex with
low-cost brothel or sidewalk prostitutes, who had many other partners. Since
most Thai male prostitutes are bisexual or heterosexual, and also use drugs, the
disease began to spread heterosexually. Now, in the third phase, heterosexual
transmission is the main mode, and the virus is spreading rapidly and
dramatically through prostitutes to the general population.

There are no reliable figures for male prostitutes or for homosexuals, but
doctors say condom use among them is now common. The national rate of infection
among intravenous drug users, too, seems to have stabilized at about 35 percent,
with education at drug clinics and free bleach to clean needles.

But not enough is being done to educate female sex workers and the general
population, where the epidemic has quickly spread. "The main problem is that
every time we think we've reached the bottom," says a W.H.O. official, "we find
there's another bottom."

THE MINISTRY OF Public Health says there are 86,000 sex workers, known politely
in Thai as those "who sell their gender." After a two-year study, Werasit, of
the Institute of Population Studies at Chulalongkorn University, thinks that
figure is ridiculously low. While some put the total at 500,000, Werasit
believes the number is about 210,000, which includes about 10,000 male and child
prostitutes. Fewer than 20 percent work in Bangkok.

Women become prostitutes for a few main reasons: subsistence; a financial
emergency at home; as a way to return to their village farther up the social
ladder, with a house and the chance to marry a decent husband; to help their
older parents, or to finance the education of a sibling. Some, of course, simply
freelance, working weekends in a massage parlor to afford a more comfortable or
stylish life.

Poverty is an accelerator of prostitution, not its primary cause, says Suvit
Yodmani, a minister in the Prime Minister's office and a former Government
spokesman. "The main causes are demand and the value system of the people. Some
parents don't mind, and kids are brought up to feel they should pay somehow for
being born. Then there is the attraction of the big city. People aren't starving
in the villages, but they're bored."

Modernization and sophisticated advertisements have also brought new desires for
consumer goods to villagers and a shift toward a cash economy. Dr. Debhanom
Muangman, dean of the School of Public Health at Mahidol University, has asked
mothers why they sell their daughters: "They say they're poor, and I say, 'You
own land, a house, you have enough to eat,' but they say, 'I want money.' "

Chantawipa Apisuk runs Empower, an organization that works with prostitutes.
Typically, she says, well-dressed agents working for brothels visit villagers,
offering between $160 and $800, depending on the beauty of their daughters, as
an "advance" on salary. Sometimes agents will convince monks, in return for
contributions to the temple, to hold beauty contests on temple grounds.

In areas of the north known for beautiful women -- Chiang Mai, Chiang Rai,
Lampang and Phayao, provinces that also have the highest rates of HIV infection
in Thailand -- the agents may also offer refrigerators, television sets and
jewelry. With AIDS, Chantawipa says, there is a premium on pretty virgins from
remote areas, "who are becoming as rare and valuable as white elephants," the
symbol of Thailand.

These young women are bonded to brothels like indentured servants and must earn
back their debt. Like migrant farm laborers in America, they must buy from the
company store at inflated prices, while money is deducted from their earnings
for days lost to illness or menstruation, or for sloppiness or laziness or any
of many other sins.

Most prostitutes are not allowed by brothel owners to refuse a customer who
won't wear a condom. Many women, fearing loss of income,don't insist. "If the
man seems clean and healthy, I say, 'O.K.,' " says Daeng, a Bangkok bar girl.
"If the man comes to me often and is nice to me, I say, 'O.K.' If he offers me
more money, I say, 'O.K.' A man asked me if I feared AIDS and I said, 'I'm
poor.' "

To make money more quickly, Werasit says, many women work through their
menstrual period, when they more easily get and give the disease, by inserting a
small tampon. If a customer notices blood, the woman will say, "Oh, you're so
big and macho, I couldn't stop myself."

Some of these brothels are nationwide businesses, and young women are shipped
around the country so customers don't get bored. If they become infected, they
may be sent home with nothing. Sometimes they continue working in a rural
brothel.

"People just want to talk about prostitutes and penalize them," says Chantawipa.
"They don't want to talk about the profiteers." It's not the poor who need to be
controlled, she says, but the rich; not the women, but the men. "Changing women
isn't difficult; they're ready to change. Why not open factories instead of
brothels and bars?"

Part of the answer is that many politicians, officials and policemen invest in
the sex trade or benefit from it. In the northern province of Phrae, a senior
Thai official says, policemen own some of the brothels. Thai newspapers
sometimes suggest that certain politicians own chains of brothels.

Thais, who are deferential to authority figures, become nervous when faced with
questions of corruption, especially when they involve the powerful military.
Thais protect and supplicate their superiors, and for reasons of face avoid
public discussion of unpleasant matters.

So while a fatal epidemic rages among Thais, especially in the countryside,
officials tend to blame foreigners. "The Government promotes tourism and the sex
industry, but they shut their eyes to what is happening," Chantawipa says.
"There's a big fear of losing face. They're not so much trying to solve the
problem as to clean their image." But many Thai doctors hope that the new
Government, though interim, will do better at actually doing something.

STILL, W.H.O. OFFICIALS say, Thailand has done more than any other country in
Southeast Asia to combat AIDS. The Thais began working seriously with W.H.O. in
1988, and in April 1989 began the region's first W.H.O.-approved plan against
AIDS.

Among the positive results, W.H.O. officials say, is that the blood supply is
now considered safe, at least in the provincial capitals, and anti-AIDS ads have
begun running on television and radio. In America, the first national TV ad did
not run until 1987. Authorities have also tried to insure that condoms of
reasonable quality are more widely available, and the involvement of private
agencies like Empower is welcome.

In addition, the military was persuaded to get serious about AIDS, testing and
teaching draftees and putting the first anti-AIDS ads on military-run radio and
TV stations. Princess Chulabhorn, the youngest daughter of Thailand's revered
King, has spoken out about the disease and its victims.

But an internal review by the Ministry of Public Health points up serious
shortcomings in its AIDS program. In the report, obtained by The Times, the
ministry says much data is inadequate; condom supplies are insufficient and of
indifferent quality; little is being done in the provinces; educational efforts
are insufficient, and "direct political commitment from the highest national
authority" is still lacking.

W.H.O. officials agree. "Nothing's really moving," one W.H.O. official says.
"They're not acting with any real urgency." The biggest problem for prevention
is in rural areas, where the sex industry continues to grow. But in Thailand,
everything stops at provincial capitals, whether the effort is blood screening
or the prevention of tuberculosis.

"The challenge we really face," the W.H.O. official says, "is to reach the kids,
11 to 14 years old, and the housewives and the pregnant women, and to help
produce policies for the time when thousands of people are going to the
hospitals with full-fledged AIDS."

As it stands now, thousands will die before behavior alters, he says. "But we're
at least a couple years away from that, and for now the epidemic goes on and it
worsens. Every month we wait, thousands more are infected."

Bamras Naradura Hospital, near the Bangkok airport, contains Thailand's showcase
AIDS ward and training center for doctors and nurses, set up in 1987.  There are
18 patients. Some are homosexual or bisexual and were infected abroad; some are
intravenous drug users; a few are women; two are babies.

A young man, 36, was told this morning that he had full-blown AIDS. His parents
are dead. "If they knew . . . ," he says, and starts to cry. Does he think about
dying? "No! I don't want to die. I just picked the black pot."

Another young man, bisexual, seems more reconciled. "I'm just as afraid of dying
as you are," he says. "But in Buddhism we call this karma, so never mind. I feel
like it's a debt to pay. To pay is to die. I accept it."

Downstairs, in the women's ward, watching her baby struggling to breathe, is a
victim of the next generation. Prapai Pokamor is 19; her baby son, Maladung, is
8 months old, the skin of his arms and thighs wrinkled and loose. At 15, Prapai
was working in a Bangkok restaurant when she met a regular customer nicknamed
Gob, or Toad. He chatted her up and eventually invited her home. In fact, she
says, he took her to Nakhon Pathom Province, west of Bangkok, and sold her to a
brothel for $200.

There were 110 girls there, she says, aged from 15 to 17. How many men did she
sleep with? She shrugs. "I don't know," she says quietly, "maybe seven or eight
a day, and at night, too.

Men paid 60 baht for her, or $2.40. Half was supposed to be credited against her
debt, but she never saw any money. She was moved to different brothels until she
became too pregnant to work. Then she was given $4 in bus fare and returned to
Bangkok.

Her family took her to a hospital. A month before Maladung was born, she was
found to be HIV positive, as is her dying son.

"I didn't do anything wrong," she says, playing with Maladung's wrinkled arms.
"If I had not gone with Gob, it wouldn't have been like this."

Whom does she blame? "A few men are good," she says, bending down to listen to
her baby struggling to breathe. "But it's hard to find a good man, very hard.
Men are not honest with women."

LOAD-DATE: July 14, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: At brothels like this one in Chiang Mai, four out of five
prostitutes carry the AIDS virus. (pg. 24); At Bamras Naradura Hospital in
Bangkok, Prapai Pokamor, a 19-year-old former prostitute, with her 8-month-old
son, Maladung. Both are HIV positive. (Peter Charlesworth/JB Pictures for The
New York Times)(pg. 26)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              25 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 15, 1991, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Eleanor Sullivan, 62, Magazine Editor, Dies

SECTION: Section D; Page 10; Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 231 words


Eleanor Regis Sullivan, the editor in chief of Ellery Queen's Mystery Magazine
since 1982, died on Friday at Calvary Hospital in the Bronx. She was 62 years
old and lived in Manhattan.

She died of cancer, her brother George Sullivan of Belmont, Mass., said.

She was the managing editor of the monthly mystery magazine from 1970 to 1982
while also serving as editor in chief of Alfred Hitchcock's Mystery Magazine
from 1975 to 1981.

She edited many anthologies of mysteries and wrote articles for newspapers,
magazines and books, at times under such pen names as Lika Van Ness, Julia
DeHahn and Ruth Graviros. She wrote a 1984 book, "Whodunit: a
Biblio-Bio-Anecdotal Memoir of Federic Dannay," profiling the writer who, with a
cousin, collaborated under the pseudonym Ellery Queen.

She was also the secretary and a board member of the Mystery Writers of America,
and won the group's 1987 Ellery Queen Award for Excellence.

She was a native of Cambridge, Mass., and a graduate of Salem State College. She
taught for a decade in elementary schools in Clinton, Conn., Cambridge and White
Plains. For five years, she helped veterans of the Vietnam War at St. Albans
Naval Hospital in Queens.

In addition to her brother, she is survived by another brother, James, of
Darien, Conn., and three sisters, Mary Ford, Catherine Collins and Anne Powers,
all of the Boston area.

LOAD-DATE: July 15, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary (Obit)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              26 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 16, 1991, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Clark Base Once Vital to Military

BYLINE: Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 6; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 250 words

DATELINE: MANILA, July 15


What would eventually become known as Clark Air Base had its beginnings in 1903,
when the United States Army established a cavalry post on the Philippine island
of Luzon.

The post was named Fort Stotsenburg, for Col. John Stotsenburg, a slain hero of
the Spanish-American war.

In 1919, the post's airfield was named for Maj. Harold M. Clark, an Army flier
who had been raised in the Philippines and died in a seaplane crash in the
Panama Canal Zone.

According to William Heimdahl, chief of the historical services division at
Bolling Air Force Base in Washington D.C., Fort Stotsenburg was abandoned to
invading Japanese forces in 1941 and was reoccupied by the United States in
February 1945.

The United States Air Force was eventually given control of the formerFort
Stotsenburg. The Air Force renamed it Clark Air Base.

During the Korean and Vietnam Wars, Clark was the logistical hub of the Western
Pacific, and as many as 60,000 Americans lived in the area.

Clark provided jobs to thousands of Filipinos, and towns sprang up around the
perimeter of the base to provide every sort of service -- American fast-food
restaurants, automobile dealerships and the honky tonk bars of the city of
Angeles.

Clark's strategic value has diminished significantly with the advent of
long-range aircraft and satellite technology, and the last fighter aircraft
stationed at Clark were pulled out earlier this year. It has remained a
logistical center for American forces in the Pacific.

LOAD-DATE: July 16, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              27 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 16, 1991, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Stress Follows Troops Home From Gulf

BYLINE: By ERIC SCHMITT,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 12; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1271 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 15


Nearly five months after the end of the Persian Gulf war, evidence of
psychiatric problems and family discord among returning troops and their
families is raising concern among mental health workers, marital counselors and
Federal officials.

In the three-month period when most of the troops returned home, divorce rates
have surged from 37 percent to as high as 56 percent over a year ago in
communities near three large Army bases that sent troops to the gulf.

In a report made public last week, the Department of Veterans Affairs said
Government hospitals have treated for psychiatric problems nearly 10 percent of
the first 2,500 gulf veterans who have left the military since the war. While
this was a small number of the 541,000 men and women who were sent to the gulf
area, the problems among deactivitated troops are seen by experts as a warning
sign of possible problems among all returning forces.

A survey of National Guard and Reserve troops returning through Fort Devens,
Mass., found that 23 percent showed "significant psychological distress" caused
not so much by combat, but by their sudden call-up from civilian life and
separation from home.

There are also dozens of personal experiences, like that of Specialist Mario
Yannetta, 22, an Army draftsman who returned to Fort Bragg, N.C., in April after
seven months in Saudi Arabia to find his wife of four years living with another
man and his finances in disarray. "I'm not over it yet, but I'm a lot better
than I was," said Specialist Yannetta, who entered the base mental health clinic
in April and is taking part in out-patient group therapy.

Military and medical experts say the emerging data are significant but still too
preliminary to draw any final conclusions. Psychologists say that many of the
initial symptoms track with their expectations, not just with returning war
veterans but with soldiers assigned without family to long tours away from home.
The psychologists also say they hope that most symptoms will diminish naturally
over time or with therapy. Even if only a small proportion of the returning
forces are affected, the sheer size of the deployment means tens of thousands of
troops could ultimately need treatment.

Statistical comparisons to past wars are difficult because systematic
psychological monitoring of returning veterans is a recent innovation. Studies
have shown that about 15 percent of Vietnam veterans suffered serious stress
disorders that included angry outbursts and trouble sleeping and holding a job.
The experts say there are signs that the gulf conflict should produce lower
rates of these more serious post-traumatic stress disorders.

The difference is thought to be attributable, in part, to the war's brevity,
popular support and relatively low number of American casualties.

Another reason is that the Pentagon and Veterans Affairs Department are acting
to blunt the trauma of separation and to prevent the longer-term problems that
Vietnam veterans suffered. Government as well as private mental health clinics
and family support groups have opened or expanded near military installations
since the war.

Congress is moving to examine the issue. The Senate Veterans' Affairs Committee
will open hearings on Tuesday.

'Oh No, Not Again'

Combat left an indelible imprint on soldiers' health and psyches. Lester
Bennett, 40 years old, a staff sergeant in the Army Reserve from Johnstown, Pa.,
suffered a ruptured ear drum and a serious leg injury when an Iraqi Scud missile
hit an American barracks in Saudi Arabia, killing 28 soldiers.

"We had a thunderstorm the other day and all the lights went out, and I thought,
'Oh no, not again,' " said Mr. Bennett, who is a financial analyst for a bank
holding company. "Things like that, unexpected noises and flashes, still bother
me."

Mental health workers say many problems surfacing now might stem from noncombat
stresses. American troops lived in searing desert camps, isolated from the Saudi
people and fearful of Scud missile attacks. Hours of boredom were punctuated by
alarms warning of possible poison gas attacks.

Bottled up during the war, these anxieties are now being uncorked at home and
mixed with concerns like financial hardships or a child's slipping school
grades.

With all but about 44,000 of the troops sent to the gulf now back home, mental
health workers are sorting through statistical and anecdotal evidence for signs
of trouble.

The demographics of the military have changed dramatically since the United
States fought its last major war, in the jungles of Southeast Asia. Nearly 60
percent of the soldiers sent to the gulf were married and had dependents,
proportionally three times as many as the soldiers in Vietnam. About 35,000
women were sent to the gulf, as were 16,337 single parents and 1,231 married
couples, who left their children with relatives or others.

Scientific studies suggest these may be among the more vulnerable groups to
longer-term stress disorders. Many reservists, for example, took hefty pay cuts
when called to active duty and on returning have been greeted with stacks of
unpaid bills at home or job changes at work. Self-employed people who served in
the Reserves struggled to operate businesses or farms from 8,000 miles away.
Many failed.

Between April and June, when most gulf troops returned home, 417 petitions for
divorce were filed in the area around Fort Sill, Okla., as against 268 filed in
the same three months in 1990, for an increase of 56 percent; around Fort
Campbell, Ky., 405 divorce petitions were filed this year compared with 282 in
1990, a 44 percent increase; and near Fort Hood, Tex., 814 were filed, as
against 593, up 37 percent. All three Army bases sent thousands of soldiers to
the gulf.

Marital counselors caution that many of these marriages might have been rocky
before the war, and that the separation acted as a catalyst for the breakups,
not a cause. In addition, some filings might have been planned earlier, but
postponed until the soldiers' return, accounting for some of the surge.
Nonetheless, many family lawyers said they were surprised by the number.

As family tensions heighten, social workers say, they are seeing more reported
cases of spouse and child abuse, as well as drug- and alcohol-related problems.
But firm statistics have not been compiled.

In addition, people whose marriages survived the war are still dealing with
their children's anxieties.

Dennis D. Embry, a family psychologist in Tucson, Ariz., said children were
exposed to "instant stress" in the gulf war because they stayed glued to the
television set to watch news of the conflict. "Some children are showing a lot
of aggression and anger at the parent who left," Dr. Embry said.

To some extent, psychologists and psychiatrists say, these personal and family
strains are normal reactions to extraordinary stressful conditions. The question
is, how serious will they become and how long will they last?

With Vietnam veterans, the early warning signs went untreated, only to blossom
years later into serious problems. With military counselors in the field during
the war and the services encouraging support groups back home during and after
the conflict, medical experts say they are confident they can prevent long-term
trauma.

Col. M. Richard Fragala, a consultant for psychiatry to the Air Force Surgeon
General, said, "My sense of it, at this reading, is that this short war, with a
small number of casualties and victorious outcome, will generate far fewer
psychiatric and other emotional casualties than any other war we've had."

LOAD-DATE: July 16, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Lester Bennett, a staff sergeant in the Army Reserve from
Johnstown, Pa., suffered serious injuries from an Iraqi Scud missle attack and
is still bothered by unexpected noises and flashes. (Terry Clark for The New
York Times)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              28 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 16, 1991, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Books of The Times;
Hurtling Across Borders, In Pursuit of Iraqi Secrets

BYLINE: HERBERT MITGANG

SECTION: Section C; Page 16; Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 815 words


Condition Black
By Gerald Seymour
336 pages. William Morrow. $20.

The themes and locales of Gerald Seymour's political thrillers call to mind Ezra
Pound's comment that literature is news that stays news. Mr. Seymour, a former
British television journalist turned novelist, places his characters in
dangerous corners of the world that remain in the news, year after year. The
world is such that he always seems to be on target: terrorism in Northern
Ireland; guerrilla warfare in the mountains of Afghanistan; attempted
assassinations of Israeli and Arab agents in Western Europe; escapes to freedom
from onetime oppressive regimes in Eastern Europe; tribal conflicts and maximum
security jails in South Africa, the covert world of intelligence in the Middle
East.

In his 12th novel, "Condition Black," he's back in the Middle East --
specifically, the Iraq of Saddam Hussein -- where his adventurous operatives
have appeared several times in the past, pursuing evil men in the service of
dictators and discovering that dedicated fanatics exist on both sides of the
unmarked espionage lines.

In "Condition Black," Mr. Seymour has a lot going for him that is right up to
the moment. Some instinctive novelists who use contemporary themes can somehow
push a secret prescience button in their heads and foretell events before they
actually happen. It says a good deal about Mr. Seymour's knowledge and keen
sense of smell that the core of his story is front-page news: Iraq's nuclear
capability.

In an Author's Note, Mr. Seymour sets the stage for the fictional events with
familiar news: the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait and the deployment of American,
British and Allied forces in the Persian Gulf area. The note actually seems
unnecessary now, but may be useful for readers in future years.

And so Mr. Seymour is out of the starting blocks in what he calls the gray world
of the international intelligence community. A few men had warned that Iraq
should not be placated, that it was building up its war machine, trying to
develop its own atomic weapons. But the intelligence operatives who cried havoc
were ignored. In a large sense, "Condition Black" is their story.

Several stories, in fact, are interwoven. The vivid characters, with
personalities all their own, inhabit familiar Seymour fictional territory and
ideas: assassins and terrorists, stalking and being stalked in Rome, Athens,
London and Baghdad; stupid bureaucrats in high places; British and American
agents caught up in turf wars.

There's a sympathetic American F.B.I. agent, stationed abroad, whose friend has
been murdered by an Iraqi-sponsored assassin and who resolves to find the
killer. There's a disaffected British atomic scientist who feels he is
unappreciated and underpaid by his own country and whom the Iraqis are trying to
suborn for Saddam Hussein's nuclear program. There's a fascinating young British
gun-for-hire called Colt, a wild international adventurer whose sympathetic
father is a World War II hero who once worked with the Maquis blowing up trains
in Occupied France. There are the Israeli intelligence agents, dedicated and
efficient, warning the British that the Iraqis are still trying to become an
atomic power. And there are the women in their lives -- some of them hasty
lovers between assignments, others enduring empty marriages.

To heighten suspense, in scene after scene Mr. Seymour uses the same stylistic
method of quick cinematic cutting in "Condition Black" that has marked his
outstanding novels of suspense ("Harry's Game," "The Glory Boys," "The
Contract," "The Running Target"). The method, let it be said, is carried to
excess in his new work.


As pursuer and pursued, along with their girlfriends, families and superiors,
are hurtling across borders and continents, they need to be untangled a little
too often in the narrative. John le Carre, the master of this genre, is unafraid
to tell his story in a more linear way. If there's a large cast of characters,
it helps the reader when the writer is direct instead of cir cuitous.

The F.B.I. agent, whose father was killed in the Central Highlands of Vietnam,
carries poems with him in his travels, by the contemporaries Seamus Heaney and
Ted Hughes, as well as by Wilfred Owen and Isaac Rosenberg, the British poets
who were killed in France during World War I. The poems serve as more than a
benchmark of his character; they are about loneliness and death. In the end,
that is the telling theme of "Condition Black," the point in an agent's life
when he works himself up to shoot to kill.

Wars and casualties hover in the background of Mr. Seymour's latest foray into
the modern world of international deception, giving him the opportunity to
enlarge the meaning of his newsworthy novel. It's serious but it's also (in
Graham Greene's phrase for his early thrillers) an entertainment.

LOAD-DATE: July 16, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Gerald Seymour (Caroline Fortes/Morrow)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              29 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 17, 1991, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Avignon Journal;
They Stood for France, So Where Do They Stand?

BYLINE: By ALAN RIDING,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 4; Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 924 words

DATELINE: AVIGNON, France, July 11


Anxious not to be taken for any of the two million or more Arab immigrants in
France, Messoud Cheraga reached in his pocket and produced the identity card of
a French citizen and a citation from the French Army praising him as "an
excellent commando leader."

Standing beside him and looking far older than his 54 years, Kaddour Bouras
quickly followed suit. He picked through his wallet and carefully unfolded his
citation. It described him as "devoted and loyal" and noted that he showed
bravery when he was wounded in battle.

For both men, the military careers are just bitter memories. In 1962, France
accepted defeat in its eight-year war to hold on to Algeria. Denounced as
traitors by the victorious nationalists, the two men and some 60,000 other
so-called harkis (pronounced ahr-KEE) fled to France.

They were given French citizenship, housed first in tent cities and later in
low-cost apartment blocks, and occasionally found work on the railroads. But the
Algerian war was so divisive that as the wounds healed, France forgot the harkis
-- the name given to local recruits in Algeria -- who fought on its side.

After 30 Years, Enough

Almost 30 years later, their fate is again an issue. It is their children who
are leading the campaign, demanding not only monetary compensation and political
recognition for their fathers, but schooling, jobs and an end to discrimination
for themselves.

Starting last month in Narbonne, near the Spanish border, the protest movement
has spread across southern France, where most of the harkis are settled. In most
cases, it has involved building road blocks and barricades of burning tires, but
occasionally things have gotten out of hand.

In the Monclar Sud neighborhood of Avignon, where harkis, gypsies and immigrants
live in apartment blocks around a garbage-strewn square named for the baroque
composer Jean-Philippe Rameau, arsonists last month destroyed a shopping center
housing a small local police station.

"Unfortunately, we cannot always control the fury of some," said Hassan Fenzari,
the 26-year-old son of an harki and a spokesman for the movement in Avignon, 60
miles north of Marseilles. "We want to be peaceful. We see Gandhi and Martin
Luther King as our models. But some troublemakers join in."

The violence has brought results. Many harkis noted that after riots by
immigrant teen-agers in other parts of France, the Government rushed to appease
them. In Avignon, having ignored repeated requests that he visit Monclar Sud,
the Mayor appeared after trouble broke out.

The Government quickly responded. President Francois Mitterrand conceded that
France had been "ungrateful" to its Algerian soldiers, while Prime Minister
Edith Cresson invited eight young harkis to Paris for negotiations and promised
new jobs and better schools in their communities as well as improved living
conditions for their parents.

Distrust, though, runs deep. At different times over the years, the harkis
received many promises and some compensation, but never enough to lift them out
of poverty. Now, harki leaders are determined to turn what began as spontaneous
protests into a solid national movement.

Some harki spokesmen recognize that at a time of growing anti-immigration
sentiment in France, their protests may be counterproductive by further
identifying them with more recent Arab immigrants. Their main claim to special
attention, after all, is that they are French citizens.

"They call us French Muslims, but that is already discrimination," said Mohammed
Bencheikh, who was in a group that met Mrs. Cresson. "They don't describe others
as French Jews or French Catholics. We are simply French. We have nothing to do
with Algeria. For us, it's a foreign country." For their parents, though, the
option is not so clear. Often semi-literate, not fluent in French, living in
tight communities and still intimidated by French society, many older harkis
feel trapped between rejection as traitors in Algeria and second-class status in
France.

Frequently unemployed, living on welfare and small military pensions, they
usually accept their lot. Mouloud Rezouali, the 30-year-old son of an harki who
fought for France in World War II, Indochina and Algeria, said his father was
denied a full pension. "How can that be?" he asked.

In contrast, representing a great majority of the 450,000-member minority,
younger harkis are anything but docile. "The main problem is racism," Mr.
Fenzari said. "We're banned from nightclubs in Avignon. Our housing is
segregated. More than half the young people cannot get jobs, even if they are
qualified."

Mr. Rezouali said he joined a nationwide rights group called France-Plus after
his trouble finding work. "I was trained and had passed all the exams, but it
took me four years to be accepted as a firefighter," he said. "In this area, 12
percent of the population is Arab, but only two of 2,000 firemen are of Arab
extraction."

Even if their current campaign wins bigger pensions for their parents and new
job opportunities for themselves, the harki protesters know they still face a
society that perhaps more than ever before is displaying resistance to
integrating nonwhite and non-Christian immigrants.

And they have an additional problem not shared by immigrants. Even now, France
has not fully digested the loss of Algeria. And the harkis are a painful
reminder of something many French prefer not to discuss.

"You have a Vietnam syndrome," Mr. Fenzari said. "We still have an Algeria
syndrome."

LOAD-DATE: July 17, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Messoud Cheraga, right, with other harkis, Algerians who fought
to keep Algeria a part of France. (Alan Riding/The New York Times)
; Map of France showing location of Avignon.

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              30 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 18, 1991, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Guy Ferri, a Diplomat And a U.N. Official, 69

SECTION: Section B; Page 8; Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 202 words


Guy Ferri, a Foreign Service Officer from 1954 to 1972 and then the deputy
representative of the International Atomic Energy Agency to the United Nations
from 1972 to 1983, died on July 8 at his home in Palm Coast, Fla. He was 69
years old.

He died of cancer, a family spokesman said.

Mr. Ferri's overseas posts in the Foreign Service included the United States
Embassies in Buenos Aires; Saigon, South Vietnam, and Asuncion, Paraguay, as
well as many State Department assignments in Washington. Besides English, he was
fluent in Italian, French and Spanish.

Mr. Ferri was born in Loreto Aprutino, Italy, and grew up in Hamburg, Pa. He was
an Army sergeant in North Africa and Europe in World War II and later served in
the Air Force Reserve, rising to captain. He earned a bachelor's degree at
Georgetown University's School of Foreign Service and a master's degree in
public administration at Harvard.

Survivors include his wife of 36 years, the former Teresa Bursley; two
daughters, Victoria Healy of Rye, N.Y., and Deborah Lynch of Rye Brook, N.Y.;
his mother, Assunta of Palm Coast; two sisters, Lucy McAlpine of Palm Coast and
Elsa Rentschler of Clifton, Va., and five grandchildren.

LOAD-DATE: July 18, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary (Obit)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              31 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 18, 1991, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Does Photo Show 3 Vietnam M.I.A.'s?

BYLINE: By CLIFFORD KRAUSS,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 3; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 677 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 17


The Administration has begun a diplomatic effort around Southeast Asia to check
the veracity of a photograph that supposedly shows that three American flyers
missing since the Vietnam War may still be alive, officials said.

The blurry black-and-white snapshot shows three mustachioed men posing in a
woody setting with a white sign marked with the numbers "25-5-1990," which may
be meant as the date May 25, 1990. There is nothing visible in the photo that
definitively establishes the location, time or identity of the men.
Nevertheless, relatives of three American listed as missing in action in
Southeast Asia said today that the men shown in the photo were their relatives.

Since a copy of the photograph was made public by a former Vietnam War prisoner
of war on Monday, it has added fuel to a growing contention in Congress and
among some veterans groups that the Administration should work harder to account
for the missing in action.

Administration officials said it would take time for Federal Bureau of
Investigation technicians to determine whether the photograph appears to be
authentic, and they note that the picture could have been faked by people hoping
to receive a reward from relatives and P.O.W.-M.I.A. groups for the information
they offer. But they say they are taking the picture seriously because American
officials have received several reports from around Southeast Asia that the
three men have been seen by witnesses.

'Hard Not to Take It Seriously'

"The body of information pertaining to this case is quite extensive," Carl W.
Ford, Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs,
told a House subcommittee today. "There is so much of it that it's hard not to
take it seriously."

Mr. Ford said the Pentagon received the original photograph late last year from
a "confidential informer" who did not divulge how he received it. Officials said
they hope they can trace the snapshot to the person who took the photograph and
to where it was taken with the help of Vietnamese Government officials.

The State Department has sent the photograph to Trinh Xuan Lang, the Vietnamese
representative to the United Nations, asking that his Government look into the
matter. Kenneth Quinn, Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and
Pacific Affairs, has been instructed to seek to enlist the cooperation of
Vietnam, Laos and Cambodia in investigating the purported sightings of the men.

Family members told reporters at a news conference today that they were certain
the photograph showed their relatives, now two decades older than the last time
they saw them.

Photo Sparks High-Level Interest

"There's no doubt in anyone's mind that they are who they are," said Albro L.
Lundy 3d, who says his father, Maj. Albro Lundy Jr. of the Air Force, is one of
the three men shown in the photograph. Major Lundy was shot down in Laos in
December 1970, and listed as killed in action.

The other servicemen who supposedly appeared in the picture are Col. John
Robertson of the Air Force and Lieut. Larry Stevens of the Navy. Colonel
Robertson, who was shot down in September 1966 over North Vietnam, and
Lieutenant Stevens, who was shot down over Laos in February 1969, have both been
listed as missing.

The release of the picture has sparked a high-level interest among several
members of Congress.

"It's a very strong photograph," Rep. Jim Leach, Republican of Iowa, said at a
House hearing on P.O.W.-M.I.A. issues today. He called it "an issue of the very
highest priority to the Congress."

Senators John F. Kerry, Democrat of Massachusetts, and Hank Brown, Republican of
Colorado, held a joint news conference today announcing that the Senate Foreign
Relations Committee had requested that the Pentagon provide all relevent
intelligence documents on servicemen still missing from the Vietnam War.

Mr. Brown was critical that the Administration had not released the photograph
months ago, saying, "The light of day is the best way to resolve this issue and
heal this wound."

LOAD-DATE: July 18, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: A diplomatic effort is under way to check the veracity of a
snapshot that supposedly shows three American pilots shot down over Indochina
duringthe Vietnam war. Family members have identified the men as Col. John
Robertson, left, Maj. Albro Lundy Jr., center, and Lieut. Larry Stevens.
(Reuters)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              32 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 18, 1991, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

William W. Palmer, Retired General, 64

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section B; Page 8; Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 130 words

DATELINE: LEWISBURG, W.Va., July 17


Maj. Gen. William W. Palmer, retired, a former staff member of the Joint Chiefs
of Staff, died of cancer on Friday at Walter Reed Army Medical Center in
Washington.

A 1950 graduate of the United States Military Academy, he served in the Korean
and Vietnam wars.

He also was a former commanding general of the Fourth Infantry Division at Fort
Carson, Colo.

General Palmer worked for the plans and policy division of the Joint Chiefs of
Staff. He was legislative liaison to the House of Representatives for the
Secretary of the Army before retiring in 1977.

He then joined the Michelin Tire Company, working in coporate posts in France,
Canada and Washington. He retired in 1986.

He is survived by his wife, Julia of Great Falls, Va., two sons and two
grandchildren.

LOAD-DATE: July 18, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary (Obit)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              33 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 19, 1991, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Hanoi Says Man Supposedly in Photo Is Dead

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 4; Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 336 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 18


Vietnam says that one of the men in a photograph that supposedly shows three
missing prisoners of war is dead and that his remains were given to the United
States last year, the Pentagon announced today. But forensic experts have been
unable to make a positive identification.

The Pentagon spokesman, Pete Williams, said the Hanoi Government reported that
the remains of Col. John L. Robertson of the Air Force were given to United
States officials in April 1990.

That would be a month before what some people have suggested may be the date of
the photograph. A copy of the photograph made available by the American Defense
Institute, a private organization in Alexandria, Va., shows three men in a
wooded setting holding a sign with a cryptic message that says, among other
things, "25-5-1990."

"In this specific case, we have never made a positive identification of the
individual that Vietnam says they've identified," Mr. Williams said. "They say
it's one of those three people in the picture. We have never made that
determination."

Poor Quality of Photo

The remains in question were among those of 10 servicemen given to the United
States last year, Mr. Williams said. But of those, only one set has been
identified, he said.

Several relatives and others have said they believe the three men are missing
American servicemen being held in Southeast Asia. But the Pentagon has said it
is unimpressed with the evidence so far.

Pentagon officials said one of the problems is the poor quality of the photo,
which is three or four times removed from the original.

The men who supposedly appear in the photograph are Colonel Robertson, of
Seattle, shot down on Sept. 16, 1966, over North Vietnam and listed as missing
in action; Albro L. Lundy Jr., an Air Force major from Sherman Oaks, Calif.,
shot down on Sept. 16, 1966, over Laos and listed as killed, and Larry J.
Stevens, a Navy lieutenant from Canoga Park, Calif., shot down on Feb. 14, 1969,
over Laos and listed as missing in action.

LOAD-DATE: July 19, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              34 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 20, 1991, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Hanoi Shipped Animal Bones

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section 1; Page 5; Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 163 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 19


The Defense Department said today that Vietnam had sent back animal bones, not
human remains, in the case of a man purportedly in a snapshot showing American
servicemen missing since the Vietnam War.

But the department said it had concluded that the man in question, Col. John L.
Robertson of the Air Force, is dead. Colonel Robertson is one of three pilots
shot down over Southeast Asia who is said by relatives to be in the photo, which
was made public this week. Defense Secretary Dick Cheney said today that efforts
to authenticate the picture had been inconclusive.

Vietnam, which has been asked by the United States to help investigate the
picture, said on Thursday that it had turned over Colonel Robertson's remains in
April 1990.

But a Pentagon spokesman, Comdr. Edward Lundquist of the Navy, said today, "That
set of remains was subsequently determined to be nonhuman, mammal." He said the
United States had told Hanoi of this determination in July 1990.

LOAD-DATE: July 20, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              35 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 20, 1991, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Peddlers to Be Offered Jobs on Fifth Avenue

BYLINE: By JOSH KURTZ

SECTION: Section 1; Page 21; Column 4; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 551 words


With the State Legislature moving to sweep sidewalk peddlers off Fifth Avenue,
businesses there have agreed to offer the vendors who are disabled wa veterans
full-time jobs at twice the minimum wage.

That was the agreement announced yesterday between New York City officials and
Fifth Avenue business leaders, who have been at odds with the peddlers for
years. Merchants have complained that the peddlers clog the sidewalks and
detract from the allure and cachet of one of the most famous shopping streets in
the world.

Mayor David N. Dinkins said at a City Hall news conference that the agreement
reached with the Fifth Avenue Association, which represents 650 businesses,
guaranteed "the integrity and appeal of one of the city's major shopping
districts, while at the same time protecting the opportunities of our disabled
veterans to make a living in the profession they have chosen."

In addition to offering the veterans jobs paying at least twice the minimum
wage, $4.25 an hour, the agreement calls for the Fifth Avenue Association to
establish a $400,000 fund that will be used for job training and education
programs, to help the peddlers find other work or to help them set up vending
stands in other parts of the city.

The offer applies to 176 disabled veterans who had special peddlers' permits
from the Department of Consumer Affairs as of June 25.

A 'Short-Term Gain'



The bill passed by the Legislature, which is awaiting Gov. Mario M. Cuomo's
signature, amended an 1894 law that allowed disabled veterans to work as
sidewalk peddlers in New York City regardless of municipal rules. Most peddling
is prohibited on Fifth Avenue.

Although yesterday's agreement calls for veterans' groups to work with the city
and businesses to administer the fund, leaders of veterans' organizations have
criticized the plan and the legislation.

"We do not believe that trading a long-term entitlement for a short-term gain is
in the best interest of vet erans," said Thad McTigue, legislative
representative of the Eastern Paralyzed Veterans Association.

When told of the agreement yesterday, Charles E. Story, who has been selling
T-shirts, ties and scarves on the corner of Fifth Avenue and 44th Street for six
weeks, said he was upset that he would have to work for someone else.

"This is my business," said Mr. Story, who was wounded as a Navy seaman during
the Vietnam War. "It's like walking into someone's store and saying, 'O.K., you
now work for me.' "

Mr. Story, who is 38 years old, said that he was often able to make a profit of
$200 a day and that he was worried the veterans would only find jobs "pushing a
broom for $7 an hour."

But Tom Cusick, executive director of the Fifth Avenue Association, said
businesses would offer veterans an array of jobs, from sales clerk to security
guard to administrative positions. He said a number of businesses had already
agreed to participate.

If Mr. Cuomo signs the bill, peddlers will technically have to be off the
streets immediately. But Mr. Cusick and city officials said that the Mayor's
Office of Veterans Affairs would talk to the veterans first and that they would
have ample time to decide what they wanted to do. "We're just not going to go
out and start taking people's tables," Mr. Cusick said.

LOAD-DATE: July 20, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: In the wake of legislation that would force sidewalk peddlers
off Fifth Avenue, disabled war veterans are being offered full-time jobs by
Fifth Avenue businesses. Charles E. Story, a vendor and a disabled veteran, said
he was upset that he would have to work for someone else. (Fred R. Conrad/The
New York Times)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              36 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 21, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

On the Way With L.B.J.

BYLINE: By Nicholas Lemann;  Nicholas Lemann, a national correspondent for The
Atlantic, is the author of "The Promised Land: The Great Black Migration and How
It Changed America."

SECTION: Section 7; Page 1; Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 2954 words



LONE STAR RISING
Lyndon Johnson and His Times, 1908-1960.
By Robert Dallek.
Illustrated. 721 pp. New York:
Oxford University Press. $30.

During the last decade of Lyndon B. Johnson's long political career, the country
changed in ways that took him completely by surprise. To cite just one aspect of
the change, from the province of intellectual life: before the 1960's a
prominent academic historian who undertook to write the biography of a major
political leader would surely have felt himself to be within a secure, central,
admired tradition in American culture. Johnson did not keep up with American
culture, but if he had, he would have wholeheartedly approved of this state of
affairs: the big men of the academy naturally gravitating, as they sought to
understand how the country worked, toward the study of the big men of politics.

Today, as the aftereffects of the period when Johnson was President continue to
play out across our society, Robert Dallek's rock-solid biography, "Lone Star
Rising," has, like its subject, an unmistakable air of embattlement about it. To
one side of Mr. Dallek, a professor of history at the University of California,
Los Angeles, is mainstream academia, which now considers a project like his to
be intellectually uninteresting and beside the point: ideas and economic and
social structures, not powerful leaders, determine the course of history. To the
other side is Robert A. Caro, representing another aspect of the broad national
shift that caught Lyndon Johnson unawares, the rise of the press to a position
of power and self-confidence -- so much so that a journalist-author like Mr.
Caro can now attempt a magisterial multivolume political biography of Johnson
that concedes no ground to professional historians.

In his preface, Mr. Dallek complains that "there exists a hatred of Johnson that
passes the bounds of common sense and contributes nothing to historical
understanding"; he says we "now need a balanced biography." Obviously this is a
slap at Mr. Caro, and it makes Mr. Dallek look as if he might be in danger of
crossing the line from balanced into defensive. In a few places in the early
going, he seems to be gritting his teeth as he gets through material Mr. Caro
used to demonize Johnson -- such as Johnson's dirty campaign to take over
student politics at his college, or the nervous breakdown to which he drove his
early aide Gene Latimer. Mr. Dallek makes a point of counterbalancing this sort
of material with blandly sunny on-the-other-hand statements. For example, in the
college section, he writes that Johnson "was an exceptionally warm person who
made friends easily and took a genuine interest in them."

On the whole, though, and especially after he gets past the part of Johnson's
life that was covered in Mr. Caro's first volume, Mr. Dallek is absolutely not
an apologist. It does him an injustice even to discuss his work in terms of
whether it is positive, negative or balanced about Johnson (though Mr. Dallek is
the one who put those terms into play), because his interest in his subject is
so obviously that of a seeker after truth rather than someone out to attack or
defend. He doesn't pull any obvious punches: Johnson, in these pages, is crude,
egomaniacal and capable of being cruel to the people around him. Mr. Dallek
shows him using his position in the Government to enrich himself through the
acquisition of broadcasting licenses, and stealing the 1948 election that put
him in the United States Senate. He was wiretapping opponents and receiving
enormous illegal campaign contributions a quarter-century before Watergate. His
racial attitudes were mixed up beyond any possibility of our untangling them
cleanly now: Mr. Dallek quotes him defending the Supreme Court appointment of
the very well-known Thurgood Marshall, rather than a black judge less identified
with the civil rights cause, by saying to a staff member, "Son, when I appoint a
nigger to the court, I want everyone to know he's a nigger."

There is a substantial difference in feel between Mr. Dallek's Johnson and Mr.
Caro's, but it springs from the way in which the two authors handle their
material, not from a great disparity in the basic information they have at their
disposal. (One of Johnson's many paradoxes is that although he loved to keep
secrets from people, a good deal of the dirt on him is publicly available in the
Presidential library that he built as a monument to himself and staffed with
loyal former aides; Mr. Dallek even quotes from documents that people sent
L.B.J. with the request that he destroy them after reading, which now reside in
the marble palace in Austin.) Without pushing the armchair psychologizing too
hard, Mr. Dallek presents Johnson as what is known as a borderline personality
-- a man who, as a result of childhood traumas (mainly, Mr. Dallek speculates,
the conditional nature of his mother's overpowering love for him), had to spend
his whole life struggling, without complete success, to keep himself within the
bounds of functional society.

Johnson in pursuit of political office, Mr. Dallek points out, was a desperate
man, helplessly in the grip of "some sense of unrelenting deprivation" and
willing to do nearly anything to win the prize. But once he got it he usually
performed magnificently, driving himself and the people around him to get the
Government to do more than it ever had for people who needed help. Johnson made
an epic achievement even out of that most routine of a politician's tasks,
answering constituent mail: Mr. Dallek has him once dictating and signing 258
letters in a day. In Mr. Caro's books, Johnson's rise seemed foreordained, and
the empathy of readers was directed toward the people unfortunate enough to get
in his way. In "Lone Star Rising," the odds against Johnson feel extremely long,
and you find yourself rooting for him.

In part because of the lack of scholarly interest in Johnson, his current
historical balance sheet is oversimplified: there is one big item in the assets
column, civil rights, and one overwhelming liability, the war in Vietnam. "Lone
Star Rising" ends with Johnson's election to the Vice Presidency -- Mr. Dallek
plans a second volume on the rest of L.B.J.'s life -- so it does not directly
try to correct or explain the main impressions we have of his Presidency. But it
does provide interesting hints as to why he could have got one issue so right
and the other so wrong.

Johnson spent nearly his whole career feeling vulnerable on his right flank. He
won his seat in Congress because, in 1937, central Texas was still deep in the
Depression and he was able to demonstrate a connection to Franklin D. Roosevelt,
who was a god there. In 1941 he lost (or, more accurately, had stolen from him)
his first Senate race, to the reactionary, buffoonish Pappy O'Daniel. In 1948
his opponent was the reactionary, upstanding Coke Stevenson, whose supporters
felt comfortable also backing Strom Thurmond's Dixiecrat Presidential campaign
that year. When he became a statewide politician, Johnson acquired a much more
conservative constituency than he had had as a Congressman, and one that made up
for being less intensely segregationist than the rest of the South by being more
intensely anti-Communist and antilabor. Only a month after the 1948 election,
Johnson told Bobby Baker, the head Senate page, that "the New Deal spirit's gone
from Texas."

Throughout his career he flourished as a doer -- in every job, he accomplished
more than anyone ever had before -- and as a compromiser. His triumphant period
as Senate majority leader, when he engineered the censure of Senator Joseph
McCarthy and the passage of the first civil rights law in decades (using
persuasive techniques up to and including lobbying the air traffic controllers
at Washington's National Airport to land planes in the order he preferred), came
at a time when the Democrats had only a one-seat majority. Johnson openly allied
himself with the Eisenhower Administration, and made himself the person liberals
had to come to if they wanted to get anything done. When he found himself
dealing with liberals who were more powerful and farther to the left, as he did
after the 1958 and 1964 elections, it threw him off his feed; what was natural
for him was placing himself a few notches to the left of the position of the
right. On Vietnam, this meant pursuing strong but not annihilatory policies, and
his instinctive expectation was that the liberals would thank him for having
tamed the conservative beast again.

Perhaps the larger problem was that Johnson's experience did not prepare him
well for an executive role. He was used to mediating among competing interests,
not deciding what course the nation should follow. As dominating as Johnson was
personally, he could be dominated by others intellectually. And he was
especially vulnerable to this in the area of foreign policy. As early as 1940,
one of Johnson's mentors, the Texas attorney Alvin Wirtz, was writing him, "I
will admit you are a whiz on domestic problems but I still think that on
international problems you should listen to the elder statesmen."

Johnson's domestic agenda as President was not something he had dreamed up: he
was applying his awesome political skills to ideas that he had been hearing all
of his adult life. On racial issues, he had been preoccupied for decades with
the idea that segregation, besides being immoral, was keeping the South from
economic prosperity and Southern politicians from holding national office. But
in the case of Vietnam, Johnson himself had to make the decision, based on the
advice of experts, of what American policy should be, and all he personally had
to go on was a lifetime of promilitary, internationalist, anti-Communist
opinions. Mr. Dallek quotes him criticizing Eisenhower's decision not to
intervene in the battle of Dien Bien Phu in 1954, which makes the disastrous
escalation in 1965 look very much like a foregone conclusion.

It would have been very hard, anyway, for Johnson to have conceived of dovish
liberalism as an important political tendency before it emerged as one. In 1958
the columnist Drew Pearson, who habitually nagged at Johnson from the left,
published a book called "USA -- Second Class Power." In bringing up this and
other details about the climate of the late 1950's, Mr. Dallek reminds us that
an interventionist strain in foreign policy dominated the Democratic Party for
all of Johnson's years on Capitol Hill. He categorizes Johnson ideologically as
"a liberal nationalist who saw a broad consensus for a strong defense against
external threats and for domestic programs that eased the problems of an
advanced industrial society and particularly served the economic needs of the
South."

Like everything Mr. Dallek says, this is completely sound as an overall
explanation for the domestic and foreign policy choices Johnson made as
President, but it doesn't soar. There will be plenty of room left after Mr.
Dallek completes his biography for more theoretically daring historians to
explain the meaning of Johnsonism. "Lone Star Rising" whets the appetite not
only for Mr. Dallek's second volume, but for their work, and also for Mr. Caro's
next volume; Mr. Dallek brings Johnson himself to life, but Mr. Caro will surely
make figures like Bobby Baker, the sleazy idiot savant of the Senate, and the
aptly named Allan Shivers, the cold-blooded Governor of Texas in the early
1950's, memorable in a way that is beyond Mr. Dallek's literary capabilities.
The rustle of index cards is always detectable behind Mr. Dallek's prose -- but
he would never let the urge to dramatize the material get such a hold on him
that he could present the 1948 Senate race as a struggle between good and evil,
as Mr. Caro did. For better and for worse, Mr. Dallek is the rare present-day
practitioner of the "three yards and a cloud of dust" school of biography. He
lays out the facts and allows the grand themes to emanate from them, relatively
untouched by authorial hands.

The main emanation that is given off by the facts of Lyndon Johnson's life and
times is that the country he inhabited is different from the one we live in now
chiefly because of the role of government. Johnson believed unshakably that
government was both the best vehicle for solving people's problems and the place
where the most ambitious people would naturally come to seek the gaudy success
they wanted. The businessmen Johnson knew well -- lawyer-lobbyists, construction
magnates, broadcasting executives -- gravitated to government to obtain money no
less than the politicians he knew did to obtain power. Mr. Dallek calls
Johnson's friends "self-serving altruists," which is apt. Johnson's world was
one in which educated, accomplished people put years of scheming into getting
jobs as postmasters.

In part this is a phenomenon common in third world countries, of which Texas was
one when Johnson was coming of age; on the other hand nothing happened during
Johnson's career as a national politician in the 1950's to change his view that
the more the Federal Government could do in every area, the better. In Mr.
Dallek's account it is plain that politically, the Government was to some extent
a victim of its own success. The New Deal coalition began to erode -- very
dramatically in Texas -- as soon as ordinary working people ceased feeling poor.
Later, when Johnson was President, his Great Society programs did bring the
South into the national mainstream and make the Sun Belt phenomenon possible,
but they also Southernized the rest of the country by introducing into national
politics the preoccupation with race that had long bedeviled Southern
liberalism.

It appears that one of Johnson's clearest intimations of the mortality of
American politics as he had always practiced it came when John F. Kennedy won
the Democratic Presidential nomination in 1960. Nothing in politics had ever
taken Johnson so much by surprise. As Mr. Dallek demonstrates, Johnson truly,
almost poignantly, believed that the attention of the electorate was focused on
the progress of legislation on Capitol Hill. It was inconceivable to him that a
man whose main assets were charm, grace, eloquence, vision and looks, rather
than a track record, and who was more wired in to the news media than to the
organized political constituencies, would be found preferable to him. Johnson
had always assumed that the political fate of liberalism would be a function of
how many Government benefits it could deliver; Kennedy demonstrated that in the
postwar United States liberals could win on the basis of abstract leadership
qualities, and thus instantly reduced the centrality of the Government in
society.

Little more than a decade after Johnson left the White House following five
years of frenetic Federal activity, another Southwesterner, Ronald Reagan, took
the oath of office on the steps of the Capitol, and immediately proclaimed that
"government is the problem." Explaining how we got from one extreme to the other
over such a short period of time is one of the crucial tasks for those who seek
to provide us with a full understanding of late 20th-century America. Surely
Johnson's Presidential performance played an important part in the story, and
surely some kind of social transformation of the United States did too. It will
probably take a small shelf's worth of important books-of-the-future to get us
to the point where we know what happened -- and there is every reason to expect
that one of them will be Robert Dallek's next volume.



'NO ONE'S GOING TO HAVE THE LAST WORD'



 When Robert Dallek, the author of "Lone Star Rising," was asked for his opinion
on the work of Robert A. Caro, his rival Johnson biographer, Mr. Dallek
responded with a single word: "Who?"

There followed silence and a laugh.

Although Mr. Caro has written two highly popular and highly critical volumes and
plans two more, Mr. Dallek insisted, "I'm not writing against Caro, I'm writing
on Lyndon Johnson. It's all to the good that we have competing views of L.B.J.
This is what fuels historical understanding and interest." And Mr. Dallek added:
"I'm not a believer in definitive history or biography. No one's going to have
the last word."

The two actually met once -- at the Johnson Library, appropriately enough, where
both men were working on what turned out to be dissimilar interpretations of
Johnson's life. According to Mr. Dallek, their meeting was "perfectly cordial
and amiable," except, perhaps, for the first words out of Mr. Caro's mouth. When
Mr. Dallek introduced himself, Mr. Caro asked, "Who are you?"

"He knew exactly who I was," Mr. Dallek said.

Speaking by telephone from his home in Los Angeles -- where, he says, a
stern-visaged campaign poster of L.B.J. dominates his study -- the 57-year-old
Mr. Dallek described himself as "an old-fashioned liberal" who started the
project "with a pretty critical perspective" on Johnson. "I was surprised by the
extent to which I found very positive things to say about the man."

The Lyndon B. Johnson Foundation contributed two $1,200 grants toward Mr.
Dallek's project, an irony not lost on the author: in a moment of whimsy, Mr.
Dallek noted that Johnson "reaches out even from the grave" to spread a little
money around. Of course, with the L.B.J. Library charging 30 to 35 cents per
page for copying, he said, the money went fast.

"Lone Star Rising," Mr. Dallek's fifth book, took him seven years; the second
volume, covering 1960-73, may take as long. The working title is Thomas
Jefferson's description of the Presidency: "Splendid Misery." -- JOSEPH A.
CINCOTTI

NAME: Lyndon B. Johnson

LOAD-DATE: July 21, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Lyndon B. Johnson in 1915 at age 7 1/2 on the front porch of
his home in Johnson City, Tex. (Lyndon B. Johnson Library) (pg. 29); Senators
Lyndon B. Johnson and John F. Kennedy at the Democratic National Convention in
Los Angeles in 1960. (United Press Internation); Robert Dallek (Mary Kate Denny)
(pg. 30)

Drawing of Lyndon B. Johnson (Mark Summers) (pg. 1)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              37 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 22, 1991, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Reviews/Television;
From 'China Beach,' Good Night, Vietnam

BYLINE: By JOHN J. O'CONNOR

SECTION: Section B; Page 6; Column 5; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 577 words


Like "M*A*S*H," ABC 's "China Beach" explored the subject of war somewhat
indirectly, not through battles and military maneuvers, but through the eyes of
the doctors, nurses and entertainers who treated the wounded and dying. Neither
series could be considered a celebration of war in the old victorious warrior
mode perfected by John Wayne. And like "M*A*S*H," "China Beach" kept getting
better as the scripts improved and the cast evolved into a first-rate repertory
company. The series will end tonight at 9 with a special two-hour episode, which
skillfully delivers the required smiles and tears and won't disappoint its fans.

The veterans of the 510th Evac unit, the China Beach gang, are meeting for a
1988 reunion in Youngstown, Ohio. Most of the familiar faces are there. McMurphy
(Dana Delany) has attended with her husband, Joe (Adam Arkin), and their
2-year-old daughter. The disabled Boonie (Brian Wimmer) gets to goof around once
again with the dour Dodger (Jeff Kober).

Dr. Richard (Robert Picardo), who was once McMurphy's lover, has a new beautiful
young wife, but as she reveals he is already having an affair with his even
younger receptionist. Beckett (Michael Boatman) is proud of his handsome
teen-age son. Lila (Concetta Tomei) and Sarge (Troy Evans) have the happiest of
marriages. K. C. (Marg Helgenberger), the one-time prostitute, is absent, much
to the disappointment of her daughter, Karen (Christine Elise).

On the surface, the reunion runs true to standard form: some nervousness about
delving into the past, inevitable jokes about graying and thinning hair, parents
playing with children. But there is a special edge of sadness about this one.
These are the Vietnam vets, back from an unpopular war and finding, at best,
only benign neglect. Now they look at one another warily and search for some
meaning in what they experienced together. McMurphy wonders: "All these people;
we're so different.  How'd we ever get along?"

Each principal character recalls the past, sometimes painfully, sometimes
joyously, through flashbacks of earlier episodes, right back to the original
two-hour pilot. No scene is more emotionally charged than when Frankie (Nancy
Giles) sings "America the Beautiful" set against a Vietnam collage of death and
destruction, personal bravery and romantic passion. The experience of China
Beach is brought back vividly and powerfully. The troubled Dodger sums up at the
reunion: "I was afraid to come here. Afraid it'd come back up. Now I realize
it's never gone anywhere."

After the party, a feeling of incompleteness lingers. The friends decide to
drive all night and visit the Vietnam Veterans Memorial in Washington. They walk
past the solemn wall, their reflections caught in the black marble. The sound
track refers to something that "was so right, was so wrong, almost at the same
time." K. C., who is now a successful businesswoman, puts in a brief appearance,
but characteristically makes no compromises. McMurphy finally recalls the name
of a soldier she met on her final day in China Beach. "I thought I forgot," she
says. "But I remembered."

In the end, that's what "China Beach" was all about, remembering, with
trepidation certainly, but also with an earned measure of pride. As McMurphy
says, "I couldn't save them all, but I saved some." Created by John Sacret Young
and William Broyles, the series sensitively tapped into national terrain that
remains difficult.

LOAD-DATE: July 22, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              38 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 24, 1991, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Scheduled to Close, Fort Opens $9.3 Million Store

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 15; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 275 words

DATELINE: AYER, Mass., July 23


Army officials at Fort Devens opened a $9.3 million commissary today even though
the store's life is almost sure to be brief. The fort is scheduled to be closed.

"Some weird things have happened over a 31-year career in the military," said
Larry Parretti, a veteran of World War II, Korea and Vietnam. "I don't know that
this compares with anything else."

The store's grand opening went ahead because the commissary was almost completed
when an independent Federal commission voted on June 30 to shut Fort Devens and
33 other military installations to save about $1.5 billion annually after 1997.

If people did not know that the base was on the closing list, they would not
have learned it from the grand opening, which featured red, white, and blue
streamers, American flags and a raffle for a new car.

Timothy Higgins, the Ayer administrator, said: "As Federal taxpayers, we should
all ask why this is going to open to be dismantled over the course of the next
couple of years. It makes you wonder if there's any long-term planning going on
at the Pentagon."

The commissary was designed to serve about 110,000 military personnel in New
England.

Alex Fletcher, a spokeswoman for the fort, said base officials had no idea Fort
Devens would be closed when they started building the commissary in March 1990.

"It was cheaper to keep on trucking until we do close," she said. "If they turn
around and broke the contract, it would probably have cost a lot more."

The commissary was paid for with a surcharge at commissaries and other bases
worldwide. Base officials declined to say whether the commissary would
definitely be closed.

LOAD-DATE: July 24, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              39 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 24, 1991, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Computer as Accessory to Photo Fakery

BYLINE: By MALCOLM W. BROWNE

SECTION: Section A; Page 6; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 695 words


If the recent photographs purporting to depict missing American servicemen in
Indochina prove to be forgeries, they will take their place in a tradition of
fakery almost as old as photography itself.

The retouching of photographs to produce bogus images may be sophisticated or
crude. Until recently, the tools of the forger were the double exposure, in
which elements of one picture can be transplanted into another by exposing one
print to two or more separate negatives, and the airbrush, used to spray a very
thin layer of pigment on a very small area. G. Howard Poteet, an expert
retoucher, says the photo manipulator also needed a mechanical pencil,
retouching medium, an etching knife and tubes of spotting colors.

The advent of the computer has taken much of the hard work out of convincing
fakery. A charge couple device camera can photograph a black-and-white or color
print, breaking up the image into microscopic "pixels," each of whose hues,
intensities and color saturation are recorded digitally on disk or tape. An
operator can then manipulate these pixels, either in groups or one at a time, to
produce startlingly realistic distortions.

Mouse Supplants Airbrush

To brush away wrinkles, trees or people or to blend new elements into a scene,
an operator can use a computer "mouse" or light pen just as an artist would use
an airbrush. To correct tiny errors, a portion of the scene can then be
magnified and altered pixel by pixel.

Typically, a computer operator can digitize a detailed color photograph of the
New York City skyline and transpose its elements so that the World Trade Center
towers appear to rise from Times Square. The result may be so free of technical
errors like misplaced shadows and inconsistent perspective angles that even an
expert unfamiliar with the scene might be reluctant to brand the picture a fake.

In looking for indications of fraud, the expert would examine the picture for
any kind of inconsistency that would suggest an insertion or deletion. For
example, the colors of objects seen at a distance are generally more blue than
those of foreground objects. Something that did not fit this pattern of
increasing blueness with distance might be suspect.

The forgery may contain obvious clues as well; a clock in a tower or a
wristwatch might display a time inconsistent with shadows. But a clever forger
can usually obliterate such clues.

Relatively Cheap Tricks

An advantage of the computer over traditional photo retouching is that even the
smallest detail can be manipulated individually until the result is perfect.
Moreover, such trompe l'oeil trickery is no long the exclusive domain of
well-heeled advertisers, commercial artists and movie makers like Steven
Spielberg. For less than $200 an amateur can buy an electronic scanner as an
accessory for a home computer.

The scanner, operated with software like Deluxe Paintbrush, can be used to copy
and manipulate photographs. For example, a man's bald pate could be replaced by
a resplendent head of hair, or the image of an annoying acquaintance who
insisted on posing with the family could be erased as if he had never been in
the picture.

But in the end, a doctored photograph's ability to deceive seems to depend
chiefly on the willingness of the viewer to accept a picture as truthful. The
relatives of MIAs are not the first to have eagerly accepted questionable
photographs as convincing evidence.

In 1917, Sir Arthur Conan Doyle, a trained doctor and the creator of Sherlock
Holmes, lent the weight of his prestige to one of the most famous of such fakes.
Two young girls, Elsie and Frances Wright, had taken a photograph that seemed to
show a sprightly group of little fairies dancing around the head of a human
child.

Conan Doyle had by then become an ardent spiritualist, and he enthusiastically
concluded that the photograph was genuine. He continued to hold this view even
knowing that the girls' father was an amateur photographer who operated his own
darkroom, and even after an official of the Eastman Company, a maker of
photographic film, pronounced the picture a crude fake. Conan Doyle wanted to
believe.


LOAD-DATE: July 24, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo/Diagram: "Playing With Photographs"

How an artificial image can be created by altering photographs electronically on
a computer.

1. Start with separate pictures of Saddam Hussein and James Baker . . .

2. Outline and remove Hussein's image . . .

3. . . . and place it in the Baker photo.

The photograph of the Iraqi Predisent, below left, was taken on Aug. 8 in
Baghdad. The photograph, below right, of Secretary of State Baker, his left arm
resting on a cushion, and Foreign Minister Raul Manglapus of the Philippines was
taken yesterday in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia. (Hussein: Associated Press)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              40 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 24, 1991, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

A Photo Said to Show 3 Lost Fliers Jogs Congress on Vietnam Missing

BYLINE: By CLIFFORD KRAUSS,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 6; Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1218 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 23


The release of a photograph supposedly showing three lost Vietnam War fliers has
stirred new moves in Congress to examine the Administration's efforts to account
for thousands of Vietnam War servicemen, even though some members express doubt
about the picture's authenticity.

The wave of publicity surrounding the grainy photograph of three men with
mustaches standing in a woody setting has caught the Administration off guard
and produced an awkward response. Several Government officials expressed
reservations about the photograph, saying it might have been a hoax by Southeast
Asian bounty hunters seeking monetary rewards from American groups that cling to
the hope that American servicemen are still alive in Southeast Asia.

Nevertheless, the Administration has dispatched a 10-member Pentagon team to
Thailand to find out the circumstances under which the photograph was supposedly
carried across the Thai border into Cambodia, and has sent urgent pleas to
Vietnam and Laos to help investigate the case.

"This is one P.R. battle we can't win," a Pentagon official said.

Of the 2,273 servicemen still unaccounted for, the Pentagon considers 1,172 as
missing. It considers the 1,101 others as killed in action, but their bodies
have not been recovered.

"There certainly could be live Americans there, but if there are, I don't know
about them," said Gen. John W. Vessey Jr., President Bush's envoy to Hanoi on
the issue of prisoners of war and those missing in action.

The Doubts Only Grow

Over the last three years, General Vessey has persuaded Vietnam to repatriate
122 sets of remains and to help resolve dozens of other cases by opening
archives and allowing investigations of locations where live sightings
reportedly occurred. But the doubts only seem to grow as the American-Vietnamese
cooperation fails to come up with any live people.

The issue has long inspired great emotion, from American Legion halls to the
homes of wives and children who cling to the hope that loved ones are alive.
Charges that senior Government officials have conspired to cover up evidence of
servicemen held in prison camps, caves and cages have persisted through the last
four Administrations, although the motivation for such a conspiracy stretches
the imagination.

The conspiracy theories were reinforced by the departure in February of Col.
Millard A. Peck of the Army, who was chief of the Pentagon intelligence unit
assigned to investigate missing American servicemen. In a farewell memorandum he
complained that the Administration failed to follow up many leads and suggested
that "a cover-up may be in progress."

After the release of the recent photograph, Hanoi added to Washington's quandary
by saying that it had already delivered the remains of Col. John L. Robertson of
the Air Force, one of three pilots believed to be shown in the picture. But the
bones Vietnam turned over last year were animal remains, the Pentagon said,
stoking claims that Vietnam is still hiding prisoners.

Authentic, Families Say

Pentagon officials note that the three fliers look unusually well nourished for
having been held in captivity for more than two decades. Some photography
experts say the head of the man standing in the middle is out of proportion,
suggesting his picture was taken separately from those of the other men. Other
analysts have noted that the cryptic sign held up by the men appears to have
been photocopied and pasted on the picture.

The families of Colonel Robertson, Maj. Albro L. Lundy Jr. of the Air Force and
Lieut. Larry James Stevens of the Navy say unequivocally that the snapshot is
authentic. But many other families maintain the servicemen shown are their
relatives.

The origins of the photograph remain a mystery. It was first released publicly
last week by Eugene (Red) McDaniel, a former prisoner of war and director of the
conservative American Defense Institute, who has long charged the Government
with covering up the existence of the missing servicemen still alive in
Southeast Asia.

Mr. McDaniel said he received his copy last November by courier from an American
private humanitarian aid worker who obtained it at a refugee camp along the
Thai-Cambodian border. The aid worker would not identify the source of the
photograph, Mr. McDaniel said, but indicated that two of the men in the picture,
Colonel Robertson and Lieutenant Stevens, had been held by a Cambodian
businessman who somehow had obtained custody of them and was demanding $500 for
anyone to see either of them at a Phnom Penh pharmacy. It was not clear from
this account how the servicemen had escaped from their original captors.

Soon after Mr. McDaniel obtained the photo, an aide said, the two servicemen
apparently were recaptured and returned to a prison camp in Vietnam.

"The reason the picture came to me is because my organization offered the
reward," Mr. McDaniel said. "For the Cambodian businessman, this was strictly a
business deal."

Administration and Congressional officials have criticized Mr. McDaniel for
raising the hopes of relatives by releasing photos in the past that he said
showed live American servicemen but that turned out not to be authentic.

The Pentagon originally received the photo by fax machine last November from a
naturalized American of Cambodian descent living in Los Angeles. A Defense
Intelligence Agency official provided Colonel Robertson's daughter, Shelby
Robertson Quast, with the name of the man who transmitted the photograph. A
friend of her family said that Mrs. Quast met with the man and that he gave her
two contacts in Cambodia and a handwritten note demanding $2 million for two of
the three men.

Mrs. Quast flew to Phnom Penh to track down the two contacts. She found one, who
maintained he took the photograph when he was a prison guard. He said he would
try to free the men, but then in a second conversation he told her he could not
fulfill his promise.

'Huge Credibility Gap'

"I'm a bit skeptical about the photo," said Representative Sam Johnson,
Republican of Texas. But he said its disclosure "graphically illustrates why we
must declassify M.I.A. files." Mr. Johnson is one of several legislators who
have demanded that the Pentagon release classified intelligence to Congress and
family members.

"There is a huge credibility gap within the veterans community and within the
American people at large," said Senator John Kerry, Democrat of Massachusetts
and a Vietnam veteran, soon after the photograph's release. "The United States
Congress has a right to know whether our citizens are being tortured unfairly by
a process that is denying them information."

Mr. Kerry and Senator Hank Brown, Republican of Colorado, who also served in
Vietnam, jointly called on the Administration to release two decades' worth of
classified reports on supposed live sightings of American servicemen. They
announced that the Senate Subcommittee on Terrorism, Narcotics and International
Operations would hold hearings in September to review charges that the Defense
Department and State Department have mishandled the search for the missing.

The two Senators are part of a coalition of liberals and conservatives pressing
for greater Congressional monitoring of the Administration's handling of the
issue.

LOAD-DATE: July 24, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              41 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 24, 1991, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1141 words



International A2-13

The Administration's China policy gained a victory as the Senate voted to attach
conditions to the renewal of China's trade status, but not by a large enough
margin to overcome a likely Presidential veto. Page A1

A photograph supposedly of fliers who were missing in action in the Vietnam War
has stirred new moves in Congress to examine the Administration's efforts to
account for thousands of servicemen.  A6

Computer as accessory to photo fakery A6

Cliffhanger down under: a soap opera huff A10

Moscow plans to sell a large stake in the country's dominant producer of
passenger cars to a foreign investor, in a step toward capitalist reform,
advisers to the Soviet Government said. A1

Moscow applied to the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund for full
membership status in a move that puts new pressure on Western Governments to
help the Soviet Union. A3

Gorbachev presses plans to stop hard-line challenge A3

Croatia rejected an accord that was reportedly reached in talks between leaders
of the Yugoslav republic and federal officials on Monday night, its leaders
announced. A13

Edith Cresson made a gesture to appease the Japanese, who have borne the brunt
of the barbs flung with seemingly scattershot frequency and frankness by the
first woman to serve as Prime Minister of France. A13

Many U.S. firms once in South Africa say they have no plans to return soon, if
at all, despite President Bush's recent decision to lift economic sanctions
against the nation. A1

Inkatha will pay back $87,000 that the South African Government secretly
provided to subsidize two political rallies, the Zulu-based political movement
announced.  A5

Kinshasa Journal: Country is plucked clean, and feathers fly A4

News analysis: Israelis and Arabs seem to be moving closer to agreement on a
peace conference, and it is becoming apparent that they are primarily doing it
either to gain the favor or avoid the wrath of the United States. A8

In Golan Heights, doubt plus a bit of confidence A8

U.S. defends plan on Iraqi oil sales A7

 National A14-17

Race- and sex-discrimination cases are frequently turned away by lawyers, who
say that such cases are time-consuming, difficult to win and bring far less
money than other civil litigation.  A1

A plan to close military bases was upheld by a House armed services subcommittee
in spite of complaints from some lawmakers that the closing process was
"flawed." A15

Cracks found developing in F-16's A15

Shuttle faces threat of storms A11

White House and Congress seek to revise election ethics rule A15

New charges of sexual assault against William Smith were contained in sworn
accounts disclosed by prosecutors. One woman says Mr. Smith raped her in 1988
and two others say he sexually assaulted them. A14

The grisliest murder case in the history of Milwaukee, as the police describe
it, is being pursued. The police say that the body parts of as many as 15 men
were discovered in the suspect's one-bedroom apartment. A14

Unisys will cut 10,000 jobs and take an unexpected $1.2 billion charge against
its second-quarter earnings, the company announced. D1

Democrats berate top Bush economist D1

A panel on the environment was named by President Bush to advise him on how slow
its destruction but not at inordinate expense to business. The panel includes
the expertise of groups historically at odds. A14

Artificial heart program give strong backing A16

Greek Church suspends ties to national council A16

Regional B1-4

Three St. John's University students were acquitted of sexually assaulting a
female student in an encounter at a house near the university's Queens campus.
The case had cut to the heart of a growing debate about sex crimes at colleges.
A1

Witnesses were hard to believe, jurors say B4

A man was indicted for child rape, even as the element that catapulted the story
to national attention -- reports that many people had watched the attack on his
3-year-old niece without helping -- appeared to be melting. B1

Several shootings in Central Park in an area known as a gathering place for gay
men have been classified as bias-related by the police. B1

States check truck-route crimes after arrest in slaying B2

D'Amato gun proposal draws mixed response B3

D'Amato offers testimony before Senate ethics panel B3

Swimmers have been sucked in by the currents of an unusual trough at Jones Beach
in large numbers since Memorial Day. No one has been seriously hurt, but
lifeguards have had to rescue more people than in any season in memory. A1
Sudden change in weather wreaks havoc B3

A state-financed tuition voucher plan that would give parents of children in New
York State's worst public schools a $2,500 voucher to pay for alternative
private or parochial schools has provoked a debate over whether it would help or
hurt public education.  B1

Council panel seems ready to vote to amend districting plan B2

The Connecticut Legislature failed to override Governor Weicker's budget veto,
badly shattering the two-party coalition that had backed the budget plan. B1

Bridgeport bankruptcy plea focuses on city's insolvency B2

Business Digest D1

Education Page

Oregon approved an education plan that would be the first in the nation to
establish a statewide apprenticeship program and would make students choose
between job training and a college preparatory curriculum after 10th grade. A1

Historic sites discover the long lost slave A18

Gephardt wants to pay bounty for good pupils A18

The Living Section

Food

Helping the Army march on its stomach without breaks C1

Eating Well C3

Gumbo makings from Carolina C4

Wine Talk C9

De Gustibus C9

Living

Couture as laboratory: Three designers' experiments C1

Arts/Entertainment

The computer magic of "Terminator" C11

George Harrison going on tour C11

Film: "The Doctor" C11

Word and Image: New Rob Reiner comedy series C11

Sports B5-10

Baseball: Mariners beat Yankees, 6-1 B5

Mets lose to Giants, 4-2 B5

Pirates defeat Braves, 12-3 B6

Columns: Smith on American League West B5

Vecsey on cricket B7

Cycling: Indurain continues to lead Tour de France B5

Football: Giants sign two receivers B9

 Health Page

Fighting wrinkles with your own fat C1

Personal Health C10

Obituaries A19

A. Raymond Brooks, World War I fighter pilot

Allan C. Wilson, a biochemist

Editorials/Letters/Op-Ed

Editorials A20

Don't ease the squeeze on Iraq

Ragged response to B.C.C.I.

Topics: Salvador voices

Letters A20

Anna Quindlen: Global warning A21

Leslie H. Gelb: Victory for Mr. Shamir A21

Martin Indyk: Israel's Grand Bargain A21

LOAD-DATE: July 24, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              42 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 24, 1991, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Books of The Times;
Many Visions of the Vietnam War

BYLINE: By HERBERT MITGANG

SECTION: Section C; Page 18; Column 3; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 866 words



The Vietnam War and American Culture
Edited by John Carlos Rowe and Rick Berg
Illustrated. 275 pages. Columbia University Press. $34.50.

Re-Writing America
Vietnam Authors in Their Generation
By Philip D. Beidler
333 pages. University of Georgia Press. $35.

Who owns the history of the Vietnam War? Put another way, whose vision or
revision of the war will remain in the minds of Americans who weren't there?
Does the war belong to the antiwar novelists, film makers, documentarians,
journalists, poets -- and the memories of the veterans themselves? Or is it the
property of Washington officials in and out of uniform who have declared that
the Vietnam syndrome -- the lingering distaste for military action -- was
overcome by victorious military actions from Grenada to the Persian Gulf?

Two new studies published by university presses -- "The Vietnam War and American
Culture" and "Re-Writing America" -- leave the reader with the impression that
the literature of the war, in different cultural forms, will overcome the
after-the-fact interpretations of high-level military and political
personalities.

In "The Vietnam War and American Culture," an essay by Stephen Vlastos, a
history professor at the University of Iowa, points out that neoconservative
magazines and President Ronald Reagan unapologetically endorsed the war. They
argue that the war was undertaken to contain Communism and was a noble cause and
that measured against the global ramifications of defeat, it was a rational
exercise of American global power.

Looking at the origins of the war, Professor Vlastos says that the revisionists
insisted that the Soviet Union, China and all other Communist movements were the
initiators of the cold war and rejected peaceful coexistence. Similarly,
President Richard M. Nixon added fuel to the fire by representing the war
exclusively in terms of East vs. West and totalitarianism vs. freedom. In all
such interpretations of Us against Them, the essayist says, the viewpoints of
the Vietnamese people themselves are excluded.


The true aims of the war, Professor Vlastos writes, were honestly spelled out in
a memorandum prepared at the Pentagon by Assistant Secretary of Defense John
McNaughton for Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara. The professor says they
were "70 percent to preserve our national honor; 20 percent to keep South
Vietnam territory from being occupied by the Chinese; and 10 percent to the
South Vietnamese to enjoy a better and freer way of life."

In an essay that leans over backward to be objective about films that have been
made about Vietnam, Michael Clark, chairman of the English Department at the
University of California, Irvine, has kind words for the "Rambo" movies. With
professorial certainty, he declares that back-to-Nam shoot-'em-ups are not just
a reflection of a desire for vengeance and for a chance to do it right this
time. Despite their adolescent machismo, he says, these films possess an
undercurrent of bitterness and indignation about the war.

A poem written by W. D. Ehrhart, who served with the Marines in Vietnam and was
decorated for gallantry, represents the general viewpoint expressed by most of
the contributors to "The Vietnam War and American Culture." Although called "The
Invasion of Grenada," its meaning for the Vietnam war and the Vietnam syndrome
is palpable:

I didn't want a monument,

not even one as sober as that

vast black wall of broken lives.

I didn't want a postage stamp.

I didn't want a road beside the Delaware

River with a sign proclaiming:

"Vietnam Veterans Memorial Highway."

.  .  .
 What I wanted

was an end to monuments.


In "Re-Writing America," Philip D. Beidler, a professor of English at the
University of Alabama who served in Vietnam, provides a thoughtful guide to the
lasting work of the war's leading novelists (Tim O'Brien, Philip Caputo, James
Webb, Larry Heinemann, Winston Groom) and of those who wrote what he calls the
literature of witness (Gloria Emerson, Frances FitzGerald, Robert Stone, Michael
Herr). He also mentions a half-dozen poets and quite properly concentrates on a
single dramatist, David Rabe, author of the powerful trilogy "The Basic Training
of Pavlo Hummel," "Sticks and Bones" and "Streamers."

Professor Beidler's book is strongest when he adheres to the texts of the
novels, plays, reports and poems. Fortunately, "Re-Writing America" includes
generous excerpts from the work of these Vietnam artists and observers. Since
the analysis by the author is on the literature of war, there's a tendency to
emphasize the importance of the writing instead of the furies of the war itself.
Of course, that is the subject of his book, but wars are much more than research
material for writers.

"Nearly a quarter century after official American entry into the Vietnam
conflict, American preoccupation with the war continues to expand in exponential
proportions," Professor Beidler writes. "Re-Writing America" may well cause
readers to turn to the original works of the Vietnam writers, and to follow what
creative roads they are now traveling to interpret their own country in light of
later wars.

LOAD-DATE: July 24, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Philip D. Beidler (University of Georgia Press)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              43 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 24, 1991, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

BUSINESS PEOPLE;
State Street Boston Hires An Executive From Chase

SECTION: Section D; Page 5; Column 5; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 340 words


Marshall N. Carter yesterday was named president, chief operating officer and
director of the State Street Boston Corporation, the country's largest custodian
and trustee of mutual and pension funds.

Mr. Carter, 51, spent the last 15 years at Chase Manhattan. In his last three
years at Chase, he was head of the global securities services division, which
holds and processes more than $500 billion in domestic and foreign investment
assets. Under Mr. Carter's leadership, the operation doubled its earnings, as
well as its custody of global assets, increasing Chase's lead as the world's
largest global custodian.

State Street, the Boston-based holding company for the State Street Bank and
Trust Company, has managed to avoid many of the problems that face most New
England banks by focusing on handling securities and related record keeping, and
relying less on loans.

Mr. Carter, who could not be reached for comment yesterday, is co-chairman of
the United States Working Group for the Group of 30, a business advisory
organization that develops recommendations for world securities clearance and
settlement procedures. He is on the board of the National Securities Clearing
Corporation, the clearing agent for the Big Board, the American Stock Exchange
and the over-the-counter system, and is on the executive committee and board of
Cedel, an international securities organization based in Luxembourg.

Mr. Carter's experience in international business is what State Street needs to
expand into the global custody market, said William S. Edgerly, its chairman and
chief executive.

Mr. Carter was awarded the Navy Cross and Purple Heart for two tours of duty as
a Marine officer in Vietnam. He has a civil engineering degree from the United
States Military Academy and a master's degree in operations research and systems
analysis from the Naval Postgraduate School in Monterey, Calif. He also has a
master's degree from the School of Public and International Affair at George
Washington University in Washington.

NAME: Marshall N. Carter

LOAD-DATE: July 24, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              44 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 25, 1991, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Baker Asks Asians to Move Warily on New Pacts

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHENON,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 14; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 682 words

DATELINE: KUALA LUMPUR, Malaysia, July 24


Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d urged major Southeast Asian countries today
to move cautiously on proposals to create new trade and security alliances that
would replace "tried and tested frameworks" involving the United States.

Speaking at the annual meeting of foreign ministers of the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations, Mr. Baker appeared to react warily to proposals made at
the meeting to create an East Asian trading bloc that did not include the United
States, and to begin regular regional meetings on military issues.

He was also apprehensive about a suggestion that Soviet and Chinese
representatives be included in future meetings of Asean, which is made up of
Indonesia, the Philippines, Thailand, Malaysia, Singapore and Brunei.

"We have had a remarkable degree of stability in this region," said Mr. Baker,
referring specifically to security cooperation in Southeast Asia.

"We ought to be careful about changing those arrangements and discarding them
for something else unless we're absolutely certain that the something else is
better and will work," he said at a news conference.While Mr. Baker received a
warm reception this week from the Asean foreign ministers, a central theme of
the Kuala Lumpur meeting was that the non-Communist nations of Southeast Asia
must integrate their economic and security planning, even if that means
asserting more independence from their old ally in Washington.

Asian diplomats said there was general agreement on the need for closer economic
ties within Asean in response to trading blocs being created in Western Europe
and in North America, and on the need for new cooperation on military issues in
light of the reduced American presence in the region. Not one of the proposals
that had most worried American officials was adopted by the Asean foreign
ministers at the meeting this week, although all remain under consideration.

Among them is a Japanese plan for formal regional meetings on defense issues.
American officials say they are wary of the proposal because it might weaken a
string of bilateral military agreements between the United States and nations in
Asia and the Pacific.

Like the United States, Japan is invited as a "dialogue partner."

The most serious disagreement between the United States and its Southeast Asian
allies at the gathering appeared to center on Myanmar, formerly Burma, and
whether economic sanctions should be imposed on that nation to end human rights
abuses.

American and other Western nations have for some time been urging Asean members
to use their influence to persuade the Burmese to hand over power to civilians
leaders elected last year.

"We would like to see Asean use whatever influence they have, individually or
collectively, in order to move the Burmese Government toward greater respect for
human rights, greater respect for political process, freedom for political
prisoners," Mr. Baker said.

Southeast Asian nations have been wary of Western attempts to impose human
rights standards on Myanmar, if only because many of their own governments are
also subject to criticism about human rights abuses.

Asean officials said today that the Philippine Foreign Secretary, Raul
Manglapus, would soon travel to Myanmar on behalf of the association to discuss
human rights. But Asian diplomats at the Kuala Lumpur meeting insisted that Mr.
Manglapus's trip was not a response to Western pressure.

"This will be a cordial meeting between Manglapus and the Burmese," said one
diplomat. "We believe that friendly, constructive persuasion -- not bullying --
will be most effective in bringing about change in Burma."

Several Asean officials drew comparisons this week between the association's
policy on Burma and the Bush Administration's policy on China -- continued
contact despite concern over human rights violations.

At the news conference, Mr. Baker said the United States continued to hope for
better relations with Vietnam, but that normal relations were not possible until
Hanoi helped bring about a settlement in the Cambodian civil war.

LOAD-DATE: July 25, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              45 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 25, 1991, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Kin Say Missing Airmen Are Being Held as Slaves

SECTION: Section A; Page 3; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LOAD-DATE: July 25, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: The families of three missing servicemen said to be shown in a
disputed photograph that surfaced recently asserted that the airmen were being
held as slaves in Southeast Asia. Johanna Lundy, who said her husband, Maj.
Albro Lundy Jr., was in the picture, appeared with her son, Albro Lundy 3d, at a
Washington news conference yesterday. (Jose R. Lopez/The New York Times)

TYPE: Caption

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              46 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 25, 1991, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Home Video

BYLINE: By Peter M. Nichols

SECTION: Section C; Page 20; Column 3; Cultural Desk; Word and Image Page

LENGTH: 1183 words



From Disney

Video films are sometimes pulled from circulation, but next winter Disney plans
to cut one up into pieces. "Fantasia" is to be released on Nov. 1. The video,
which will cost $24.99, will be in stores for 50 days, after which the studio,
always adroit at recycling its properties, will break it into parts. Some of the
pieces, according to the plan, will be scrapped; others will be incorporated
into a new animated film, "Fantasia Continued," to be released in 1996 or 1997.

"It was Walt Disney's concept," said Tania Steele, a spokeswoman for Disney.
"We'll use at least three segments from 'Fantasia' and then create three new
segments for 'Fantasia Continued.' " The score for the new film will be
classical, as was the score for "Fantasia," and it will also be pop.

After its 50 days in video stores, "Fantasia" will be dismantled and gone
forever. The supply of copies available, Ms. Steele said, expected to be seven
to eight million, should last a year or more. Some critics question the film's
appeal to modern audiences, but many dealers expect a sell-out.

Disney normally lets its animated features run a while on video and then
withdraws them for a period of years. In this case, though, a new film will be
waiting to take over.

Summing Up a Decade

One wouldn't call them the funniest, but most everything about "The 90's," the
television show that ends its third season at 11 tonight on Channel 13, suggests
home video. Taking an anti-establishment stance, "The 90's" looks at subjects --
war, racism, food and nutrition, drug and alcohol abuse, money and television
itself -- through the eyes and camcorders of a network of independent video
makers from around the country.

"We do a little of what 'America's Funniest Home Videos' does, only in a much
different vein," said the show's producer, Joel Cohen. "The 90's" describes
itself as a program rooted in years of alternative video. "We've tapped into
centers where people go to make and edit tapes," Mr. Cohen said. "They know
about us and send us things."

Hourlong programs examine topics in pieces that are six to eight minutes long.
Many are strongly personal, and perspectives can suddenly shift in interesting
ways. On "The Antiwar Tapes," for example, the discussion moves from the war in
the Persian Gulf to a peace demonstration at a nuclear submarine plant in 1971
to a group of Vietnam veterans teaching high school students about war.

"There's no host," Mr. Cohen said. "We just weave the pieces between each
other."

The third season of 10 broadcasts is available on video at $22.95 a tape. For
information, call (312) 321-9321.

New Video Releases



Hamlet
1990. Warner. $92.99. Laser disk, $34.98. 2 hours, 15 minutes. Closed captioned.
PG.

It's not "Mad Max" or "Lethal Weapon," but Mel Gibson makes a surprisingly
effective prince. His is a visceral portrayal, distinguished by raw emotion and
the desperate wit one needs to be convincingly mad. Franco Zeffirelli's film
shuffles the play's lines from one scene to another but is always lucid and
beautifully cinematic. Glenn Close and Alan Bates are fine as Gertrude and
Claudius, but by far the best is Mr. Gibson, whose Hamlet is "strong,
intelligent and safely beyond ridicule" (Caryn James).

Sleeping With the Enemy
1991. Fox. $92.98. 1:39. CC. R.

Battered by her sleek, violent husband (Patrick Bergin), Laura Burney (Julia
Roberts) flees to Iowa and resumes life under another identity, that is, until
her vengeful spouse gets wind and tracks her down. Sparsely peopled and driven
by unlikely events, Joseph Ruben's film would sink to tawdry melodrama were it
not for Ms. Roberts, who, with movie star magnetism to spare, "shines in even
the most impossible situations" (Janet Maslin).

Alice
(1990). Orion . $94.98. LD, $39.95. 1:46. CC. PG-13.

Swathed in fur and attended to by relays of apartment-building personnel, Alice
Tate (Mia Farrow) has few concerns beyond a back that kills her and a conviction
that her sheltered life doesn't amount to much. Trips to Chinatown put her in
touch with a Dr. Yang (Keye Luke), dispenser of herbal remedies that ease her
aches, open her libido and transport her soul through psychic heavens to a
radically altered existence. Woody Allen's comedy is "hilarious and romantic,
serious and exuberantly satiric" (Canby).

Hands of a Stranger
(1987), Worldvision . $89.95. 2:59. No CC. No rating.

With a screenplay by Arthur Kopit, this made-for-television adaptation of Robert
Daley's novel probes the murky world of criminal courts and police precinct
houses. Armand Assante plays a workaholic detective investigating the rape of
his wife (Beverly D'Angelo) in a furiously paced procedural that scores "a
pronounced advance for the curious beast known as the television movie" (John
O'Connor).

My Friend Flicka
(1943). Fox. $14.98. 1:29. No CC. No rating.

Few things are more photogenic than a boy and his horse, especially when the
filly is the rowdy offspring of a loco mare and the lad is determined to salvage
her over the objections of a stern and disapproving parent. Cast as youngster on
a Wyoming ranch, Roddy McDowall (then a child star who had been evacuated from
London during the blitz) has trouble warming to the countryside, but the horse
does well enough for both of them.

Shakespeare on Video

Shakespeare is a strong performer on video, with many of the plays in duplicate.
They include:

HAMLET (1948), Laurence Olivier directs himself in one of the finest
Shakespearean adaptations. Paramount . $19.95. 2 hours and 33 minutes. No
rating.

HAMLET (1969), Nicol Williamson is the prince and Anthony Hopkins is Claudius in
Tony Richardson's film. RCA/Columbia. $69.95. 1:58. No rating.

HENRY V (1944), Olivier's portrayal begins in a Globe Theater-like setting
before bursting forth onto the battlefield. Paramount . $19.95. 2:17. No rating.


HENRY V (1989), Kenneth Branagh and Derek Jacobi star in Mr. Branagh's
accessible treatment. CBS /Fox. $89.98. 2:18. Closed captioned. PG.

JULIUS CAESAR (1953), Marlon Brando is Marc Antony. MGM/UA. $19.95. 2:01. No
rating.

KING LEAR (1971), Peter Brook directs Paul Scofield, Irene Worth and Jack
MacGowran. Warner. $19.98. 2:17. No rating.

 KING LEAR (1984), The BBC production was Olivier's last major screen
performance. Kultur . $29.95. 2:38. No rating.

MACBETH (1948), Orson Welles is usurper and director. Republic . $19.95. 1:52.
No rating.

MACBETH (1971), Gore flies in Roman Polanski's action-filled interpretation.
RCA/Columbia. $59.99. 2:20. No rating.

ROMEO AND JULIET (1968), Olivia Hussey and Leonard Whiting are swept away in
perhaps the most popular of all Shakespearean films. Paramount . $19.95. 2:17.
PG. Also note some of the ballet performances: Rudolf Nureyev and Margot
Fonteyn's ( Kultur , $29.95); the Bolshoi's ( Kultur , $29.95), and the Royal
Ballet's (HBO, $39.95).

THE TAMING OF THE SHREW (1967), Richard Burton lands an unruly Elizabeth Taylor.
RCA/Columbia. $59.99. 2:04.

LOAD-DATE: July 25, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Mickey Mouse in "Fantasia," which is to be released on Nov. 1.
(Associated Press); Mel Gibson in "Hamlet." (Icon Distribution)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              47 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 26, 1991, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Review/Pop;
Mix-and-Match Show With Snarling and Anger

BYLINE: By JON PARELES

SECTION: Section C; Page 3; Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 799 words


There was a certain symmetry to the quintuple bill that came to Radio City Music
Hall on Wednesday night.  It started with Kory Clarke, the lead singer of
Warrior Soul, hurling imprecations against "12 years of Republican
administrations." And it ended with the Sisters of Mercy performing "Vision
Thing," a song that snarls President Bush's slogans in a fury of sarcasm over a
booming beat.

The concert was the first of this summer's mix-and-match tours, which bring
together rockers and rappers, new bands and punk-era veterans; next to arrive
will be the Lollapalooza tour headlined by Jane's Addiction. Wednesday's concert
featured Sisters of Mercy, an English band, and Public Enemy, New York's most
important rap group. The opening acts were the reconstituted Gang of Four, a
pioneering punk-funk band, and Warrior Soul, a hard-rock band from Detroit. Also
squeezed in were Young Black Teen-Agers, a white rap group that shares Public
Enemy's producer but not its intelligence or enunciation. All except Young Black
Teen-Agers offered some mixture of angry leftist politics and walloping,
abrasive music.

The mix-and-match tour grows out of idealistic and practical considerations. The
ideal is to convene a post-punk community from factionalized rock audiences. The
practicality is that because insurers are so leery of violence at rap shows,
promoters rarely book all-rap bills; joining rock bands on the road helps
rappers to get out and perform.

Although Sisters of Mercy topped the bill, part of the audience left after
Public Enemy finished. "We should be supporting Public Enemy," Andrew Eldritch,
the Sisters' leader, said from the stage; in England, "supporting" means
"opening for." But it was only lip service. Otherwise, the Sisters of Mercy
might have shortened their overlong set and given Public Enemy more time.

Sisters of Mercy merge pretension and propulsion. In a bass-baritone growl that
rises to a bitter bleat, Mr. Eldritch sings about lust and apocalypse, slinging
poetic images as he skulks around the stage veiled in sunglasses and smoke. At
Radio City, lyrics were obscured behind the music, which pounds away with a riff
or two for each song -- more in "This Corrosion," the Sisters' catchiest tune.
Some songs use quasi-Celtic guitar lines, others lean toward power chords, but
once under way the riffs simply repeat to the end. The concertgoers started out
dancing; by the end of the set, most were simply standing and watching the
moires and starbursts of the band's impressive lighting setup.

Public Enemy's set was a holding action, pending the September release of its
next album, "Apocalypse 1991: the Enemy Strikes Black." With a dancing honor
guard of four men in white Navy-like uniforms, and security men trailing the
rappers, Chuck D. and Flavor-Flav ran all over the stage, led short stretches of
audience participation and declaimed some greatest hits. The set included "Bring
the Noise," "911 Is a Joke," "Who Stole the Soul," "Welcome to the Terrordome":
songs about the power of rap, the neglect of the poor and the exploitation of
black labor and culture, in dense, multi-layered language over backdrops that
are all muscle and dissonance.

There was no new material and no speeches between songs; Sister Souljah, Public
Enemy's new rapper, was also absent. And because Chuck D. often rapped over his
own prerecorded voice, the sense that his songs are spontaneous blasts of
articulate rage was lessened. But the songs remain rap's most tough-minded
material, and after years of roadwork, Public Enemy performs them as if they're
participatory party music.

Gang of Four, now a five-member group, matches oblique lyrics to stark music,
mostly drumbeats and guitar noise that are occasionally tempered by a melodic
chorus. Its set juxtaposed its best old songs -- "Love Like Anthrax," "I Love a
Man in a Uniform" -- with new material like "F.M.U.S.A.," a splintered evocation
of the Vietnam War. Two original Gang members, its singer Jon King and its
guitarist, Andy Gill, were upstaged by its new bass player, Gail Ann Dorsey, who
sang, danced and added a sensual element the original Gang disdained.

Where Public Enemy details inner-city anger, Sisters of Mercy purvey Romantic
disillusion and Gang of Four offers educated cynicism, Warrior Soul sums up the
rage of suburban youth facing drastically lowered expectations. Its stamping,
grinding songs carry Mr. Clarke's shouted accusations -- "all the oil that you
pump/my world's a garbage dump" -- on basic guitar riffs and booming drums,
updating Led Zeppelin with glimpses of politics.

Each band was blunt and focused, but disappeared after its set. If the musicians
really want to suggest a new community, they might consider playing a finale
together.

LOAD-DATE: July 26, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: A member of Public Enemy performing Wednesday at Radio City.
(Gary Gershoff/Retna Ltd.)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              48 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 26, 1991, Friday, Late Edition - Final

PENTAGON CASTS DOUBT ON PHOTO

BYLINE: By ANDREW ROSENTHAL,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 3; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 586 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 25


The Pentagon cast doubt tonight on the origins of a mysterious photograph that
reportedly shows three lost Vietnam War fliers, saying the picture passed
through the hands of known fakers of such information.

In a report issued tonight, the Pentagon also said that biographical information
that accompanied the photograph, including birth dates, Social Security numbers
and home addresses of the three men, was false.

But Lieut. Col. Kerry Gershaneck, a Pentagon spokesman, said the military was
still not declaring the photograph a fake. "The bottom line is we are not
discounting that photo," he said. "We have not come to any conclusions and we
are still investigating it."

The Pentagon made public the analysis of the photographs under heavy pressure
from the families of the three Americans: Col. John L. Robertson of the Air
Force, Maj. Albro L. Lundy Jr. of the Air Force and Lieut. Larry James Stevens
of the Navy. The families have accused the Bush Administration of not taking
seriously the possibility that their missing relatives are still alive.

"There have been a lot of wild accusations about us ignoring information,"
Colonel Gershaneck said.

Photo Called Authentic

The families have identified the three men in the photograph as their relatives
and said unequivocally that the snapshot is authentic. But many other families
maintain that the servicemen shown are their relatives.

At the same time, several Government officials have expressed reservations about
the grainy picture of three men with mustaches standing in a wooded setting.
They have said it might be a hoax by Southeast Asian bounty hunters seeking
monetary rewards from American groups who hope that American servicemen listed
as missing from the Vietnam War are still alive.

In its report tonight, the Pentagon said that 20 sources, ranging from
missionaries to bounty hunters to government officials and refugees, had
identified the three men in the photograph as Colonel Lundy, Major Robertson and
Lieutenant Stevens, but that none of the identifications were based on
first-hand information. In addition, it said the origins of the picture were
suspect.

"One principal source of the photograph lies in a ring of Cambodian opportunists
led by a well-known and admitted fabricator of P.O.W.-M.I.A. information," the
Pentagon analysis said.

Colonel Gershaneck acknowledged that the photograph may also have come from
other sources. But he said any information that passed through the hands of the
Cambodian ring had to be questioned.

Doubt Cast on Letter, Too

The Pentagon report said that figures in Southeast Asia provided biographical
information on the men reportedly shown in the picture and asserted that it had
been provided by the missing servicemen themselves. But the information was
wrong in many respects, the report said.

In addition, the picture was accompanied by what was said to be a personal
letter written by one of the men, Major Robertson.

"The text of the letter bears little resemblance to anything that would have
been written by an American officer possessing an intimate knowledge of the
English language," the report said. "Correct grammar, syntax and spelling, for
example, are lacking."

It said one report from a figure claiming to authenticate the photograph
included a tape recording that was said to have been made by Major Robertson but
"apparently was made by a non-native English speaking male" who did not even
pronounce Major Robertson's name correctly.

LOAD-DATE: July 26, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              49 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 26, 1991, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Carol Laise, 73, Ex-Ambassador and High State Dept. Aide, Dies

BYLINE: By JOAN COOK

SECTION: Section B; Page 6; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 528 words


Carol Laise, an American Ambassador who was the wife of an American Ambassador
and the first woman to be an Assistant Secretary of State, died yesterday at her
home in Dummerston, Vt. She was 73 years old.

Miss Laise died of cancer, a spokesman for the family said.

She was named Ambassador to Nepal by President Lyndon B. Johnson in 1966 and
remained in the post until 1973. In January 1974 she married Ambassador at Large
Ellsworth Bunker, a 79-year-old widower, in Katmandu, Nepal. She kept her maiden
name professionally.

It was the first marriage between two American Ambassadors. Miss Laise was a
close friend of Mr. Bunker's first wife, Harriet Allen Bunker, who died in 1964,
and it was Miss Laise's first marriage.

For nearly six years after their marriage the couple saw each other only once a
month when Ambassador Laise would take a plane provided by President Johnson and
fly to Saigon, where Ambassador Bunker was trying to stabilize the situation in
South Vietnam.

Named Director General

In October 1973 she returned to Washington and was sworn in as Assistant
Secretary of State in charge of the Bureau of Public Affairs, the first woman to
hold so high a post in the department. Before her appointment as Ambassador to
Nepal she had been director of the Office of South Asian Affairs,

In 1974 Miss Laise became director general of the Foreign Service, the highest
nonpolitical job in the Foreign Service, a post she held until she retired in
1977.

Caroline Clendening Laise began her Government career in 1940 as an occupational
coder for the Civil Service Commission. In 1946 she went to the United Nations
Relief and Rehabilitation Administration, and in 1948 joined the State
Department.

From 1956 to 1961 she was an adviser to American delegates to various United
Nations agencies and in 1962 was made deputy director of the Office of South
Asian Affairs with responsibilty for diplomatic relations with Afghanistan,
Ceylon, Nepal, India and Pakistan.

In comparing the economic problems of Nepal with those of India, she said in a
1966 interview with Ann Terry Pincus of The New York Post, "You could explain
that Nepal is like Appalachia, and India has the problems of Harlem."

An Adviser in New Delhi

When Vice President Hubert H. Humphrey went to India and Pakistan in 1965, Miss
Laise went along as his adviser. In the 1962-63 Chinese invasion of India,
Ambassador John Kenneth Galbraith sent for Miss Laise for advice and she spent
about a year in New Delhi.

She was a winner in 1965 of the annual Federal Women's Award for outstanding
contributions by women in government service, and in 1973 she received the
Career Service Award of the National Civil Service League.

Miss Laise, a native of Winchester, Va., was a graduate of American University
and received an M.A. in political science from George Washington University.

Her husband, Ambassador Bunker, died in 1984.

She is survived by a brother, Frederick Laise of Santa Fe, N.M.; two stepsons,
Samuel Bunker of Dummerston, Vt., and John Bunker of Wheatland, Wy.; and a
stepdaughter, Ellen Bunker of Tucson, Ariz.

LOAD-DATE: October 17, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Carol Laise (Associated Press, 1973)

TYPE: Obituary (Obit)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              50 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 27, 1991, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Scowcroft Defends Pentagon Over Vietnam Photo

BYLINE: By CLIFFORD KRAUSS,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 2; Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 940 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 26


Brent Scowcroft, the President's national security adviser, today dismissed
charges that the Administration was not committed to finding surviving Vietnam
War servicemen and he said there was no credible evidence that Vietnam still
held any American prisoners of war.

It was the strongest comment so far by an Administration official on the
emotionally charged question of whether there are any Americans left trapped in
Southeast Asia. A flurry of recent photographs and renewed charges by family
members that the Defense Intelligence Agency was covering up evidence on missing
servicemen have forced the Administration into a defensive and sometimes awkward
position.

"There are not games being played," Mr. Scowcroft said at a White House briefing
mostly devoted to the Moscow summit next week. "There is no incentive on the
part of the United States to conceal anything on this tragic issue."

A surge of attention accompanied last week's disclosure of a blurry photograph
of three stocky mustached American fliers standing in a woody setting. The
release of the photograph added impetus to a growing movement in Congress to
force the Pentagon to unclassify thousands of secret documents related to
reports or rumors about American men still living in Southeast Asia.

Defends Pentagon Handling

Mr. Scowcroft strongly defended current Pentagon handling of such documents. "At
one time in the past, the Pentagon did allow fairly wide access to the records
and what happened as a result is that family members started getting letters
from unscrupulous people," he said, suggesting that con artists were playing on
the emotions of people willing to put money behind their lingering hopes.

He added that neither the Pentagon's files nor any other evidence available
"would lead one to the kinds of conclusions that a number of people have come
to" -- that Americans still live in prison camps or forced labor camps under the
most horrible conditions.

The Pentagon released a study on Thursday night reporting that the much
publicized photograph and letters that accompanied the picture were distributed
by people in Southeast Asia known to have faked such information in the past.

The report said, "One principal source of the photograph lies in a ring of
Cambodian opportunists led by a well-known and admitted fabricator of
P.O.W.-M.I.A. information." It added that a letter allegedly written by one of
the fliers "bears little resemblance to anything that would have been written by
an American officer possessing an intimate knowledge of the English language.
Correct grammar, syntax, spelling, for example, are lacking."

But family members of the three fliers say they remain convinced that their
loved ones -- Col. John Leighton Robertson of the Air Force, Maj. Albro Lynn
Lundy Jr. of the Air Force and Lieut. Larry James Stevens of the Navy -- are
held captive in a prison camp somewhere in Vietnam.

Daughter Presses Action

They sharply criticized the report, and questioned why it was released as a
senior State Department official was dispatched to Hanoi to press Vietnamese
officials to investigate the origins of the photograph and the possibility that
the men could still be alive.

"Why is so much effort going into discrediting the sources behind the photograph
rather than negotiating for the men in the photo?" asked Shelby Robertson Quast,
daughter of Colonel Robertson, who was lost when his F-4C Phantom crashed in
North Vietnam in 1966. Suggesting that the Defense Intelligence Agency was
purposely undercutting the envoy, Deputy Assistant Secretary of State Kenneth
Quinn, she asked, "Why is the Government so divided on this?"

There are 2,273 American servicemen still unaccounted for from the Vietnam War.
The Pentagon considers 1,172 as missing and 1,101 as killed in action, but their
bodies have not been recovered.

Administration officials say there may be Americans who still live in Vietnam,
Laos and Cambodian who married local women or who deserted, but they tend to
believe the Governments of those countries who say they do not hold any
prisoners.

Second Photo Is Reported

Retired Gen. John W. Vessey, President Bush's envoy to Hanoi on the issue, has
made a series of trips to Vietnam to gather information. He has persuaded the
Vietnamese to allow the Administration to open an office in Hanoi, and during
talks earlier this year the Vietnamese agreed to allow Government investigators
to travel wherever they wished. But the charges of conspiracy have persisted as
no American has been found alive.

Even as Mr. Scowcroft made his remarks, another family came forward at a news
conference with a new photograph that they said showed that Capt. Donald Carr of
the Army, who was lost while flying on a reconnaissance mission over Laos in
1971, was still alive. Mr. Carr's family said they were given the photograph by
Jack Bailey, a retired Air Force pilot who has been stalking M.I.A. cases for
years.

"My brother is alive," Matthew Carr, a school administrator in East Chicago,
Ind., told The Associated Press.

The photograph shows a smiling man in a green sports shirt. Mr. Bailey took the
photograph to Michael Charney, a forensic anthropologist at Colorado State
University, to compare the picture to a snapshot of Mr. Carr at his wedding in
1961.

In a telephone interview, Mr. Charney said he could not be sure that the new
photograph was authentic, but by studying the bone structures in the two
pictures he could tell that "the faces are the same."

"Bailey has to raise money to keep his operation going," he added, "but I think
he is honest."

LOAD-DATE: July 27, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              51 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 27, 1991, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

BUSINESS PEOPLE;
New Safelite Glass Chief Has Plans for Expansion

SECTION: Section 1; Page 35; Column 5; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 446 words


Garen K. Staglin, who has been named chairman and chief executive of the
Safelite Glass Corporation, a manufacturer and retailer of glass for autos, has
plans to extend the company's service to the insurance industry beyond
installing new glass in damaged cars.

Safelite, based in Columbus, Ohio, has more than 630 auto-glass replacement
shops throughout the country. Mr. Staglin, 46 years old, would like the company
to do more than just install the auto glass for insurance claims, but also to
aid in claim scheduling and to handle some of the administrative claim work.

Mr. Staglin has had experience working with the insurance industry in his
previous position as chairman of the automotive services group of Automatic Data
Processing Inc., which is based in Roseland, N.J. Under his leadership, the
group became a leading supplier of automotive services, like computerized claims
estimating and claims adjusting, to the insurance industry, with 20 of the top
25 insurance companies as clients.

Mr. Staglin succeeds Robert H. Morosky, who will be pursuing personal interests,
a company spokesman said. Mr. Morosky, who joined the company in 1989 as a major
investor, has been named chairman emiritus. Earlier, Mr. Morosky was a top
retail executive who helped Leslie H. Wexner build the Limited clothing chain.
Safelite has been owned by Forstmann Little & Company, a Wall Street investment
firm, since 1987.

In 1966, Mr. Staglin received a bachelor of science degree in engineering from
the University of California at Los Angeles and in 1968 an M.B.A. from Stanford
University. After graduating, Mr. Staglin did a one-year tour in Vietnam with
the Navy.

From 1969 to 1971, Mr. Staglin worked at the Pentagon in the office of the
Secretary of Defense as a systems analyst.

In 1971, he became vice president of the Crocker National Bank in San Francisco
and in 1975, he joined the Itel Corporation, a San Franicisco-based leasing
company, as finance director. In 1976, he became president of the insurance
services division.

In 1980, he joined Automatic Data Processing as president for automotive
services in Hayward, Calif. In 1987, he became corporate vice president and
general manager of the automative services group and in 1991 he was named the
group's chairman.

Mr. Staglin and his wife, Sharalyn, have been married for 23 years. They have a
daughter, Shannon, 12, and a son, Brandon, who will be a junior at Dartmouth
College.

Mr. Staglin's hobbies include skiiing and wine making. Queen Elizabeth II was
served chardonnay from his family's vineyard in Rutherford, Calif., during a
luncheon with Congressional leaders in Washington.

NAME: Garen K. Staglin

LOAD-DATE: July 27, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              52 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 27, 1991, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

News Summary

SECTION: Section 1; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1200 words



International 2-5

A weapons factory south of Moscow has gone into partnership with a Swedish
company and now produces milk and juice containers -- alongside sophisticated
military parts too secret to be discussed.  Page 1

Major changes for the Communists were approved by Soviet party leaders.
President Gorbachev said the new charter would help transform the Communists
into a broad-based "party of democratic reforms." 5

U.S.-Soviet pact signings 5

The republic of Serbia is sending aid to pockets of Serbs in their increasingly
lethal rebelliion against Croatian authority in Yugoslavia. But Serbian
officials say the aid has been for supplies, not for weapons.  3

Germany's hottest political debates in the first summer of reunification are
over old questions about the nation's dark past. Some see troubling signs of
resurgent nationalism.  4

Mysterious circles in wheat fields have become a popular attraction to tourists,
scientists and others intrigued by their presence in southwestern England. The
circles have been a boon to the local economy.  4

No good proof of missing servicemen in Vietnam exists, the President's national
security adviser said, dismissing charges that the Administration was not
committed to finding any survivors there.  2

The commander of American forces in the Pacific said the United States was
seeking new military alliances in Asia after the decision to shut down Clark Air
Base in the Philippines.  2

Fight over water rights in India threatens coalition 4

Money from the South African Police was given to the labor union loyal to the
Zulu-based political movement Inkatha without the authorities knowing where the
money went. 3

National 6-10

The economy has started to expand for the first time since last summer as it
managed a gain of four-tenths of 1 percent at an annual rate during the
April-June quarter and inflation pressure subsided, new figures show. 1

State and local taxes are increasing more steeply than they have in decades. The
total amount to be raised this year may approach the $23 billion in Federal tax
increases that Congress enacted last fall. 1

A new bill on intelligence oversight was agreed on by a House-Senate committee.
The oversight legislation would clarify and limit the President's authority to
approve secret intelligence operations abroad. 1

A letter to the Senate ethics panel from Senator John Kerry suggested that its
special council in the inquiry into five Senators had a potential conflict
problem. But the panel decided there was no conflict. 10

The Senate Republican leader, Bob Dole, said he was going to try to get the Bush
Administration to agree on some plan to extend unemployment benefits for people
who have been out of work at least half a year. 6

Bush praises rules for protecting disabled workers 7

Three police officers in Milwaukee who visited the apartment of Jeffrey Dahmer
two months ago were suspended. The officers were checking a complaint that Mr.
Dahmer, accused of butchering as many as 11 people, had molested a 14-year-old
boy. 6

Smith's lawyers asked for delay in rape trial 8

Massachusetts rules against patient's use of marijuana 8

A growing number of Cuban tourists are overstaying their visas in Miami in an
attempt to gain citizenship. The tourists, in addition to the boatloads of
refugees from Cuba, are beginning to strain the city's resources. 7

Gaps in safety programs of railroads have been exposed in the aftermath of the
derailment and chemical spill that poisoned 45 miles of the Sacramento River in
California. 6

Regional 25-27

The doctor who aided in the suicide of a leukemia patient in Rochester was not
indicted. The decision is expected to help shape a debate over how far doctors
can go to help terminally ill patients end their lives. 1

A doctor with the HIV virus resigned after administrators of a hospital near
Buffalo asked him to leave. He was the first doctor to resign since Federal
guidelines were released on health workers and AIDS.  1

John Gotti's lawyer was disqualified from representing the reputed Mafia leader
in his next trial. The ruling disqualifying the lawyer, Bruce Cutler, and two
other well-known lawyers was a triumph for prosecutors. 1

A 15-year-old youth was killed in his Harlem apartment building and a
20-year-old was charged in the shooting. The police said the two had an "ongoing
dispute," possibly over one's comment on the other's clothes.  25

The revised plan for redistricting the New York City Council was approved by the
Justice Department, making it likelier that the city can hold historic elections
on schedule. 1

In one-two M.T.A. punch, new token, then no token 27

Private garbage hauling fee to decrease starting Aug. 1 27

The foster-care program in Michigan is a model for New York City's new plan,
which is aimed at keeping troubled families together. Some experts say that such
programs can work; Others say they are unproven. 25

A state-financed voucher program in New York for sending children to private or
parochial schools was defeated by the Board of Regents. It would have involved
5,000 students in the state's worst schools.  25 Condoms seized by U.S. agents
in a label case 26

Connecticut leaders were optimistic enough to set a new deadline for adopting a
budget for the fiscal year that began 26 days ago: one more week. But the
feeling that progress is being made has been felt before. 25

New Jersey fails to seize life insurer 33

Business Digest 33

Arts/Entertainment

Barnes Collection dismisses adviser 13

Film makers retreat from Brazil 13

Reprieve for a Hollywood haunt 14

Theater: Reno returns 13

Film: Richard Pryor in "Another You" 16

"Bikini Island" 16

Music in Review 17

Dance: A choreographer then and now 15

Consumer's World 48

A pump that cools air or warms it

A warning on a new phone scheme

Coping with unwanted hair

Timing the interruption when cable TV service fails

Guidepost: "Kiddie" pools

Obituaries 11

One of the closest aides to Stalin, Lazar Moyseyevich Kaganovich, died in
Moscow. He was 97 years old. Mr. Kaganovich sometimes was regarded as the No. 2
man in the Soviet Union because of his ties to Stalin.

George H. Love, an industrialist

Sports 28-32

Baseball: Angels beat Yanks 29

Aguilera gets 26th save for Twins 30

Full speed ahead for Coleman 31

Colleges: Amid pressure, N.C.A.A. committee meets 32

Column: Berkow on Mel Hall 29

Football: Rookie finds camp 29

Steeler said to attempt suicide 29

Rumble of rumors for Jets 31

Golf: Snead, at par, has lead 32

Horse Racing: Saratoga gets serious 32

Sports People 32

Sports Leisure: Italian racing bikes 32

Editorials/Letters/Op-Ed

Editorials 22

Staring hard at South Africa

Baby Bells: antitrust mistrust

The Sandinista syndrome

Letters 22

Russell Baker: Looking for giants 23

Anna Quindlen: A slice of life 23

Alfred E. Kahn: Our treadmill economy23

C. Edwin Baker: First Amendment protection for gays 23

Richard M. Hughes: In Vietnam, punishing good deeds 23

LOAD-DATE: July 27, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              53 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 28, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

The Last Word

BYLINE: By SARAH FERRELL

SECTION: Section 7; Page 11; Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 244 words


It's hard not to giggle at a photograph of a tombstone in Paris, Tenn.,
inscribed with an off-the-hook telephone and the message "Jesus Called and My
Darling Sugarbabe Answered." The picture occurs early on in SCORING IN HEAVEN:
Gravestones and Cemetery Art of the American Sunbelt States (Aperture, $40) --
the title is taken from a bowler's epitaph -- a collection of more than 200
photographs by Lucinda Bunnen and Virginia Warren Smith. But you shouldn't
laugh. The monuments shown here commemorate, for the most part, such traditional
American values as pride in work and worldly achievement or devotion to God,
country or family. Consider the memorial to the twin sailors, buried at sea, who
died in 1945 at the age of 20, or the angel-topped tomb with the photograph of a
very young man in uniform and the inscription "Daddy / Our Beloved Father / He
Was Too Perfect to Live." The grave of a biker who died in 1977 in Vietnam,
which includes the motto "God Forgives, Outlaws Don't," is decorated with
fraternal graffiti and empty whisky bottles. Most touching are the simpler grave
sites. Many, particularly those in the poorer parts of the Southwest, are marked
with sun-bleached wooden crosses and adorned with homemade wreaths and plaster
statues of Jesus. These memorials are clearly fragile, themselves returning to
dust. It's good to have them so splendidly documented in this book -- "A Noble
Purpose Served Well," to quote another tombstone.

LOAD-DATE: July 28, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: A trucker's gravestone in Chickasha, Okla. (From 'Scoring in
Heaven")

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              54 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 28, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Film;
Oliver Stone, Under Fire Over the Killing of J.F.K.

BYLINE: By RICHARD BERNSTEIN

SECTION: Section 2; Page 9; Column 1; Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1931 words

DATELINE: NEW ORLEANS


Camelot Productions' research department is on the second floor of a shabby
former bus depot on Annunciation Street, a few minutes' drive from where Oliver
Stone is filming his controversial interpretation of the assassination of John
F. Kennedy. The full 26 volumes of the Warren Commission hearings occupy a metal
shelf alongside several books that see the President's assassination, on Nov.
22, 1963, as part of a conspiracy and the Warren report as a Government
cover-up. There is a videotape library; there are copies of Congressional
investigations, C.I.A. reports, Xeroxed magazine articles from 20 years ago.

Mr. Stone, the writer-director of "Platoon," "Born on the Fourth of July" and,
most recently, "The Doors," has suggested a visit to the research department.
His purpose is clear.

Months before release of his new movie, written by Mr. Stone and Zachary Sklar
-- indeed, well before filming is finished -- "JFK" has come under assault.
There have been articles in The Washington Post, Time, The Chicago Tribune and
The Times-Picayune of New Orleans, all arguing that Mr. Stone's film is going to
be based on what Time called "the far-out fringe" of conspiracy theories.

The theory, specifically, is that of Jim Garrison, the District Attorney of New
Orleans in the late 1960's who put a local businessman on trial in 1968 for
plotting with Lee Harvey Oswald and others to kill the President. (The jury
decided on a not-guilty verdict after less than an hour of deliberation.) Mr.
Garrison's hypothesis was "zany," The Washington Post has charged. The district
attorney himself, according to an article in The Times-Picayune, knew that his
case amounted to nothing, but he cynically pursued it to get publicity. In
short, the accusation is that Oliver Stone doesn't know what he is talking about
in his film, which stars Kevin Costner as Mr. Garrison, Gary Oldman as Lee
Harvey Oswald and Tommy Lee Jones as Clay Shaw, the accused businessman.

Mr. Stone has been fighting back, answering his critics in letters and articles.
And now, in New Orleans, he wants to show that his "JFK" does not spring
full-blown out of some paranoid, conspiracy-theory imagination. Every point,
every argument, every detail in the movie, he says, has been researched, can be
documented and is justified.

"I didn't want to make a movie of the Garrison book only," he said. "He is the
protagonist, but the book ends essentially in 1969, and I wanted to push the
movie into the new ground that was uncovered after 1969 and pre-'69 -- the
autopsies, the bullets, the work of other researchers. So, I've taken dramatic
license. It is not a true story per se.  It is not the Jim Garrison story. It is
a film called 'JFK.' It explores all the possible scenarios of why Kennedy was
killed, who killed him and why."

Mr. Stone notes what others have noted before him -- that rarely, if ever, has a
movie attracted such assault before anybody has seen it, even before most of it
had been filmed. Perhaps this is not surprising. For nearly 30 years, the
Kennedy assassination has provoked intense debate between those convinced that
Kennedy was killed by Lee Harvey Oswald acting alone and those who believe
Kennedy was killed as part of a conspiracy -- perhaps by agents of Fidel Castro,
maybe by anti-Castro Cubans.  Some have accumulated evidence supposedly
indicating that the Mafia was behind the murder.Others think it was the Central
Intelligence Agency, which, the theory goes, wanted to forestall an effort by
Kennedy to make peace with Castro and withdraw from Vietnam.

"What actually happens in the movie is that you see different scenarios,
different possible conclusions," Mr. Stone said, comparing the movie more to the
1951 Japanese classic "Rashomon," in which the same event is seen from several
points of view, than to a straightforward, unequivocal defense of any particular
theory. At the same time, however, Mr. Stone makes clear that he himself
strongly favors the conspiracy theory and rejects the Warren Commission
findings.

"If the movie is cut the way I think it's going to be cut, and if you are a
neutral person, I think you will leave the theater ready to think about things,
and, I hope, to rethink them, and maybe to go back and read some more and begin
to wonder about some of the givens, some of the sacred cows, some of the
official story," Mr. Stone said. "Because that's what I think the Warren
Commission is. It's America's official story."

The negative articles about "JFK" have largely been based on a draft of a
screenplay that, he says, has since been revised.  Mr. Stone is clearly worried
that the advance publicity could lead the public to form a negative opinion of
"JFK" before the film, budgeted at about $40 million, is finished.

He says that initially he accepted the conclusions of the Warren Commission and
doubted the conspiracy theories. In this sense, the film chronicles his own
reversal of belief.

"I believed that Lee Oswald shot the President," Mr. Stone said. "I had no
problem with that." But his view of the assassination changed as his view of
many things changed, beginning in the late 1960's after his tour of combat duty
in Vietnam. "I began basically to change the way I looked at the Government," he
said. "I stopped believing it." There was Watergate and the Pentagon papers.
Eventually, his skepticism extended to the official version of the Kennedy
assassination.

"This was compounded by the House assassination probes, which came up with the
idea that it was a conspiracy and that the Government had done a very shoddy job
of investigating it," he said. The reference was to the House Select Committee
on Assassinations, which concluded in 1976 after a long investigation that there
had likely been a conspiracy to kill Kennedy, though it identified no
conspirators. "All during the 1970's and 1980's," Mr. Stone said, "there are
these seismic shocks, let's say, and then you hear all kinds of weird evidence
coming in here and there, new autopsy reports, new forensic evidence. It just
drifted in, but we never got it all at once. Time kind of defeats discovery."

What made him focus seriously on the assassination was a 1988 book, "On the
Trail of the Assassins" by Mr. Garrison -- the only person ever to put someone
on trial for conspiracy to murder President Kennedy.  The defendant, Clay Shaw,
according to some witnesses, had been overheard discussing a plan to kill
Kennedy with Oswald and another alleged plotter, David Ferrie.

Mr. Garrison believed that the plotters were anti-Castro activists angry at
Kennedy for compromises he made after the Cuban missile crisis. He also believed
that the Government covered up the truth and, as he built his case, promised he
would solve all of the mysteries about the Kennedy murder. But witnesses were
discredited in the trial, and Shaw was quickly acquitted. Mr. Garrison's
conspiracy theory lost whatever following it may have had. Mr. Stone allows
that, at first, he also put little credence in Mr. Garrison, finding him "a
Southern buffoon, a Huey Long type." Eventually, however, he chose to make Mr.
Garrison and his unsuccessful investigation the centerpiece of his movie.

"I got 'On the Trail of the Assassins,' and I purchased the movie rights for it
immediately," Mr. Stone said. "It read like a Dashiell Hammett whodunit. It
starts out as a bit of a seedy crime with small traces, and then the detective
gumshoe district attorney follows the trail, and the trail widens and widens,
and before you know it, it's no longer a small-town affair. That seemed to me
the kernel of a very powerful movie. The theme is more why Kennedy was killed
rather than who did it. It's a whydunit."

But, it is a whydunit that many have long felt was a travesty. Writing in The
Times-Picayune, Rosemary James, who covered the Shaw trial for the newspaper,
asserted in a recent article that Mr. Garrison's investigation was a cynical
ploy by which he ruined the career of a man he knew to be innocent to further
his own ambitions. "Now," Ms. James concludes, speaking of Oliver Stone, "comes
a gullible from La-La Land . . . who wants to regurgitate all of that garbage."
Mr. Garrison was unavailable to respond to a request to reply to Ms. James's
assertions.

Ms. James is joined by other critics, most notably George Lardner, the national
security writer for The Washington Post. In an article in May, Mr. Lardner
challenged several elements in Mr. Stone's movie based on the leaked first draft
of the screenplay. He points out, for example, that one of Mr. Garrison's key
witnesses, an insurance salesman named Perry Russo, who claimed to have
identified Shaw and Oswald together, is left out of the script entirely --
presumably, Mr. Lardner suggests, because Mr. Russo's testimony seemed
ridiculous when it turned out to have been elicited by a hypnotist.

Mr. Lardner dwells on another figure in the alleged conspiracy, David Ferrie,
who died after being questioned by Mr. Garrison -- but before the Shaw trial. In
the film, Ferrie is murdered by two imaginary Cuban anti-Castro activists named
Bull and Indian -- who are later spotted in the Texas Book Depository in Dallas,
from which Oswald, according to the Warren Commision, shot the President. Mr.
Lardner, who interviewed Ferrie the night of his death, says in his article that
the coroner's report indicated that Ferrie died of natural causes.

Mr. Stone acknowledges that there is no character in the movie named Perry
Russo, but not because his testimony was embarrassing to the case. A composite
character, Mr. Stone says, combines Russo with two others who claimed to have
seen the supposed plotters together. As for Bull and Indian, he says: "There is
a long history of Lee Oswald's association with the shadiest Cubans, the ones
who fought Castro." Mr. Stone says that he has filmed a black-and-white scene
that presents the existence of people like Bull and Indian as one hypothesis
among others. But, he adds, "JFK" has not been edited.  "Who knows if it will
even be in the final movie?"

To Mr. Stone the mood of the early 1960's in New Orleans makes a conspiracy to
kill Kennedy ever more plausible. New Orleans was the home not only of fanatical
right-wing groups but also a center of anti-Communist Cuban activity.  There are
many in New Orleans who will describe the fury felt by local Cubans after
Kennedy prohibited an attack on the island from American territory.

"It was a time of conspiracy and tension, and murder was in the air," Mr. Stone
said. "Assassinations were prevalent. De Gaulle was almost hit three or four
times with machine guns at roadblocks. Lumumba got knocked off. Diem got knocked
off. You have to live in that period. I don't find it that difficult to accept
that conspiracy was in the air."

Back at Camelot Productions' research department is a June 1967 article in The
New Republic by Fred Powledge, a former reporter for The New York Times, who was
in New Orleans at the time of the Garrison investigation. The article reflects
the seductive power of conspiracy theories, the ideas that can never be proved
but can never be fully disproved either.

At first Mr. Powledge is skeptical of Mr. Garrison, and he says he believed the
Warren Commission conclusions. But, in his last paragraph, he says: "Now,
against my will and my better judgment, I was powerfully tempted to believe Jim
Garrison." Some time next year, "JFK" will be on movie screens across America,
and audiences can decide for themselves whether to believe Oliver Stone.

NAME: Oliver Stone

LOAD-DATE: July 28, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Oliver Stone, second from left, directing "JFK" (Matt Anderson
for The New York Times); above right, a scene from the film's re-creation of the
assassination (Dallas Morning News/Gamma Liaison) (pg. 9); New Orleans District
Attorney Jim Garrison at a 1967 news conference about impending arrests in the
assassination conspiracy (Associated Press)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              55 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 28, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

VIETNAM MEMORIAL;
Modifying A Designer's Intent

SECTION: Section 2; Page 4; Column 3; Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 217 words


To the Editor:

Vincent Scully's discussion of Maya Lin's Vietnam Memorial ["The Terrible Art of
Designing a War Memorial," July 14] brought a profound sense of recollection of
that extraordinary place. However, his description of how Ms. Lin "leads us
gently into the ground, enveloping us slowly in the war" is more a description
of how we experience the memorial rather than what the designer intended.

The memorial was meant to be approached from all sides, even from atop the
granite slabs. Now, a post-and-chain barrier prevents us from approaching it
from the lawn to the central vertex, the symbolic place where the war begins and
ends. Extensions of paths force us to take a structured journey. A cobbled path
running along the length disrupts the concept of black granite slicing directly
into the grassed earth. All these elements are at odds with the elegance and
clarity of the original design.

There is no question of the success of the Vietnam Memorial, but one wonders
what might have been if the National Park Service allowed Ms. Lin to come up
with her own solutions to the problems of the unexpected popularity of the
place.

FELICE FRANKEL
Longmeadow, Mass.

The writer is co-author of the book "Modern Landscape Architecture: Redefining
the Garden."

LOAD-DATE: July 28, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              56 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 28, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Kathleen Callo to Wed in September

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2; Page 44; Column 1; Society Desk

LENGTH: 149 words


Kathleen Elizabeth Callo, a correspondent for Reuters in Vietnam, and Peter
Wilson-Smith, a journalist in London, plan to marry in September in New York.

Miss Callo, 32 years old, is a daughter of Susan Callo of New Paltz, N.Y., and
Joseph F. Callo of Forest Hills, Queens, who have announced her engagement. The
prospective bridegroom, 36, is a son of Mr. and Mrs. John Wilson-Smith of
Nayland, Suffolk, England.

Miss Callo graduated from the State University at Purchase and received a
master's degree in journalism from Columbia University. Her father is a
corporate communications consultant.

Mr. Wilson-Smith, a graduate of Oxford University, was until recently the
business and financial editor of The Independent on Sunday in London. His
father, who is retired, was the director general of the Liverpool Cotton
Association and a major in the British Royal Artillery.

LOAD-DATE: July 28, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Kathleen Callo and Peter Wilson-Smith

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              57 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 28, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

For Families of M.I.A.'s, New Hope, Old Despair

BYLINE: By SETH MYDANS,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 1; Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 1560 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES, July 27


Last year, 17 years after her husband, an Air Force pilot, disappeared without a
trace over Hanoi, Barbara Cleary O'Connor received from Vietnam a rubbing of his
dog tag, complete with his serial number and blood type.

"It was a shock," said Mrs. O'Connor, who lives in Wayland, Mass. "It meant
there was some information about him. I truly thought he had not survived. I
never would have remarried if I had thought there was the slightest glimmer of
hope."

Nothing further came of that brief glimmer. But now again, as a photograph that
is said to show three other missing American servicemen in Vietnam is drawing
public attention, Mrs. O'Connor said, "You can't help but think: 'Oh, my gosh.
What if?' "

Old Wounds Reopened





For the parents, wives, siblings and children of the 2,273 American servicemen
still unaccounted for in the Vietnam War, every new report of a sighting, every
new promise by the Government in Hanoi, every new delivery of boxes of bone
fragments -- some of them human, some animal -- stirs old pains and fresh
disappointments.

These feelings are also kept alive by cottage industries in both the United
States and Southeast Asia that collect or manufacture photographs, packets of
remains and reports of sightings of servicemen missing in action.

The most recent center of attention is the photograph of three middle-aged men
who appear to be holding a placard with a date and cryptic lettering. Three
families have come forward to assert that these men are their missing relatives.
But the Pentagon says that while analysis of the photograph was inconclusive the
biographical data that accompanied it were false and that the picture itself had
passed through the hands of known fakers.

On Friday, Brent Scowcroft, the President's national security adviser, said
there was no credible evidence that Vietnam still held any American servicemen.

This weekend a Deputy Assistant Secretary of State, Kenneth Quinn, is meeting
with officials in Vietnam and Laos to seek information about missing fliers; the
State Department would not give any other information about his mission.

The source of the photograph is uncertain, but it apparently passed through the
hands of one of several American groups that have played on the emotions of
missing servicemen's families with urgent fund-raising appeals.

"If I cannot raise $13,671.71 by October 31," reads an appeal, this one in 1986
by Operation Rescue, a group headed by a retired Air Force lieutenant colonel,
Jack Bailey, "vital intelligence gathering cannot continue. And an American
serviceman will die in the jungles of Vietnam."

Another appeal, by the Skyhook II Project, says: "We're close to making contact
with an American P.O.W. who has been alone since his fellow prisoner died of
natural causes less than a year ago. That effort could fail for lack of funds.
Please be as generous as you can." The head of that project is John
LeBoutillier, a Republican Congressman from Long Island from 1981 to 1983.

Both appeals were quoted, among many others, in a 1987 analysis by the Federal
Defense Intelligence Agency, which concluded, "For all their 'proof' and the
untold millions of dollars raised, none of these groups or individuals have yet
to furnish even the slightest shred of evidence of P.W.'s, much less secure the
return of a living American captive."

Seeking the Mafia's Help





Victimized by groups like these, Maureen Dunn of Randolph, Mass., said she was
once persuaded to travel to New York for a fruitless meeting with members of the
Mafia in search of information about her husband, a Navy pilot who was shot down
in 1968. There is no evidence the Mafia has been extensively involved in schemes
involving missing servicemen.

Another time, Mrs. Dunn said, she traveled in great secrecy to Canada, where she
waited in vain in the back pew of an empty church for a promised meeting with a
man who had said he had information for her.

Now, as an active member of the National League of Families of American
Prisoners and Missing in Southeast Asia, she said, "I must receive 5 to 10
dog-tag stories a week. It's a cottage industry, let me tell you, and it's a
terrible emotional roller coaster for the families."

The league, a lobbying group, works with the American Government to seek the
return of any remaining live prisoners or their remains and to obtain a full
accounting of the missing.

Hopes continue to be fueled by the sheer number of Americans believed to have
been captured, by continuing reports of live sightings and by the fact that the
Vietnamese Government has concealed evidence of missing Americans.

For Mrs. O'Connor, the unsettling stirring of hope came when a Vietnamese
refugee presented the rubbing of her husband's dog tag to American officials
with the notion of trading it for resettlement in the United States. Since then,
she said, half a dozen other refugees have come forward with similar rubbings,
but with no evidence that her husband, Major Peter Cleary, is alive.

One of the most colorful rescue schemes was launched in 1983 by James (Bo)
Gritz, a retired Army lieutenant colonel who led a band of mercenaries into
Laos, where they were promptly ambushed and fled.

George Brooks of New Windsor, N.Y., the father of a missing Navy pilot,
remembers that mission well. He said he contributed about $30,000, including his
son's insurance money, to Mr. Gritz, whom he called "a very persuasive speaker."

In part, he said, he acted out of a frustration that is shared by many families
with what they see as the Government's slow pace, political swings and
occasional confusion or misinformation in individual cases.

Kate Rothacker of Mission Viejo, Calif., said that perhaps because her brother
had been shot down during a secret mission for the Air Force the Government told
her family that he was dead. The family later discovered that Pentagon records
showed a clear possibility that he had parachuted to safety.

A Political Tool>





"It's real hard to describe the low that you feel at the deception that they
pulled," Ms. Rothacker said.

At one point President Richard M. Nixon tried to use the families of missing
servicemen as a political counterweight to antiwar protests. For example, he
invited them to the White House, where they were serenaded with "The Impossible
Dream" and praised for their patriotism.

President Jimmy Carter, emphasizing normalization of relations with Vietnam,
declared the missing-in-action cases closed and transferred all but one symbolic
name to the status of killed in action.

Since President Ronald Reagan took office, the Government has taken a more
active approach to the issue, and more than 100 Government officials are now
assigned to the search for answers. But the Government has had to deal with
shifts of policy on the Vietnamese side, which has parceled out remains over the
years as one of its few bargaining tools in the slow movement toward
re-establishing diplomatic relations.

The last live American to emerge from captivity in Vietnam since the release of
American prisoners in 1973 was Robert Garwood, a Marine private who had deserted
and who asked to return home in 1979, four years after the end of the war.

He was court-martialed, convicted for collaborating with the enemy and for
assaulting another American prisoner, and received a dishonorable discharge.

Since the war ended in 1975, the Pentagon has received 1,483 firsthand reports
of live sightings of possible Americans in Indochina, said Comdr. Edward
Lundquist, a spokesman for the Defense Department. Only about a quarter of these
have been determined to be fakes; 1,008 have been definitely identified as
Americans, including missionaries and jailed civilians but not any of the
missing servicemen. Three hundred of the sightings were of Private Garwood.

Tired of Waiting





As of now, 103 first-hand reports of sightings remain unresolved, Comander
Lundquist said, including 45 involving an American in captivity and 58 involving
an American said to be living freely somewhere in Vietnam, Laos or Cambodia.

Two of the live sighting reports, in 1984 and 1986, seemed to involve Clarence
N. Driver, a retired Air Force major who was flying for Air America when he was
shot down over Laos on March 7, 1973. But his wife, Allene, who is now 66 years
old and has never remarried, has grown tired of hoping.

"I feel that unless they are going to do something about it, I'd rather they
don't tell us anything any more," she said. "It gets your hopes up and then
nothing happens."

But as in a growing number of families, the younger generation is beginning now
to take over the struggle because, as Mrs. Driver's 34-year-old daughter,
Sharon, said, "We realize that our moms are tired and it's our turn to try to
keep that spark alive."

Miss Driver said news coverage of the recent air war in the Persian Gulf revived
their memories and sharpened their feelings of loss.

"Every time a plane was shot down, wow, it just brought back memories of the day
when I was 16 and my father's plane was shot down," she said. "It's like this.
Just pretend you're talking to someone you love very much on the telephone and
that person says, 'Hold on a second; I'll be right back,' and they never come
back."

LOAD-DATE: July 28, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Kate Rothacker of Mission Viejo, Calif., with her daughter,
Lisa. Ms. Rothacker says she believes that her brother is still alive in
Southeast Asia. Behind her is the P.O.W.-M.IA. flag, which she flies each day
(Bart Bartholomew for the New York Times) (pg. 1); "I truly thought he had not
survived," said Barbara Cleary O'Connor, whose first husband, Peter, was shot
down over Hanoi. " I never would have remarried if I had thought there was the
slightest glimmer of hope."; Maureen Dunn of Randolph, Mass., left, at a news
conference after her son, Joseph, center, and, Daniel Gallagher, right, returned
from a trip to China to seek information about her husband, Joseph, who was shot
down in 1968. Mrs. Dunn is a member of the National League of Families of
American Prisoners and Missing in Southeast Asia, and continues to search for
information about her husband. (Photographs by Rick Friedman for The New York
Times) (pg. 20)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              58 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 28, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

The Nation;
Tying a Yellow Ribbon 'Round the Election

BYLINE: By ROBIN TONER

SECTION: Section 4; Page 3; Column 1; Week In Review Desk

LENGTH: 1124 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


THE nation's capital lives from news cycle to news cycle action followed by
reaction followed by fallout. For many, the military victory in the Persian Gulf
is an old story, quickly superseded by the continued friction with Saddam
Hussein, the worries over Iraqi weapons capabilities, all the troublesome
aftermath of the war.

But for the public at large, the war remains a powerful memory, and it is likely
to have lasting political consequences. One year after the Iraqi invasion of
Kuwait, President Bush strides the scene as a tested Commander in Chief with
extraordinary approval ratings. Democrats are only beginning to stir from a
crippling, months-long defensive crouch. The Presidential campaign is lurching
to one of its latest starts in years. And in towns and cities across America,
there are still banners flying that welcome soldiers home, still local
celebrations of victory in the gulf, still yellow ribbons and placards
declaring, "We support our troops." The monuments to the war are everywhere in
American politics.

To be sure, the public opinion polls show a few signs of reappraisal. The
general euphoria about the direction of the country just after the war has
eased, reverting to a more pessimistic, pre-war level. There is concern about
the aftermath of the war: A poll released last week showed that the percentage
of adults who considered the war a "great victory" had dropped to 62 percent,
down from 84 percent in March. Still, 80 percent say they believe America "did
the right thing" in the gulf, according to the survey by the Americans Talk
Issues Foundation.

Worrying About Saddam

"The war is precious to people and I don't think they're going to give it up,"
said Stanley B. Greenberg, one of the polltakers.  Senator Bob Kerrey, a
Nebraska Democrat who voted against the resolution to use force in the gulf,
agreed: "There are a large number of Americans concerned about Saddam still in
power, but that doesn't detract from their feeling that the war was a tremendous
military success, and they feel good about it."

There are numerous theories about the psychic importance of the war in the gulf,
many revolving around a yearning for redemption after Vietnam.

Others, like Harrison Hickman, a Democratic polltaker argue, "The country needed
a success, and it wasn't a pivot so much off of Vietnam as off the clear end of
the go-go 80's." Whatever the cause, the war has taken its place in popular
culture as a transcendent, heroic moment in national life, some analysts say,
and Democrats expect endless replays of it in the 1992 campaign.

The war clearly was a transforming experience for Mr. Bush. "I don't think he'll
ever hear the word wimp again," said Fred Meyer, the Texas Republican chairman.
Somewhat more delicately, Bob Teeter, Mr. Bush's polltaker, said: "The public
got to watch him handle the most difficult problem any President can handle,
every day, almost on a play by play basis. It sharpened, it hardened, it firmed
a definition of him as a leader."

Most important, it cast him as Commander in Chief, rather than as the
beleaguered head of a country in recession. Democrats can play many sad
variations of "what if" these days, and most begin with the Iraqi invasion of
Kuwait last August as the turning point.  Remember, they say, that Mr. Bush a
year ago had just broken his promise to forswear new taxes, faced outright
rebellion on his party's right, seemed bogged down in a morass of domestic and
budgetary woes as the nation was heading into a recession.

Even today, as Democrats struggle to turn the debate to domestic issues, Mr.
Bush clings to his role as head of state, traveling abroad and focusing on
trouble spots from the Middle East to the Soviet Union.

The war transformed the Democrats as well: It froze them for months. With half a
million troops arrayed in the gulf against Saddam Hussein, it was not an
auspicious moment to mount a partisan challenge to the President. Moreover, most
Congressional Democrats opposed the resolution authorizing the use of force in
the gulf, which put them on the defensive. After the war, many Democrats seemed
dispirited, stunned into inaction by the President's popularity. "The war
essentially has delayed the active pursuit of the Presidency by Democrats for
almost a year," said Thomas Donilon, a veteran Democratic Presidential campaign
strategist.

Such a delay can have important consequences, Mr. Donilon said. In the summer of
1983, Ronald Reagan was taking his hits from Walter F. Mondale and a bevy of
other Democratic hopefuls. Until only recently, one had to look hard for signs
of an imminent Presidential campaign, leaving Mr. Bush above the fray. The late
start also means that many of the Democratic hopefuls, who are mostly novices in
Presidential politics, will have to find their footing, their finances and their
voice very quickly.

Case for Change

"His rationale is, 'I'm Commander in Chief, I've won a war, we're coming out of
recession, there's no compelling case for change, and they're risky,' " Mr.
Donilon said. "The other side is, there is a compelling case for change."

Many Democrats have pinned their hopes on the domestic concerns of the middle
class. "George Bush seems to have an economic recovery program for the Soviet
Union, Eastern Europe and Kuwait, and I think a lot of Americans are saying we
need an economic development plan for America," said Ronald H. Brown, the
Democratic national chairman.

Kevin Phillips, the conservative analyst who predicted a tide of economic
populism after the 1980's, argues that these trends still exist, but have been
suppressed by the war, just as Watergate suppressed the conservative tides in
the mid-70's. Mr. Phillips said these issues of economic equity will inevitably
rise in the 1990's.

But Republicans seem unlikely to let the debate shift away from foreign policy
for very long.

"It's clearly there in the public's mind," said Senator Phil Gramm of Texas, the
chairman of the National Republican Senatorial Committee. "Politicians don't
create images and issues, they discover them. You ask my mama about George Bush
and she's going to bring up the war." Mr. Gramm also argues that a vote against
the use of force resolution will be "a silver bullet" in Senate races next year.

Mr. Bush's polltakers speak with simple confidence of the power of the war in
the public's consciousness. Regardless of the aftermath, Mr. Teeter said: "There
was both a principle and a favorable result. We did what we said we were going
to do. It was a principle worth going to war for." For now, the "welcome home"
banners still fly. And the Democrats are still struggling to adjust to a
politics remade by the Persian Gulf.

LOAD-DATE: July 28, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: A display of patriotism at a house in Huntington, L.I., earlier
this year. (Barton Silverman/The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              59 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 28, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Swiss Protester Fighting for World's Forests

BYLINE: By STEPHEN KINZER,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 6; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 553 words

DATELINE: LONDON


By climbing to the top of a lamppost in front of Westminster Abbey and chaining
himself there during the recent economic summit conference, a Swiss protester
named Bruno Manser has further enhanced his status as Europe's newest
environmental celebrity.

Mr. Manser sat at his perch for 90 minutes before a poice crane arrived. He was
cut loose, arrested and brought to a nearby police station.

"They sat me down at a table and asked me what I was protesting against," Mr.
Manser recalled the next morning. "I pointed to the table and said: 'This is
what I am protesting against. I am protesting the fact that you have this table
made out of wood from the rain forest.' "

Mr. Manser, an artist and naturalist by inclination, was working as a shepherd
in the Swiss Alps when he decided to find a place as remote from modern
civiliation as possible. In 1984 he made his way to Borneo, penetrated the
ancient rain forest, and made contact with a small aboriginal tribe, the Penan.
He immersed himself in their culture and lived among them for six and a half
years.

"I didn't know about the logging problems when I went there," he said in an
interview. "I didn't go as an environmentalist or an activist. I went as a lover
of nature, to be in the wild, to draw pictures of birds and plants and animals.

"I am doing this as a question of humanity. I realize that if these people do
not get help from outside, they will become extinct as a culture. They will lose
their economy, and with it their freedom."

Mr. Manser says that in his years in the Sarawak region of Borneo, more than
half of the forest where native people live was destroyed by lumber companies.
An international timber organization has estimated that the entire forest will
be gone within a decade.

As a form of protest, native people and their supporters have periodically
blockaded roads leading into the forest. The Malaysian Government has sent
soldiers there to keep the roads open.

In Kuala Lumpur, the Malaysian capital, officials of the two Government agencies
that oversee logging -- the Ministry of Primary Industries and the Malaysian
Timber Industry Board -- said no one was available for comment on Mr. Manser's
activities.

In the past, the authorities have said that logging in Sarawak provides a
livelihood for more than 50,000 people, and that the loggers' future must be
considered as well as that of aboriginal tribes.

The exploitation of pristine forests is increasingly common in Southeast Asia.
Many countries, ranging from impoverished Vietnam to relatively prosperous
Indonesia, earn valuable hard currency from timber exports.

Sitting under a tree in a London park after his release from custody, Mr. Manser
spoke about his experiences in the wilderness and about the native people whose
cause he has taken up.

"I had the experience of a society that was still untouched by the outside
world," he said. "It was a mixture of paradise and hell. It was very romantic,
but the reality was very hard."

"Of course, you suffer and ask yourself why you are doing this. You are always
wet, maybe you are far away, it is night, you have nothing to eat and no way to
make a fire. You can't be lazy in a place like that. The problem is just to get
your daily food. When there is enough food, you are happy."

LOAD-DATE: July 28, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Map: Malaysia indicating Sarawak

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              60 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 28, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 827 words



International 3-13

New steps to topple Saddam Hussein are the aim of consultations between the
United States and its allies. But holding together the international alliance
that defeated Iraq is proving to be a formidable task. Page 1

Baghdad is becoming normal again, almost six months after the end of the war.
Traffic lights are working and air-conditioners hum in the heat. With the
recovery, Saddam Hussein's Government digging in as well.  12

Britain exported radioactive material to Baghdad 13

A major issue in U.S.-Soviet relations is how the Bush Administration will
answer a basic question: Are American interests best served by a united Soviet
Union or a group of smaller states built from its republics? 1

Economy sulks as Gorbachev enjoys his encore 10

Americans share Soviet economic pessimism 10

Europeans try again to calm Yugoslavs 3

Eastern Europeans are seeing Paris this summer, most for the first time. It
doesn't matter that they don't have much money to spend. For tens of thousands,
what really counts is that they are no longer so different. 1

Swiss protester fighting for world's forests 6

The mood of West Bank Palestinians is one of bitterness, dejection and
frustration about the American-led peace process. Many fear they will be
isolated again in trying to gain an independent state.  8

Price rises rule postwar Cairo's scuttlebutt 8

Support for Japan's Finance Minister came from an unusual source: Treasury
Secretary Nicholas Brady, who backed the minister in comments about the rising
furor over the Japanese stock market scandal. 3

Beijing cracks down on Mongol dissidents 11

 National 14-22

Job seekers in three American cities, New Bedford, Mass., Iowa City and Tyler,
Tex., are encountering trends that are more unsettling than the usual lag
between economic recovery and unemployment rates. 1

Court papers on a huge seized bank, the Bank of Credit and Commerce
International, allege that the bank was involved in various shady deals,
including smuggling coffee, hushing witnesses and selling helicopters. 1

The servicemen missing in Vietnam are receiving renewed attention because of a
photograph said to show three men lost in the war. For the families, any bit of
news stirs old pains and fresh disappointments. 1

Black elected officials in Milwaukee plan to call for an investigation of the
police department, which has been embarrassed by the way it handled complaints
in May about a man now accused of mass murder. 14

Rights group says Bush's approach to rights bill is lacking 14

Black journalists fear setback from recession 15

Two major decisions by the F.D.A. seem to show that it is willing to relax its
strict requirement that drugs be proved effective before being sold. The new
position has dismayed some and delighted others.  22

A request to remove the feeding tube of a woman who had been unconscious since
1987 will be heard in Indiana, even though the woman has died. The trial could
provide legal guidance in an especially thorny issue. 14

First child treated with gene therapy said to be thriving 20

 Regional 23-31

Political memo: The redistricting of the New York City Council opened wounds
between black and Hispanic politicians. In the struggle to share power with
whites, minority groups frequently fought each other. 1

Redrawing of districts results in dissent among candidates 27

Political Talk: Alarums about Athens and Troy 28

A real-estate office was firebombed in Canarsie for the second time in less than
two weeks. Before the first incident, a caller told an employee that the agency
would be punished for selling to blacks. 25

The police presence in Central Park has been increased because of the related
shootings there. But they have few leads -- and the gay men who are believed to
be the suspect's targets are staying away. 25

Correction captain accuses supervisor of harassing her 23

Reporter's notebook: The trial of the man accused of starting the fire that
killed 87 people at a Bronx social club is unfolding slowly and eerily. The
trial's six days so far have been a long roll call for the dead. 26

Owner of Happy Land building faces foreclosures 26

Man kills wife with hammer and slits his wrists, police say 24

Informer insists bid-rigging testimony was truth 29

Some people call them Jet Skis, the jet-pump propelled craft that make noise and
dart through waters everywhere. But at Lake George, people are divided on
whether to call them the new scourge of summer.  24

No car flips this summer for child in Fresh Air Fund 28

Hospitals flooded with calls on HIV-infected doctor 27

92d Street Y tries to raise $40 million 23

 Obituaries 30

Earl Attlee, a founder of Britain's Social Demoratic Party

 Arts/Reviews 45

 Campus Life 35

 Fashion 38-39

 Life Style 36

 Pastimes 46-47

 Weddings 42-44

LOAD-DATE: July 28, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              61 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 28, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THEATER;
When 'The Nerd' Moves In

BYLINE: By ALVIN KLEIN

SECTION: Section 12CN; Page 9; Column 1; Connecticut Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 526 words


NOW that "nerd" has come into the mainstream of language, a pressing question
comes up. Is it necessary to spend an evening with one?

The brazenly titled and shoddily constructed play "The Nerd" by Larry Shue
raises other questions as well. If someone saves your life, does that mean he
has a right to ruin it? How much do you owe him? Must you also put up with him?

Mr. Shue's nerd, an ostensible lifesaver in Vietnam, arrives at -- no, moves
into -- the home of his once wounded and unconscious buddy, now an architect.
The first act is actually easy to take; it's mostly sustained silliness. The
second is wearying, and doesn't offer an answer to anybody's questions. Instead,
Mr. Shue provides a poor plot twist that is supposed to pass as a payoff.

The play is shrewd as far as it can make an audience feel superior to it. But
unlike real farce, it trades on sheer implausibility. People are not being
revealed in their folly but, rather, reduced to inanity. "The Nerd" is about
smart people doing stupid things, but not how, or why.

The Phoenix production is a handy example of how a play can be staged (and in a
couple of cases, acted) for more than it is worth, which causes one to wonder
why it was selected by the Phoenix Theater Company in the first place. In
compensation, Sydnie Grosberg has over-directed in a valiant attempt to get at
the comedy that is not intelligently there.

On the goony surface, Branislav Tomich's performance is all it is supposed to
be. His nerd is a social catastrophe who causes others to run off screaming or,
in frustration, to break saucers. In one dictionary a nerd is slang, meaning
contemptibly dull, unsophisticated and ineffective; but in up-to-date usage, a
nerd is also bookish: the sort of kid, say, who gets high marks in school but is
otherwise inept. In everchanging slang, the "stupid" connotation of nerd seems
to have been displaced, which could -- a ghastly thought -- spawn a series of
semantic-based sequels to Mr. Shue's play with titles like "The Dweeb" or "The
Wimp."

Perhaps in sheer desperation, it is stretching a point to perceive just that
subtle, inherent, perhaps latent braininess in Mr. Tomich's performance. In
either case, he is a nerd with a difference beyond dopiness.

Conversely, the actors in other roles are more than exasperated, but less than
efficient. These include the ingenuous architect who takes the nerd in; his love
interest, a weather forecaster; an unctuous client; his son, who runs in and out
of doors screaming, and a blase drama critic who hangs around drinking bourbon
and making wisecracks.

An exception was Adrienne Doucette, now replaced. She played, and wickedly, the
client's overwrought wife, the one who breaks saucers.

"The Nerd," produced by the Phoenix Theater Company at the Performing Arts
Center of the State University of New York at Purchase. 914-251-6200.
Performances at the Abbott Kaplan Theater in rotating repertory with "A Day in
Hollywood/A Night in the Ukraine" and "Educating Rita" through Sunday. Remaining
performances of "The Nerd" are today at 5 P.M., Tuesday and Fridy at 8 P.M. and
Saturday at 2 P.M.

LOAD-DATE: July 28, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Branislav Tomich, left, with Paul Carlin in scene from "The
Nerd."

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              62 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 28, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THEATER;
When 'The Nerd' Moves In

BYLINE: By ALVIN KLEIN

SECTION: Section 12WC; Page 17; Column 1; Westchester Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 527 words

DATELINE: PURCHASE


NOW that "nerd" has come into the mainstream of language, a pressing question
comes up. Is it necessary to spend an evening with one?

The brazenly titled and shoddily constructed play "The Nerd" by Larry Shue
raises other questions as well. If someone saves your life, does that mean he
has a right to ruin it? How much do you owe him? Must you also put up with him?

Mr. Shue's nerd, an ostensible lifesaver in Vietnam, arrives at -- no, moves
into -- the home of his once wounded and unconscious buddy, now an architect.
The first act is actually easy to take; it is mostly sustained silliness. The
second is wearying, and doesn't offer an answer to anybody's questions. Instead,
Mr. Shue provides a poor plot twist that is supposed to pass as a payoff.

The play is shrewd as far as it can make an audience feel superior to it. But
unlike real farce, it trades on sheer implausibility. People are not being
revealed in their folly but, rather, reduced to inanity. "The Nerd" is about
smart people doing stupid things, but not how, or why.

The Phoenix production is a handy example of how a play can be staged (and in a
couple of cases, acted) for more than it is worth, which causes one to wonder
why it was selected by the Phoenix Theater Company in the first place. In
compensation, Sydnie Grosberg has over-directed in a valiant attempt to get at
the comedy that is not intelligently there.

On the goony surface, Branislav Tomich's performance is all it is supposed to
be. His nerd is a social catastrophe who causes others to run off screaming or,
in frustration, to break saucers. In one dictionary, nerd is slang, meaning
contemptibly dull, unsophisticated and ineffective; but in up-to-date usage,, a
nerd is also bookish: the sort of kid, say, who gets high marks in school but is
otherwise inept. In everchanging slang, the "stupid" connotation of nerd seems
to have been displaced. This could -- a ghastly thought -- spawn a series of
semantic-based sequels to Mr. Shue's play with titles like "The Dweeb" or "The
Wimp."

Perhaps in sheer desperation, it is stretching a point to perceive just that
subtle, inherent, perhaps latent braininess in Mr. Tomich's performance. In
either case, he is a nerd with a difference beyond dopiness.

Conversely, the actors in other roles are more than exasperated, but less than
efficient. These include the ingenuous architect who takes the nerd in; his love
interest, a weather forecaster; an unctuous client; his son, who runs in and out
of doors screaming, and a blase drama critic who hangs around drinking bourbon
and making wisecracks.

An exception was Adrienne Doucette, now replaced. She played, and wickedly, the
client's overwrought wife, the one who breaks saucers.

"The Nerd," produced by the Phoenix Theater Company at the Performing Arts
Center of the State University of New York at Purchase. Performances at the
Abbott Kaplan Theater in rotating repertory with "A Day in Hollywood/A Night in
the Ukraine" and "Educating Rita" through Sunday. Remaining performances of "The
Nerd" are today at 5 P.M., Tuesday and Fridy at 8 P.M. and Saturday at 2 P.M.
Box office: 251-6200.

LOAD-DATE: July 28, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Branislav Tomich, left, with Paul Carlin in scene from "The
Nerd."

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              63 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 29, 1991, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Washington at Work;
Senator Who Hunted Bank Scandal Is Watching Doubters Take His Path

BYLINE: By MARTIN TOLCHIN,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 10; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1546 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 28


Alone among the 535 members of Congress, and despite the hostility of Federal
law-enforcement officials, Senator John Forbes Kerry has spent the last three
years investigating what has become the largest bank scandal in history.

"Law-enforcement authorities looked the other way," the Massachusetts Democrat
said in an interview last week about his investigation of the Bank of Credit and
Commerce International. "The Justice Department put roadblocks in our path."

"We turned over significant information over two years ago," Mr. Kerry said,
adding that nothing happened. "We tried to have certain witnesses deposed and
they said, 'Don't do it.' We tried to have hearings, and they said, 'We will not
testify, and we will not make so-and-so available to you.' "

Now that B.C.C.I. has been closed by financial regulators in seven countries,
Attorney General Dick Thornburgh has had to answer charges that his department
failed to act. Robert S. Mueller 3d, head of the Justice Department's criminal
division, acknowledged in an interview that the department thwarted the Kerry
investigation, but said officials feared that cooperating with the Senator would
compromise their own investigation.

Challenging Icons

With his lanky frame and boyish manner, the 47-year-old Senator seems an
unusually casual denizen of Capitol Hill. But there is nothing casual about Mr.
Kerry's pursuit of this issue. His single-mindedness has raised the eyebrows of
some colleagues, who worry that he might smash Democratic icons in his eagerness
to make headlines.

In 1988 it was the Senator's investigation that first disclosed that Gen. Manuel
Antonio Noriega, the former Panamanian dictator, had deposited $20 million in
B.C.C.I. That year the Senator's investigators also gave the Justice Department
evidence that the bank had engaged in international money laundering. And in
1990, the Senator said, his investigation established the link between B.C.C.I.
and the big Washington-area financial institution it secretly owned, First
American Bank.

Moreover, it was the Senator's top aide who persuaded Robert Morgenthau, the
Manhattan District Attorney, to begin an investigation of the bank in 1989.

"I'm a stubborn person and, I think, a passionate person," said Mr. Kerry, who
is in his second term in the Senate. "When I was a prosecutor in Middlesex
County, trying murders and rapes, or trying to reform the system, some people
said I was too intense."

Stumbled Across Bank

He was passionate, too, as an organizer of Vietnam Veterans Against the War,
which first brought him national attention, in 1971.

Wounded three times in Vietnam, Mr. Kerry, a Navy lieutenant who commanded
patrol boats in the Mekong Delta, was awarded the Bronze Star, Silver Star and
three purple hearts. There were also psychological scars. "The years when I came
back and worked hard against the war served as an opportunity to express a lot
of my anger," he said.

Mr. Kerry stumbled across the bank during an investigation into international
drug trafficking he had begun in 1987 as chairman of the Senate Foreign
Relations Subcommittee on Terrorism, Narcotics and International Operations. In
February 1988, Amjad Awan, a Pakistani official of the bank later found guilty
of money laundering in Florida, and other bank officials, told the subcommittee
that General Noriega opened an account at B.C.C.I. in 1982 with large amounts of
cash.

B.C.C.I. seemed an valuable target for the junior Senator, who has lived in the
shadow of the state's senior Senator, Edward M. Kennedy. The renegade bank has
provided him a target for the rhetoric of outrage that sells well in
Massachusetts.

'Theft and Lawlessness'

"B.C.C.I. represents a new level of corruption of the political processes," Mr.
Kerry said. "B.C.C.I. is real greed and theft and lawlessness. It's bribery and
white-collar crime. It's money laundering and drugs. It's people dying in the
streets as the result of corporate lawlessness. It's the regulatory system that
doesn't protect the average citizen. It's life savings that have been lost
because of this Ponzi scheme. It's big guys running around with an awful lot of
bucks."

His investigative efforts have left some colleagues unimpressed. They view Mr.
Kerry as overly ambitious, willing to exploit any issue that promises headlines.
"He's too easily led by his staff," said an eastern Republican.

But Senator Alan J. Dixon, an Illinois Democrat whose Banking Subcommittee on
Consumer and Regulatory Affairs gave Mr. Kerry a forum for a hearing last May,
said that "he's done a very competent job," and Senator Warren B. Rudman, a New
Hampshire Republican and former prosecutor, praised Mr. Kerry as "a man to be
taken seriously."

"At the outset there were a lot of puzzled looks and question marks," Mr. Kerry
recalled. "They said, 'Why is he dragging all these well-known, respected
personalities into something? What is he doing to the Democratic Party?' "

Famous Names

The number of party stalwarts with ties to the bank could be expected to impress
a Senator believed to have Presidential ambitions. They include former President
Jimmy Carter, whose charities received $8 million in contributions from the
bank; Clark M. Clifford, an adviser to Democratic Presidents and chairman of
First American Bankshares, First American's parent company; Thomas H. Boggs, a
major fund-raiser for Democratic candidates, whose law partners include Ronald
H. Brown, chairman of the Democratic National Committee, and whose law firm
represents B.C.C.I., and David L. Paul, chairman of the failed Centrust Savings
Bank, which was financed by B.C.C.I., and former co-chairman of the Democratic
Senate Campaign Committee.

Mr. Kerry insists his investigation was not muted by appeals from Mr. Clifford,
who contributed $3,000 to his Senate re-election campaign, nor by meetings with
Mr. Paul, who contributed $30,000 to the Democratic Senatorial Campaign
Committee, which Mr. Paul and Mr. Kerry jointly led in 1987 and 1988.

The Senator said he met Mr. Clifford once, in September 1988, when the former
Presidential adviser and Secretary of Defense vouched for the integrity of the
bank. "Clark Clifford said, 'This is a good bank,' " Mr. Kerry recalled, adding:
"Clark Clifford's contribution was not solicited by me. As for David Paul, the
word 'Centrust' never came up in the context of B.C.C.I. until I finished my
chairmanship of the committee. No one ever spoke to me about the two."

Mr. Kerry's investigation faltered in the spring of 1989, and the issue of who
stalled what has been a hot one lately.

Mr. Kerry, who had used his Foreign Relations subcommittee to conduct the
initial investigation, was unable to get authority to continue. He says Senator
Claiborne Pell, the Rhode Island Democrat who is chairman of the full committee,
found the investigation distasteful. "Claiborne said, 'I don't like to see the
Foreign Relations Committee involved in this sort of thing,' " Mr. Kerry said.
"He didn't like hooded witnesses, that sort of thing."

Like Mr. Kerry, Mr. Pell denies that he slowed the investigation for political
reasons. Indeed, a Pell aide, Geryld B. Christianson, staff director of the
Foreign Relations Committee, said that the Kerry subcommittee had dragged its
feet in the issuing of a subpoena, from March 1988 when it was authorized until
July when it was served. The investigation's mandate first expired at the end of
1988, was extended for three months then was discontinued. Mr. Kerry decided to
pursue the issue, but using only his personal staff.

Robert S. Bennett, lawyer for Mr. Clifford, said his client had never sought to
impede the Congressional investigation.

When asked why Mr. Pell did not further extend the subcommittee's mandate, Mr.
Christianson said, "We're not a permanent investigating committee."

Jack A. Blum, a Washington lawyer who directed the initial investigation for Mr.
Kerry, said that their inquiry was delayed for a time at the formal request of
the Justice Department, which was conducting an undercover operation into drug
smuggling. Mr. Christianson, asked to comment, said he was unaware of the
agency's request.

As this back and forth suggests, the question of who delayed what has become one
of those Washington debates-within-a-controversy. But most everyone agrees that
Mr. Blum, fearful that the Senate investigation would falter, went to see
District Attorney Morgenthau in the spring of 1989, and that their meeting
started the train of events that brought the bank under public scrutiny.

Some Nice Comments

Mr. Morgenthau initiated a broad investigation that Mr. Blum believes finally
prompted the Justice Department to take action.

Mr. Morgenthau has joined Mr. Kerry in repeatedly complaining about lack of
cooperation from the Justice Department.

But with some satisfaction, Mr. Kerry now says: "In recent months the Justice
Department has been more forthcoming. Bob Mueller has been direct and open.
Prior to him, the record is the record. And it was a difficult record."

With the seizure of the bank, does Mr. Kerry feel vindicated? "Vindication is
sort of petty," the Senator said. "A couple of colleagues have made some nice
comments."

NAME: John F. Kerry

LOAD-DATE: July 29, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: "The Justice Department put roadblocks in our path," said
Senator John Kerry, Democrat of Massachusetts, about his investigation of the
Bank of Credit and Commerce International. (Paul Hosefros/The New York Times)

Graphic: "John Forbes Kerry"

Born: December 11, 1943.

Hometown: Boston.

Education: B.A., Yale University (1966); M.A., J.D., Boston College Law School
(1976).

Military: Navy (1966-1969); awarded in the Silver Star, Bronze Star with Combat
"V," three Purple Hearts.

Career Highlights: Lieutenant Governor of Massachusetts (1982-84), U.S. Senate
(1985-present), founding member and organizer, Vietnam Veterans of America.

Hobbies: Skiing, flying, playing ice hockey, reading history and other
nonfiction.

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              64 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 30, 1991, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

SUMMIT IN MOSCOW;
Bush in Moscow to Chart a New Course

BYLINE: By R. W. APPLE Jr.,  Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1541 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW, July 29


President Bush landed in the Soviet Union tonight for a summit meeting with
President Mikhail S. Gorbachev that will explore the shape of Moscow's relations
with Washington in the post-cold-war era but may also focus on the politics of
the Middle East.

Mr. Bush's plane arrived at Sheremetyevo Airport here a few minutes before 10
P.M., local time, after a nine-hour flight form Washington. He received a
low-keyed greeting from Vice President Gennadi I. Yanayev, reviewed a small
honor guard, including a quartet of drummers with red stars emblazoned on their
instruments, and then sped into the capital and retired for the night.

After four decades of intermittent summit conferences at which the United States
and the Soviet Union were adversaries if not enemies, Mr. Bush and Mr. Gorbachev
meet this week with both the cold war and the arms race apparently cast upon the
scrap heap of history, with a successful military collaboration in the Persian
Gulf fresh in their memories and with the Soviet leader having only last week
jettisoned much of Communism's sacred dogma.

A Need for Western Help

Feeble economically but still strong militarily, the Soviet Union has
ackowledged its need for help from the United States and the West and has made
evident its recognition that it lives in a world transformed. But most of the
details of how it will govern itself, manage its economy and relate to that
world remain to be filled in, and the process may speed up this week.

In the hours preceeding Mr. Bush's arrival, senior Soviet officials pressed the
United States to join them in issuing invitations for a Middle East peace
conference as a means of stepping up pressure on Israel, which has not yet
formally agreed to such a meeting. American officials, led by Secretary of State
James A. Baker 3d, reportedly expressed reluctance about pushing the Israelis
quite that hard yet, and the Soviets later conceded that no joint invitation
would be issued now.

Mr. Baker met with Aleksandr A. Bessmertnykh, the Soviet Foreign Minister, in a
preliminary to the two days of Bush-Gorbachev talks, which begin Tuesday
morning. He said afterward that "I for one do not think the window of
opportunity has closed" in the Middle East. But he did not commit himself either
to a joint trip to the Middle East with Mr. Bessmertnykh, as proposed by the
Soviets, or to a starting date for a peace conference before the end of the
year, another idea put foward by the Foreign Minister.

Vitaly N. Ignatenko, the Soviet presidential spokesman, said at his first summit
briefing this morning that Mr. Gorbachev and Mr. Bush might issue a joint Middle
East declaration at the end of this, their sixth meeting and fourth full-fledged
summit conference in a little more than 18 months.

Arms Treaty to Be Signed

The ceremonial high point of the meeting will come on Wednesday when the two
leaders sign the treaty reducing the size of their strategic arsenals by about a
third. For the first time, the superpowers will formally commit themselves to
scaling back their enormous fleets of long range-nuclear missiles and bombers in
by far the longest and the most complicated arms-control agreement ever
negotiated.

Mr. Bush and Mr. Gorbachev will meet at a government country house or dacha 20
miles northwest of Moscow; at Spaso House, the American Ambassador's residence
here, and in the Kremlin, whose golden domes glistened brilliantly this weekend
in sultry sunshine that seemed more Italianate than Muscovite.

At the top of the agenda for their discussions will be Mr. Gorbachev's effort to
reform the Soviet economy. Ten days ago in London, the leaders of seven major
industrial democracies, led by Japan and the United States, balked at giving
large-scale financial help to the Soviet Union, although the continental
European powers and even Britain had been eager to give Mr. Gorbachev, who met
with the seven, a strong signal of Western support.

New Trade Status Seen

Mr. Bush is likely to announce most-favored-nation status for the Soviet Union
here this week, a concession long sought by Moscow that would make Soviet
exports to the United States eligible for the lowest tariffs.

But there is no sign that he will relax his stand against cash subsidies.

The Western nations agreed to seek limited membership for Moscow in the
International Monetary Fund, but Mr. Gorbachev stunned them a few days ago by
applying for full membership, against Washington's expressed wishes.

Underlying the generally upbeat mood of this week's meetings are not only that
disagreement but also American uncertainties about the completeness of the
Soviet leader's commitment to reform, the exact scope and nature of the reform
plans and the relationship of the central Government to the republics.

In addition, Mr. Bush is unlikely to find any backing here for his threats to
stage air strikes against Iraq for failing to disclose to United Nations
inspectors the full dimensions of its nuclear weapons program. Vitaly I.
Churkin, the Soviet Foreign Ministry spokesman, said in an interview on Cable
News Network on Sunday that any use of military force against Baghdad could have
"negative consequences" and would not win unanimous support internationally, as
did the January attacks in the Persian Gulf.

Because the lines of power are so tangled in the Soviet Union at the moment, Mr.
Bush faces a very delicate task during his time here.

He has agreed to hold a private session with Boris N. Yeltsin, the President of
the Russian republic, which has most of the Soviet Union's natural resources and
more of its people than any other republic. Mr. Yeltsin, a more avid reformer
than Mr. Gorbachev, has been his rival or his enemy for much of the recent past,
but at the moment they are reconciled.

Mr. Bush is also flying to the Ukraine, another large and restive republic, on
his way back to Washington. He will make a speech in Kiev, capital of the Soviet
agricultural powerhouse, visit a cathedral and meet with local officials in a
gesture of approval of Ukrainians' attempts to find some new means of expressing
their rich cultural and historical traditions.

Overall, the President's schedule makes it clearer than ever before that the
United States takes the republics and their aspirations seriously and
understands that politicians like Mr. Yeltsin and Leonid M. Kravchuk, the
Ukrainian leader, have developed significant independent power bases.

But he took care this weekend in an interview with Soviet journalists to
underline his continuing support for Mr. Gorbachev and the national Government.

Asked whether the White House, the Kremlin and the republics now formed a
triangle, Mr. Bush replied, according to the official Tass press agency, "The
President of the United States primarily deals with the President of the Soviet
Union."

In its report of the interview, the Communist Party daily Pravda said Mr. Bush
added: "Contacts with the republics are very important, but I don't think I deal
with Yeltsin on the same level as I deal with Gorbachev. People in the Soviet
Union should know the U.S. president will deal with respect with the President
of the Soviet Union. That doesn't exclude good relations with Yeltsin. I just
don't want to make them equals."

The continuing struggle for power was as evident as ever right up to the time of
Mr. Bush's arrival. Lest the President forget the bid for independence of the
three Baltic republics and Mr. Gorbachev's resistance, Mr. Yeltsin and Vytautas
Landsbergis, the Lithuanian leader, signed a friendship treaty today. The treaty
recognizes Lithuania, which in March 1990 declared its independence as a
sovereign state.

For his part, Mr. Gorbachev has invited both Mr. Yeltsin and Nursultan A.
Nazarbayev, the leader of Kazakhstan, to take part in "expanded talks" with him
and Mr. Bush on Tuesday. Kazakhstan has been one of the republics most loyal to
Mr. Gorbachev's economic and political policies. Mr. Ignatenko said of the two
republic leaders, "They are fully fledged partners in the talks."

Several Agreements Ready

The presidential spokesman said a number of agreements would be signed during
Mr. Bush's visit to Moscow, the first by an American President since Ronald
Reagan's trip in the spring of 1988. Among them, he said, would be treaties
covering security in civil aviation, technological cooperation, medical
supplies, cooperation in preventing industrial accidents, natural disasters and
elimination of their consequences and housing construction.

But it is the arms treaty, known as Start, that has brought Mr. Bush to the
Soviet capital this week.

Linton Brooks, the chief United States negotiator, and Yuri K. Nazarkin, his
Soviet counterpart, initialled copies of the treaty at a ceremony in Geneva
today before sending them to Moscow. Mr. Brooks described the agreement, which
took nine years to reach, as "an immense accomplishment," according to a Reuters
dispatch. They put their initials on 300 pages of each of four copies of the
600-page treaty, for a total of 1,200 times.

"It's hard work, isn't it?" Mr. Brooks asked Mr. Nazarkin, who responded, "But
it's more fun than negotiating it."

LOAD-DATE: July 30, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Vice President Gennadi I. Yanayev escorting President Bush past
an honor guard at the Moscow airport. (Associated Press) (pg. A1); Secretary of
State James A. Baker 3d being greeted yesterday by Eduard A. Shevardnadze, the
former Soviet Foreign Minister, after arriving in Moscow for the Bush-Gorbachev
summit conference. (Agence France-Presse) (pg. A6)

Chronology: "Looking Back: 30 Years of Summitry"

Septmeber 1959: Dwight D. Wisenhower and Nikita S. Khrushchev meet at camp
David, Md. The talks result in the "spirit of Camp David," an effort to press
for scientific and cultural exchanges and disarmament.

June 1961: Khrushchev and John F. Kennedy have heated exchanges in Vienna. There
are no formal agreements. A year later, the Soviets send nuclear missiles to
Cuba; the United States forces their removal.

June 1967: Lyndon B. Johnson meets in Glassboro, N.J., with Aleksei N. Kosygin
to dicuss the Middle East, the Vietnam War and nuclear arms. They come to no
agreement.

May 1972: Richard M. Nixon and Leonid I. Brezhnev, in Moscow, sign the first
treaties setting limits on strategic nuclear arms, know as SALT I, and on
curbing antiballistic missile systems. They agree to keep negotiating on arms,
but region issues divide them.

June 1973: Nixon and Brezhnev meet in Washington. They agree to try to complete
a new arms treaty by 1974.

June-July 1974: Nixon and Brezhnev meet in Moscow and Yalta. They agree to a
treaty banning underground nuclear-arms tests with yields exceeding 150
kilotons, and arrange a 10-year economic accord.

November 1974: Gerald R. Ford and Brezhnev, in Vladivostok, reach a tentative
deal limiting missile launchers and bombers and lay a base for a second
strategic arms treaty. The treaty is not completed before Jimmy Carter takes
office.

June 1979: Carter and Brezhnev, in Vienna, sign the second treaty limiting
strategic arms, or SALT II. Although the Senate never approves the treaty
because of the Soviet sweep into Afghanistan in December 1979, both sides agree
informally to observe its limits.

November 1985: Ronald Reagan and Mikhail S. Gorbachev meet in Geneva for
wide-ranging talks on arms control and other subjects. They agree to revive
cultural exchanges and to enhance air safety, but no arms-control agreements are
achieved.

October 1986: Reagan and Gorbachev meet in Reykjavik, Iceland, to provide
momentum to arms-control talks. The two sides speak of vast cuts in strategic
arms and medium-range missiles, but the accord falls through because of
disagreements over the American plan for a space-based missile defense system,
or "Star Wars," and over Moscow's insistence on putting all arms issues in one
package.

December 1987: Reagan and Gorbachev meet in Washington. They sign a treaty to
destroy intermediate-range nuclear forces, known as I.N.F., and agree to seek a
treaty cutting long-range nuclear arsenals. But "Star Wars" remains a sticking
point.

May-June 1988: Gorbachev and Reagan, in Moscow, exchange formal documents
putting the I.N.F. treaty into effect, but make no breakthrough on cutting
long-range nuclear forces. Reagan says important work has been done but
Gorbachev speaks of "missed opportunities."

December 1988: Gorbachev says farewell to Reagan and greets President-elect
George Bush at a two-hour luncheon on Governors Island in New York harbor.

December 1989: Bush, now President, and Gorbachev meet in Malta. They say they
will strive to conclude treaties on long-range nuclear weapons and conventional
arms in 1990.

May-June 1990: Bush and Gorbachev meet in Washington. They pledge to cut
stockpiles of long-range nuclear arms and chemical weapons. They also sign a
trade treaty.

TYPE: Chronology

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              65 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 30, 1991, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

U.S. Math Team Places 5th

SECTION: Section C; Page 5; Column 5; Science Desk

LENGTH: 179 words


AN American team of six high school students has scored fifth in a field of 55
national teams that competed in the International Mathematical Olympiad in
Sigtuna, Sweden.

In this year's competition, which was held July 17-18, the Soviet Union scored
first, followed by China, Romania, Germany, the United States, Hungary,
Bulgaria, Iran, Vietnam and India. One member of the American team, Joel E.
Rosenberg of Hall High School, West Hartford, Conn., won a gold medal. The other
Americans, Kiran S. Kedlaya of Georgetown Day High School, Washington, D.C.,
Robert D. Kleinberg of Iroquois High School, Elma, N.Y., Lenhard L. Ng of Chapel
Hill Senior High School, Chapel Hill, N.C., and Michail G. Sunitsky and Ruvim Y.
Breydo, both of Stuyvesant High School in Manhattan, won silver or bronze
medals.

The American coach, Cecil Rousseau of Memphis State University, said he was
proud of the showing.  Last year's American team placed third in the
competition. Since American teams began participating in 1974, the United States
has always placed among the top six.

LOAD-DATE: July 30, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              66 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 31, 1991, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Pentagon Is Increasing Staff To Look for Vietnam Missing

BYLINE: By ERIC SCHMITT,  Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 490 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 30


As a result of improving American-Vietnamese relations, the Defense Department
said today that it was sharply increasing the number of people assigned to
investigate the cases of servicemen unaccounted for in the Vietnam War.

Pete Williams, the Pentagon spokesman, said an expected increase in access to
crash sites in Vietnam and to Hanoi's wartime archives had prompted the military
to increase the number of investigators, analysts and other workers to 222 from
134.

"It's a very painstaking process to go through all these records," Mr. Williams
told reporters today. "Now we can begin to sit down and go through that material
very, very carefully, and that is going to produce finds for us which we can
then analyze."

Today's announcement comes amid a flurry of publicity over photographs
supposedly showing American servicemen in Southeast Asia, and growing calls in
Congress for the Administration to redouble its efforts to examine the issue.

Dole Urges Commission

Senator Bob Dole, a Kansas Republican who is the Senate minority leader, urged
President Bush on Sunday to create a special presidential commission to
determine whether any American servicemen are still being held in Southeast
Asia.

But at a special White House briefing Friday, the President's national security
adviser, Brent Scowcroft, said "there is still no credible evidence" to suggest
that American servicemen are being held captive in Laos, Cambodia or Vietnam.

Of the 2,273 servicemen still unaccounted for in Southeast Asia, the Pentagon
classifies 1,172 as missing. The other 1,101 are believed to have been killed in
action, but their bodies have not been recovered.

Mr. Williams said the increase in experts dealing with missing servicemen had
been "in the mill" for several months, and did not stem from the resurgent
public interest in the issue.

The additional personnel will include interviewers, linguists, anthropologists,
dental experts, intelligence analysts, graves registration specialists and
clerks assigned to offices in Washington, Hawaii and Thailand.

Meeting With Cheney

The Pentagon also set up a special field office in Hanoi three weeks ago, which
initially was assigned two investigators.

Mr. Dole praised the Pentagon plan as "another opportunity to pursue every lead"
shortly after he and nine other Republican senators met with Defense Secretary
Dick Cheney in Mr. Dole's office today to discuss the issue.

The beefed-up investigation and broader access to Vietnamese records are likely
to raise the hopes of family members who cling to hopes that their loved ones
are alive.

"It all depends on the kind of access the Vietnamese are willing to give," said
Ann Mills Griffiths, executive director of the American League of P.O.W./M.I.A.
Families in Washington. "It could mean a tremendous increase in results, which
would give answers to many questions that exist for families."

LOAD-DATE: July 31, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              67 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 31, 1991, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

SUMMIT IN MOSCOW;
U.S. Largesse Sticks in Soviet Craw

BYLINE: By SERGE SCHMEMANN,  Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 11; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 907 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW, July 30


In lifting trade restrictions against the Soviet Union today, President Bush
dismantled one of the major cold-war tank-traps still littering the East-West
divide and released the Soviet Union from its long consignment to the status of
an undesirable.

But neither the benefits of the measure nor all the gilded hoopla of the summit
meeting could conceal the disappointment of Soviet officials that be it in trade
or in arms, Washington and the West were still holding back, clearing away the
debris of the cold war but not yet plunging to Moscow's side.

Whether they were complaining of continued restrictions on high-technology
imports, or applying for full membership in the International Monetary Fund
immediately after they were offered associate membership, or writing about the
need to go further in arms cuts, Soviet officials have signaled their pique over
the reserve of the West in dispensing favors to Moscow.

Mr. Bush was equally clear in signaling that he was awaiting more action from
Moscow. In his speech to the Institute for International Relations, he coupled
enthusiastic reviews of President Mikhail S. Gorbachev's achievements with an
explicit catalogue of unfinished business: the fate of the Baltic republics, the
islands dispute with Japan, military aid to Cuba, military spending and "real
reform."

Demanding Evidence First

The debate, played out against the background of Mr. Bush's first summit meeting
in Moscow, reflected the approach that the West first made evident in London
earlier this month: that it is ready to dismantle cold-war barriers and to
welcome the Soviet Union into the fold of favored nations, but will require more
evidence of tangible Soviet reform before coming actively to Moscow's support.

In this context, Mr. Bush's announcement that he would propose that Congress
grant the Soviet Union "most favored nation" trading status removed one of the
most notorious stigmas on the Communist regime. The status effectively reduces
trade tariffs to the lowest levels possible and thus encourages investment in
industries that could trade with the United States.

The Soviet Union has made gaining most-favored-nation treatment a point of honor
through the years. In the initial years of President Nixon's detente with Leonid
I. Brezhnev, a trade accord was worked out that was to grant this status to the
Soviets. But when negotiations over allowing a set number of Jews to emigrate
collapsed, so did the trade accord and favorable trade status.

In 1974, the so-called Jackson-Vanik amendment linked favored-trading status for
Moscow to Jewish emigration, as did other laws curbing credits to the Soviets.

Even after Mr. Bush and Mr. Gorbachev signed a new trade law last year
incorporating "most favored nation" status for the Soviet Union, Washington made
approval contingent on the removal of Moscow's emigration restrictions. That was
accomplished when the Soviet Parliament passed a new emigration law in May.

Lumped With Vietnam

Even if Mr. Bush's action was largely a technicality in the end, it represents
one of the last major steps in returning Moscow to a normal slot in the world
community. Only a handful of international miscreants still remain outside the
"most-favored" club, including Vietnam, North Korea and Romania, which once had
the status and hopes to regain it soon.

The action was not purely symbolic. In addition to urging "most favored nation"
status for Moscow, Mr. Bush said he would ask Congress to repeal the Byrd and
Stevenson amendments, which have limited American credits to the Soviet Union to
a total of $300 million unless the credits apply to agricultural commodities.
Together, the measures stand to increase the interest of private investors.

After the summit meeting, Mr. Gorbachev is certain to tout the trade package as
evidence of the importance and effectiveness of his international connections.
But coupled with Mr. Bush's tacit reprimands, the measure is not without an
element of humiliation for the Soviet Union and for Mr. Gorbachev.

Before he traveled to London earlier this month to meet with Western leaders,
the Soviet President had come under considerable criticism from Communist
hard-liners for "holding his hat out" to the West. Now he is effectively being
told by Mr. Bush that he can come out of the corner -- but that he is still
being watched.

Bush Still Dominant

Mr. Gorbachev also reportedly complained to Mr. Bush about continuing
restrictions on high-technology exports under the "Cocom" list, which bars
exports that can be used for the Soviet military. The list has been considerably
shortened in recent years, but still exists.

The hard fact for Mr. Gorbachev, however, was that he was not in the position of
strength at the summit meeting. For all the talk of a new "partnership" in
Soviet-American relations, not only was it manifestly Mr. Bush who was the
dominant partner, but Mr. Gorbachev was in open competition with new political
forces at home.

That was most succinctly demonstrated when Boris N. Yeltsin, the President of
the Russian republic, failed to show up at a session with Mr. Bush and Mr.
Gorbachev, arguing that he did not want to be part of the background that was a
fixture of the "time of stagnation."

The summit ceremonies, it seemed, were still dedicated to the demolition of the
old order. The inauguration of the new was yet to come.

LOAD-DATE: July 31, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: President Bush greeting President Mikhail S. Gorbachev as their
meeting at the Kremlin got under way. (Reuters)

TYPE: News Analysis

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              68 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 31, 1991, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Christian de Castries Dies at 88; French General at Dien Bien Phu

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section D; Page 20; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 838 words

DATELINE: PARIS, July 30


Brig. Gen. Christian de la Croix de Castries, the swashbuckling French cavalry
officer who stubbornly defended but ultimately lost the fortress of Dien Bien
Phu in the jungles of Vietnam, has died, his family announced today. He was 88
years old. The announcement did not disclose the cause or date of death.

A tall, steely-eyed soldier-aristocrat, General de Castries became a national
hero for his grinding 55-day stand at Dien Bien Phu, a soggy, sandbagged
garrison in the Vietnamese highlands about 150 miles northwest of Hanoi.

The punishing struggle for Dien Bien Phu caught the world's attention, and the
stakes were great. France knew that losing the monsoon-drenched citadel, where
15,000 soldiers were dug in, would herald the end of French military and
colonial rule in Indochina.

A Martial Dynasty

It was in December 1953 that the French High Command sent Colonel de Castries
(pronounced duh CASS-tree) to take charge of its forces at Dien Bien Phu. The
imperious and elegant field commander, a cigarette pasted eternally to his lower
lip, was hailed as the kind of man who would never surrender, and his lineage
bore this out.

A descendant of Guillaume de la Croix, the 15th-century French baron whose line
produced eight lieutenant generals, four lieutenant governors, five knights and
a Marshal of France, Colonel de Castries was born to command. While sometimes
criticized as reckless in battle, he was admired by his troops, many of them
Algerian and Moroccan conscripts who trusted the commander never to desert them.

Military analysts describe Dien Bien Phu as a disastrous error in judgment. The
historian Bernard B. Fall called it "a momentous gamble that backfired badly."
France had hoped to lure the Communist Vietminh guerrillas into a classic
set-piece battle, with artillery facing artillery in the thickly overgrown
valley at the Laotian frontier.

Battlefield Promotion

Instead, Vietminh troops commanded by Vo Nguyen Giap, the architect of the
subsequent United States defeat in Vietnam, surrounded Dien Bien Phu, cutting
off French supply lines.

In the textbook example of guerrilla warfare that followed, the Vietminh mauled
battalion after battalion of French infantry and marines, backing up their
hit-and-run and occasional human-wave tactics with murderously accurate
artillery fire.

Still, Colonel de Castries held out, winning a rare battlefield promotion to
brigadier general and even finding time to talk by field phone to his wife,
Jacqueline, a volunteer nurse tending to the wounded in Hanoi. Pictures of Mrs.
de Castries nibbling nervously on her fingers while speaking with her husband
appeared in Life magazine.

Bit by bit, French trenches at Dien Bien Phu were bombed into muddy quagmires
and ammunition, even bullets, ran out. At the end, the near-catatonic defenders
subsisted on little more than cigarettes and instant coffee. The general
surrendered on May 17.

He was taken prisoner with about 10,000 men, half of them wounded. Nearly 2,000
bodies were left strewn on the battlefield, where the upturned soil and flooded
dugouts evoked a small-scale Verdun. Few soldiers survived the torturous
300-mile death march to the Vietminh prison camps in the east; few others
emerged from captivity.

The general himself sat in custody for four months while France and Vietnam,
attending the nine-power talks in Geneva, negotiated the settlement that
ultimately divided Vietnam into a Communist north and a pro-Western south.
General de Castries was finally freed, a battlefield hero for the French on the
order of Foch and Petain.

Equestrian Heritage

Christian Marie Fernand de la Croix de Castries was born in Paris on Aug. 11,
1902. His aristocratic family had a tradition of equestrian expertise and
military service dating back to Louis XV. In 1933, he guided his horse to a
world-record jump of 7 feet, 10 inches.

He was married twice and is survived by his only child, a daughter.

He was twice wounded in World War II, and was decorated for uncommon valor for
his actions in Lorraine. There, leading a depleted company of 60 men, he held
out for three days against a German battalion before capitulating.

He escaped from a prisoner-of-war camp on his fourth try in 1941, making his way
to Marseilles. Troops under his command later took Siena, Italy, and he helped
capture Karlsruhe and later Freudenstadt in western Germany.

In 1946, as a lieutenant colonel, he began his first tour in Indochina, where
the nationalist Vietminh guerrillas, commanded by Ho Chi Minh, were battling for
independence from France.

With his starched uniform and garland of military medallions, a Moroccan orderly
at his side, he seemed an unlikely jungle commander. But those who knew him had
few misgivings.

"Dien Bien Phu will be all right unless de Castries gets himself killed," a
French official in Hanoi said in 1954, when the colonel took command of the
besieged stronghold. "He will get himself killed or come back a general."

NAME: Christian de Castries

LOAD-DATE: July 31, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Brig. Gen. Christian de la Croix de Castries in a 1954 photo.
(Associated Press)

TYPE: Obituary (Obit)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              69 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 31, 1991, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

The Military Mind Worked

SECTION: Section C; Page 9; Column 1; Living Desk

LENGTH: 223 words


To The Living Section:

Marian Burros commenced her otherwise informative article "Lower-Fat Foods vs.
U.S. Standards" [June 26] by labeling "military intelligence" a world-class
oxymoron. While this labeling may be trendy and embraced in certain circles, it
is also quite inaccurate. Compared with other sources of information and
evaluation, military intelligence has shown itself superior in analyses and
prognostication. The following illustrates this claim.

At the end of World War II military intelligence urged that we not oppose Ho Chi
Minh in Vietnam. The well-educated folks in the State Department disagreed and
made it American policy to become involved in Vietnam in support of European and
colonialist France. Later into this sad story of American involvement, President
Kennedy's Harvard expatriates overruled the military wisdom of "no land wars in
East Asia" and sent American troops to Vietnam.

It was not the military intelligence component of the Government which
sanctioned the buildup of Iraqi conventional and nonconventional weaponry by
U.S. and European firms. But it was precisely the intelligent military which
devised a way to deal with the Iraqi threat without the huge number of body bags
predicted by those whose intelligence is unlikely to be ridiculed.

DR.  T. L. ROME
New York, N.Y.

LOAD-DATE: July 31, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              70 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 31, 1991, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

The M.I.A. Racket

SECTION: Section A; Page 18; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 530 words


At first the blurred photo supposedly showing three American fliers given up for
dead in the Vietnam War excited their families and intrigued the news media.
Then Government investigators raised persuasive doubts about the photo's
authenticity. This sequence was a vivid reminder of the roller-coaster emotions
experienced by families of lost servicemen -- and of the cynical efforts to
manipulate their grief.

Yesterday's decision by the Pentagon to increase the number of people
investigating reports of missing Vietnam War servicemen is a reassuring step. It
could prove a welcome antidote to the hucksters who trade in tragedy.

The Pentagon lists 2,273 U.S. servicemen as missing in action during the war.
Investigators have received 1,483 reports of their existence; most were false or
described Westerners who weren't American servicemen. Only 103 cases remain
unresolved.

Exploitation of the M.I.A. families' lingering hopes supports a cruel industry
in the U.S. and Southeast Asia. Asians seeking money or favorable immigration
treatment offer faked photos, dogtags and letters. American groups use such
"evidence" as the basis for publicity and fund appeals.

"As you know, we are very close to bringing out a live P.O.W.," goes a typical
pitch. "But the monsoon season in Southeast Asia has just begun. Within the next
twelve days, I must raise a minimum of $27,630. . . ." The racket is so
lucrative that Cambodians in the U.S. are said to seek M.I.A. background
information from American families, then fax it to confederates in Southeast
Asia for recycling in phony M.I.A. documents and reports.

Several copies of the photo purporting to show the three fliers, their faces
resembling aged versions of those in photos taken when they were young, have
circulated since last summer. A copy was released by the American Defense
Institute, which was criticized by the Pentagon in 1987 for exaggerating its
knowledge of servicemen in captivity. Aspects of the photo suggest fakery: its
scale, awkward placement of faces and a sign supposedly dating the scene.

Copies of the photo were accompanied by autobiographical data sheets and letters
in broken English that appear to be ludicrous fabrications. While there is no
absolute proof either way, the case for a hoax heavily outweighs that for the
photo's validity.

The damage goes beyond the insult to servicemen's families. Pursuing fakes
diverts investigators from more serious business: persuading the Vietnamese to
open archives of prison camp records and permit access that could resolve the
open cases. Yet the Defense and Justice departments and state charity fraud
investigators haven't taken the M.I.A. hoax industry seriously. Families and
other contributors have been slow to complain, and officials worry about
appearing callous to hopeful relatives.

The flap over the released photo could change all that. Representative Stephen
Solarz of New York has summoned M.I.A. fund-raisers to testify at a hearing
today. Unless they give better accounts of themselves than they have so far,
there ought to be no official reluctance to expose, condemn and prosecute to the
fullest extent of the law.

LOAD-DATE: July 31, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              71 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 1, 1991, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Phnom Penh Violates Truce, a Rebel Charges

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 9; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 166 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, July 31


A senior guerrilla leader said today that hundreds of Cambodian Government
soldiers had broken a truce and attacked rebel positions in several provinces.

The rebel officer, who spoke on condition of anonymity, said that about 900
troops struck in a northwestern province, Otdar Meanchey, last week in an effort
to retake areas lost to guerrillas commanded by Prince Norodom Ranariddh. Prince
Ranariddh is the son of Prince Norodom Sihanouk, titular leader of Cambodia's
three-faction rebel coalition.

The officer said troops also attacked guerrillas of the Khmer People's National
Liberation Front near Phumi Thma Pok. Son Sann, leader of the front, has
protested the attacks.

The front and Prince Sihanouk's faction are joined in a coalition with the
Communist Khmer Rouge in an effort to unseat the Government installed by Vietnam
late in 1978.

The guerrilla officer also reported fighting in another northwestern province,
Siem Reap, and in Kompong Thom, a central province.

LOAD-DATE: August 1, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              72 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 1, 1991, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

On That Chat With Dinkins: Make It Almost Everybody

BYLINE: By JAMES C. McKINLEY Jr.

SECTION: Section B; Page 1; Column 2; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 887 words


Ken Wyche, a fry cook, would like nothing better than to tell the Mayor about
the run-down city-owned building he lives in. So he was thrilled to hear Mayor
David N. Dinkins, right there on television, declaring that his office door was
open to New Yorkers with gripes.

But Mr. Wyche is in for a surprise. The door, it turns out, is only ajar.

In his speech on Tuesday evening, Mayor David N. Dinkins promised to be in his
office next Monday, for "the entire day to meet with New Yorkers who want to
speak about how we can change our city."

"Face to face," the Mayor said. "One on one."

But yesterday mayoral aides changed the rules a bit. They said people who want
to see the Mayor will be screened so that those with personal complaints, minor
problems or wacky theories can be weeded out.

Ideas Line Starts Here

City officials said the Mayor was interested only in concrete suggestions on
overhauling the way the city operates.

Mr. Wyche did not know this when he was among the first to approach a card table
set up in the rotunda of City Hall yesterday, hoping to sign up to see the
Mayor. About 20 other people showed up.

"I've sent him letters and pictures of the building," Mr. Wyche said of the
place where he lives. "I got no response at all. This is a perfect opportunity.
I'm going to ask him: 'What's the problem?' "

That was not what the Mayor had in mind, his deputies said yesterday.

"It isn't just opening City Hall to the masses," Deputy Mayor Bill Lynch said.
"There are a lot of good ideas out there that he wants to hear."

First, Fill Out a Form

Michael Kharfen, director of the Mayor's Community Assistance Unit, said
everyone who arrived at City Hall would be asked to fill out a form before being
quizzed by mayoral aides. Deputy Mayors and commissioners of various city
agencies will be in hearing rooms to hear minor complaints.

"Not everybody will be able to speak to the Mayor," Mr. Kharfen said. "But
anybody who comes to City Hall -- no matter what their idea may be, no matter
what their problem may be -- will speak someone in city government."

Listening to ordinary citizens is not a totally new idea. Mayor Dinkins has held
community meetings with that purpose. So did his predecessor, Edward I. Koch. In
the 1930's and early 40's, Mayor Fiorello H. La Guardia occasionally sat as a
magistrate in court to hear common concerns, and Mayor William J. Gaynor, who
served from 1910 to 1913, sometimes met with people who came uninvited to City
Hall.

More recently, Mayor Maureen O'Connor of San Diego has been meeting with
citizens on two days a month, even when the concern is about a stop sign or a
high school students' report card.

On the streets around City Hall yesterday, a lot of citizens wanted to complain
to the Mayor, but few had any concrete suggestions. In dozens of interviews,
people were quick to say that the Mayor must do something about homelessness,
crime and budgetary waste. But specifically what should he do? Several people
shrugged and said the problems were beyond the Mayor's powers. One man replied,
"He should step down."

"I think he's baffled," said Pierre Lespinasse, 35 years old, a banking
executive from Queens "It's too big a problem for the Mayor to handle.
Businesses are failing. Banks are failing. It boils down to money. If he can't
get any money, no advice will help."

Some said they would advise Mr. Dinkins to get rid of his advisers. "First of
all, I'd tell him to get rid of all the rotten politicians under him," said
Stephen Allen, a 36-year-old Sanitation Department worker who was laid off six
weeks ago. "Then I think he's got to talk to the unions. That's number one."

Several people said more abandoned city buildings should be rehabilitated to
house the homeless and provide jobs. Others lamented the effect of city budget
cuts on social services.

"I wish he would stop making so many budget cuts in child care and day care,"
said Yolanda Ramos, a 18-year-old mother who lives in a Queens foster-care home
with her 2-year-old daughter, La Asia. "It's just a shame that most of the
highest cuts hit the black and Hispanic community. I don't know what he's
thinking."

'Consult Specialists'

Others doubted that seeking opinions from the public would turn up any startling
ideas. "Instead of wasting all that time doing something like that, he should
consult specialists," said Mindy Scarvey, a 27-year-old lawyer. "I'd say to him:
'Address the problems yourself. You're the Mayor. That's what people elected you
for.' "

"Everything's so obvious," said Ronald Stevens, a 32-year-old a Wall Street
personnel recruiter. "Who needs to be told what the problems are? The biggest
problem is crime; everything stems from there. People are afraid to come out of
their house."

Across the street from City Hall, Herman Karim, a 41-year-old homeless Vietnam
veteran, was opening the door of a Citibank branch for customers while holding
out a grimy paper cup for money. Mr. Karim said he would tell the Mayor that
more low-income housing and fewer luxury co-op apartment buildings should be
built. Then he became angry.

"How many times can you really voice your opinion about what you need?" Mr.
Karim said. "It's already been said. He knows. I need everything, man. I need a
house."

LOAD-DATE: August 1, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Pierre Lespinasse, "It boils down to money. If he can't get any
money, no advice will help."; Angie DiMarco, "The homeless. I'm really sick and
tired of seeing them everywhere. That's definitely the No. 1 issue.";
Rosemary Apeland, "Do I have a couple of days? He's not going to change
anything. He doesn't have any money."; Joan Caffrey, "I just feel like I have
lost the New York that was the place I loved. You used to be able to talk to
your neighbors."; Ronald Stevens, "The biggest problem is crime; everything
stems from there. People are afraid to come out of their house." (Photographs by
Vic DeLucia/The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              73 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  August 2, 1991, Friday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

Serial Murder Case Exposes Deep Milwaukee Tensions

BYLINE: By DON TERRY,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 10; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1636 words

DATELINE: MILWAUKEE, Aug. 1


Almost day and night for a week, there have been angry news conferences, marches
and rallies against the police in this wounded city.

Bitter charges of racism and homophobia in the police department have been
provoked by the handling of the Jeffrey L. Dahmer serial murder case and the
belief that some of the killings could have been prevented.

Tension heightened today as the chief of police announced that unspecified
departmental charges had been filed against the three officers at the center of
the public's anger.

The announcement by Chief Philip Arreola followed the department's release of
recorded conservations between a woman, 911 emergency operators and police
officers on May 27, two months before Mr. Dahmer was arrested and the horrors
inside his apartment were discovered.

The woman reported seeing a bleeding boy, staggering along the street. But when
officers arrived, Mr. Dahmer was able to convince them that the boy was his
drunken friend and they left

At one point on the tape an officer tells the dispatcher that "an intoxicated
Asian, naked male was returned to his sober boyfriend." Then there is laughter.

Before announcing the charges, Chief Arreola said "the Police Department should
be commmended" for its efforts since Mr. Dahmer's arrest. He said the language
used by the officers on the tape recordings was "not common, it's not
tolerated."

Also today, the Milwaukee Journal reported that the three officers actually
entered Mr. Dahmer's apartment. There were that photos of previous victims
strewn on the floor, the newspaper said, and Dahmer has since told investigators
that a body was in an adjoining room.

But The Associated Press reported that a spokeswoman for the police union said
the officers saw no evidence to suggest anything was wrong.

'Treated Differently'

The case has badly shaken the 2,000-officer department, pitting the police union
against the chief, at a time when officers are struggling to adapt to an
increasingly diverse and complicated city.

"It's a great city by a great lake, but it depends on what color you are," said
the Rev. LeHarve Buck, a neighborhood organizer and housing advocate. "If you're
not an Anglo-Saxon white male, you're treated differently by the police in this
city. The police have a picture of what a good citizen looks like. If you don't
fit that description, you're not a good citizen and you're not worth serving."

At a community forum in the City Council chambers tonight, Charlene Taylor, a
black mother of three, said the time had come to act instead of "talking about
how angry we are."

"It's not just a black issue," she said. "There are a lot of white people who
support this because they are just as appalled as we are." She suggested action
like "some kind of boycott of the major stores."

To be sure, there is tension in other cities between the police, minority
populations and others who say they are neither served or protected by the
police. In Los Angeles, the shock waves are still reverberating five months
after officers were videotaped beating a black motorist. But Mr. Dahmer and his
confessions of murder and dismemberment has exposed what many here say is a long
pattern of police indifference to minority citizens and homosexuals.

"Milwaukee is a sick town and it's been swept under the carpet for years," said
the Rev. Gene Champion, a black Baptist minister. "But this has lifted up the
carpet and the whole world can see the dirt."

But change is in the wind. The department, which is still 80 percent white, was
taken just less than three years ago by Chief Arreola, who has a Hispanic
background and has begun steps to adapt the department to the city's changing
makeup.

A Victim Nearly Rescued

The division between police and community was never more evident ortragic than
on the May night two months and four killings before Mr. Dahmer's arrest last
week

That night, the police went to Mr. Dahmer's apartment building on North 25th
Street but apparently dismissed what they saw: a teen-age Laotian boy whom
neighbors say was bleeding and naked and being pursued by Mr. Dahmer. The
officers considered it a routine domestic dispute between homosexuals. Two
months later, the 14-year-old boy was identified as one of 17 men and boys that
the 31-year-old former cholocate factory worker says he killed here and in Ohio.

"The straw that broke the camel's back was when people found out the police
could have done something, they could have saved that boy," Mr. Buck said. "If
that boy had been white, he'd be alive today. People felt completely sold out by
the police after that."

Chief Arreola moved quickly to contain public anger. Last Friday, he suspended
the three officers and today announced the charges against them, although the
department would not disclose what the charges were.

"This has been an extremely trying time for the Police Department and the city
of Milwaukee," Chief Arreola said today. "This is a challenge to rebuild
confidence, to bridge the gap if there is any between ourselves and the
community."

The police union, the Milwaukee Police Association, moved just as quickly,
angrily charging that he had failed to support his officers.

The union is now tallying a vote of confidence it held on the chief and
depending on its may might press the Fire and Police Commission for his
resignation.

"The actions of those three officers are only symptoms of problems in the police
department for a long time," said Susan Boekhouas, a neighborhood organizer in
the West End section of the city where Mr. Dahmer lived. "The department has a
very unpleasant history. It was completely closed to the community. Now, we're
looking for some fundamental changes, some lasting changes."

For years, especially under the the former Chief, Harold Brier, the Milwaukee
police had a reputation in some areas of the city as hostile to minority members
both in and out of its ranks.  As a result of earlier community discontent,
Milwaukee has been under a court order since 1975 to hire more minority members
and women as police officers.

Gradual Changes Under Way

Even those who are now marching and meeting in protest acknowledge that Chief
Arreola, who is from Detroit, has tried to nudge the department into a new era.
He has brought back foot patrols and is working to develop a more
community-oriented policing style.

But old habits die hard.

"If you're poor, black, Hispanic, gay or lesbian then in the eyes of many on the
Milwaukee Police Department you are engaging in deviant behavior," said Sgt.
Leonard Wells, an 18-year veteran of the department and the president of the
League of Martin, an organization of black officers named for the Rev. Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr.

Organizers of Milwaukee's homosexuals say they have been asking for years for a
police liaison to their population and for improved training about homosexuals.

"We want the police department to listen to the community," said Scott Gunkel of
the Lambda Rights Network, a homosexual educational and political group. "We
want them to wake up that this is no longer just a white city. It is a diverse
city, with diverse needs."

But frustration and anger with the police is growing among homosexuals.

Some here say the police did not arrest Mr. Dahmer in May because the officers
regarded a dispute between homosexuals as hardly worth the time to write a
police report about.

"Instead of protecting the gay community," said Kitty Barber, "in many, many
incidents, the Milwaukee Police Department has a history of harassing us."

Terry Boughner, the editor of a gay-oriented newspaper here, said reports of
assaults on homosexuals are in every issue. "And somebody will call the cops for
help and they don't come for 30, 45 minutes," he said. "A couple of weeks ago,
two cops watched while five men beat up two gay people. They did absolutely
nothing."

A spokeswoman for Chief Arreola, Sgt. Susan Edman, said the chief had no comment
about those assertions.

At the Fellowship Missionary Baptist Freedom Church earlier this week, more than
200 people crowded in, fanning themselves with fliers in the stuffy heat, and
LaVerne LeRoy was among them. She has been a police officer for eight years and
attended the rally while off duty.

"I think the frustration is so high that people want to strike out at something
and we're it," she said. "But why blame the whole department on a few people?"

Support for Police

There are also voices of support for the police.

"To fault the police for all this is wrong," said Jason Bridgemen, a 41-year-old
building superintendent, as he walked past Mr. Dahmer's apartment building last
week.

"This is a tough neighborhood to be a cop in," he said. "I spent 16 months in
Vietnam but I felt safer there then here."

A few blocks away, Officer Jim Sobek, 38, was walking his beat on Wells Street.
"A lot of people are jumping to conclusions about this case and what happened,"
he said. "That's what's causing the problems in the city. Everybody needs to
calm down."

Office Sobek said he grew up on the South Side of Milwaukee, where "everybody in
my neighborhood was a policemen." He has been one for 15 years.

This is not the first time there has been uproar about the police, he said, and
it will not be the last.

"You get some of the snide comments, the cat calls about us not doing our job
about them not feeling safe now because of the Dahmer case," Officer Sobek said.
"On the other hand, there are people who give us words of encouragment, tell us
they're glad we're here. It's a mix."

He turned down a tree-lined street, and a boy of about 7 shouted from the other
side, "Policeman, you got any baseball cards?"

"Not today," Officer Sobek said, waving. "Next time."

LOAD-DATE: August 2, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: August 10, 1991, Saturday

CORRECTION:

An article on Aug. 2 about tensions between some Milwaukee residents and the
police misstated the duration of Philip Arreola's service as Police Chief. He
has been in office almost two years, not three.


GRAPHIC: Photos: "A lot of people ar jumping to conclusions about this case and
what happened," said Officer Jim Sobek, a police officer for 15 years who walks
a beat in Dahmer's neighborhood.; "I think the frustration is so high that
people want to strike out at something and we're it," said Officer LaVerne
LeRoy.; The Jeffrey L. Dahmer serial murder cas has intensified the division
between the police and the community in Milwaukee. A crowd of black citizens
protested mistreatment by police officers at a meeting at the Fellowship
Missionary Baptist Freedom Church. (Photographs by Tom Capp for The New York
Times)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              74 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 3, 1991, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

John Francis Whealon Dies at 70; Archbishop of Hartford 22 Years

BYLINE: By C. GERALD FRASER

SECTION: Section 1; Page 26; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 601 words


John Francis Whealon, Roman Catholic Archbishop of Hartford for 22 years, died
yesterday at St. Francis Hospital and Medical Center in Hartford. He was 70
years old.

Dr. Francis L. Geary said the Archbishop "died unexpectedly during a routine
surgical procedure" in which the Archbishop's heart rate and rhythm changed
severely.

The Archbishop was due to be discharged from the hospital today. He had been
admitted July 27 after he fainted while saying Mass in Windsor Locks. Dr. Geary
said yesterday the fainting was caused by abdominal cramping attributed to
adhesions from previous cancer surgery. Between 1978 and 1988, the Archbishop
had five operations for intestinal cancer.

The Rev. Thomas J. Barry, secretary to the Archbishop, described him as "a
Vatican II bishop with a strong respect for and appreciation of the tradition of
the church."

'Pastorally Innovative'

In 1961 Archbishop Whealon had become the nation's youngest bishop when Pope
John XXIII named him Auxiliary Bishop of Cleveland. He was installed in March
1969 as leader of the Archdiocese of Hartford, which encompasses the counties of
Hartford, New Haven and Litchfield and has 771,000 Roman Catholics.

The Archbishop attended every session of the Second Vatican Council and Father
Barry suggested that this was reflected in the Archbishop's ministry. "He was
pastorally innovative," Father Barry said. "A number of his policies were very
ecumenical.'

He established a program to train married men to be ordained for service as
deacons, advocated the promotion of women in the structure of the church and
developed a team ministry in which clerical and lay people administer a parish
together. These clerical-lay groups have been established in 30 of the 225
parishes of the Archdiocese.

Archbishop Whealon was active on ecumenical issues, and was chairman of the
Committee on Ecumenism of the National Conference of Catholic Bishops and head
of ChrisConn, the Christian conference of Connecticut.

The Archbishop quit the Democratic Party in 1988 because of his opposition to
abortion, declaring in his column in the weekly Catholic Transcript that he was
"unable in conscience to remain a registered Democrat" because of the party's
support of legal and government-financed abortions.

Objects to Condom Campaign

In 1974 he said that Roman Catholic health workers who participated in abortions
faced excommunication. He resigned from a local television station's program
advisory committee because the station did not cancel an episode of the
situation comedy "Maude" that dealt with abortion.

More recently, he took serious exception to a state-sponsored advertising
campaign that encouraged sexually active adults to use condoms to prevents AIDS.
He called the campaign "a commendable effort but a serious mistake to present
condoms as the answer to the threat." The "only true safe way" to avoid AIDS, he
said, was through sexual abstinence outside of marriage.

On other politically charged issues, the prelate had supported the war in
Vietnam and defended the maintenance of nuclear weapons.

An austere and scholarly man who taught scripture and Hebrew, Archbishop John
Francis Whealon was born in Barberton, Ohio, and was ordained as a priest in
Cleveland in 1945. He founded Borromeo Seminary in Cleveland, where he was
diocesan vicar general for six years. He became the sixth bishop of Erie, Pa.,
in 1967 and two years later was moved to Hartford to become its 10th bishop.

He is survived by his sisters, Veronica Whealon of Barberton, Ohio, and AnnaMary
Costello of Utica, N.Y.

NAME: John Francis Whealon

LOAD-DATE: August 3, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Archbishop John F. Whealon (Don Heiny, 1983)

TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              75 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 3, 1991, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Leo Cawley Economist, 47

SECTION: Section 1; Page 26; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 161 words


Leo Cawley, an economist and radio commentater whose weekly program on
economics, "Fearful Symmetry," was broadcast on WBAI-FM, died on July 22 in the
Seattle Veterans Affairs Medical Center. He was 47 years old and lived in New
York.

He died of complications from a bone-marrow transplant, said Paula Webster, a
spokeswoman for the family. Mr. Cawley was exposed to the herbicide Agent Orange
when he was a marine in Vietnam, and he developed bone cancer in 1980.

Mr. Cawley won the William Faulkner Award for Writing in 1961, and one of his
better-known essays, "Refighting the War: Why the Movies Are in Vietnam," was
published in the anthology "Hanoi to Hollywood: The Vietnam War on Film." He
also wrote for the Monthly Review, of which he was a board member, The Nation,
The Village Voice and Newsday. He had also taught at Vassar College and
Georgetown University.

He is survived by his wife, Hilda Gore, and a brother, John, of San Francisco.

LOAD-DATE: August 3, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary (Obit)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              76 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 3, 1991, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Sketches of Atlantis Crew Members

SECTION: Section 1; Page 6; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 488 words



John E. Blaha
Mission Commander

Colonel Blaha, a 48-year-old Air Force pilot, made his first trip into space two
years ago as pilot of the shuttle Discovery.

After receiving his pilot's wings in 1967, he completed over 360 combat missions
in Vietnam and was awarded then Air Force Distinguished Flying Cross. He then
served as a test pilot and instructor pilot before being selected as an
astronaut in 1980.

Colonel Blaha received a bachelor's degree in engineering from the Air Force
Academy and a master's degree in astronautical engineering from Purdue
University. He and his wife, Brenda, have two sons and one daughter. His
hometown is San Antonio.

Michael A. Baker
Pilot

Commander Baker, a Navy pilot, is making his first trip into space. NASA chose
him as an astronaut in 1985 and since then he has worked to improve the safety
in shuttle landings.

Before becoming an astronaut, Commander Baker, 37, served as a pilot on the
carrier Midway and later became an instructor at the Navy Test Pilot School.

He earned a bachelor's degree in aerospace engineering from the University of
Texas. Commander Baker and his wife, Deidra, have two daughters. Lemoore,
Calif., is his hometown.

Shannon W. Lucid
Mission Specialist

This will be the third shuttle mission for Dr. Lucid, who has logged more than
289 hours in space.

She spent the first years of her life with her parents in a Japanese prisoner of
war camp in Shanghai, where her parents were serving as missionaries in the
1940's.

Dr. Lucid, 48, received a bachelor's degree in chemistry and a master's degree
and a doctorate in biochemistry from the University of Oklahoma. Bethany, Okla.,
is her hometown. She and her husband, Michael, have two daughters and one son.

G. David Low
Mission Specialist

Mr. Low's first space flight, aboard the Columbia in January 1990, was the
longest shuttle mission, at 261 hours.

Before becoming an astronaut in 1985, he worked at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory
in Pasadena, Calif., planning and engineering spacecraft.

He graduated with a bachelor's degree in physics-engineering from Washington and
Lee University and a bachelor's degree in mechanical engineering from Cornell
University. He also received a master's degree in aeronautics and astronautics
from Stanford University. Mr. Low, who was born in Cleveland, is 35 and single.

James C. Adamson
Mission Specialist

Colonel Adamson, an Army pilot, is making his second space flight.

After flying helicopter missions in Vietnam and earning two Distinguished Flying
Crosses, he became an assistant professor in aerodynamics at the United States
Military Academy and worked as a military test pilot.

He received a bachelor's degree from the military academy and a master's degree
in aerospace engineering at Princeton University. He and his wife, Susan, have
one son. He considers Monarch, Mont., his hometown. He is 45.


NAME: John E. Blaha; Michael A. Baker; Shannon W. Lucid; G. David Low; James C.
Adamson

LOAD-DATE: August 3, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: The Atlantis crew on the way to the launching pad yesterday.
From left were G. David Low, Comdr. Michael A. Baker, Dr. Shannon W. Lucid, Col.
James C. Adamson and Col John E. Blaha. (Agence France-Presse)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              77 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  August 4, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

New & Noteworthy

BYLINE: By GEORGE JOHNSON

SECTION: Section 7; Page 28; Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 853 words


EAST IS EAST, by T. Coraghessan Boyle. (Penguin, $8.95.) A Japanese sailor jumps
ship and learns about the subtleties of American culture while hiding from
immigration officials in an artists' colony. "This irresistible novel is T.
Coraghessan Boyle's finest yet," Gail Godwin said here last year. "Mr. Boyle
gives us an absolutely stunning work, full of brilliant cross-cultural insights,
his usual virtuoso language and one marvelous scene after another."

HIT MEN: Power Brokers and Fast Money Inside the Music Business, by Fredric
Dannen. (Vintage, $11.) A journalist finds that it is often the love of money
more than the love of music that causes records to be made. " 'Hit Men' is an
entertaining collection of anecdotes about an uproariously unsavory subculture
of egomaniacs, sybarites, goniffs and music lovers," Robert Christgau said here
last year. "Exploiting sources that range from trial records, confidential
interviews and other journalists' notes to People magazine and the trade
publications . . . Mr. Dannen has a knack for the telling quote and a healthy
appetite for the juicy story."

A BOTTLE IN THE SMOKE, by A. N. Wilson. (Penguin, $8.95.) In the second volume
of the projected trilogy that began with "Incline Our Hearts," an aspiring
writer named Julian Ramsay discovers the evils of the publishing world. "Mr.
Wilson invites us to compare his trilogy in progress to a serial melodrama,
ending 'A Bottle in the Smoke' with a shameless cliffhanger," Ann Arensberg said
here last year. "Any reader who can resist swallowing that hook is a block of
wood."

ROLLING STONE MAGAZINE: The Uncensored History, by Robert Draper. (Harper
Perennial, $10.95.) From its beginning in 1967, Rolling Stone magazine has been
a tangle of contradictions: an idealistic, crusading showcase for some of the
best new writing and the plaything of an opportunistic editor named Jann Wenner.
"The details of the compromises so essential to his transformation from Angry
Young Man of San Francisco to First Yuppie of Manhattan will be useful to anyone
still puzzling over the unfulfilled promise of the 60's," Charles Kaiser said
here last year.

VARIANT, by Alan Engel. (Jove, $4.95.) After an 8-year-old boy, who is dying of
old age, flees Leningrad, an American scientist discovers that the Soviets are
trying to use genetic engineering to create superhumans.  "There is a great deal
of science in "Variant," all of it absorbing," Newgate Callendar said here in
1989.

LEGACIES: A Chinese Mosaic, by Bette Bao Lord. (Fawcett Columbine, $10.) As the
wife of an American ambassador, Bette Bao Lord recorded the stories of Chinese
visitors who described what the Cultural Revolution and other oppressions had
done to their lives. Last year our reviewer, Linda Mathews, called the book "an
assemblage of indelible portraits that get at the essence of what it means to be
Chinese in our times."

THE CASE OF THE HOOK-BILLED KITES, by J. S. Borthwick (St. Martin's, $4.50.) On
a Texas wildlife refuge, a bird watcher is found strangled by his binocular
straps and a 13-year-old genius disappears. "Miss Borthwick has a keen eye and a
sharp pen," Newgate Callendar said here in 1983.

AS I SAW IT, by Dean Rusk as told to Richard Rusk. Edited by Daniel S. Papp.
(Penguin, $14.95.) Though Dean Rusk and his son Richard strongly disagreed about
the Vietnam War, they collaborated on these memoirs. The former Secretary of
State "is alternately eloquent, funny, moving, devilish and even earthy," John
Lewis Gaddis said here last year.

BETHLEHEM ROAD, by Anne Perry. (Fawcett Crest, $4.95.) In Victorian England,
members of Parliament are found murdered and hanging from lampposts. Anne
Perry's "finely drawn characters couldn't be more comfortable within the customs
and sensibility of their historical period, for which Ms. Perry once again
demonstrates her true and lively passion," Marilyn Stasio said here last year.

PASSAGE THROUGH EL DORADO: Traveling the World's Last Great Wilderness, by
Jonathan Kandell. (Avon, $9.95.) In his travels though the interior of South
America, Jonathan Kandell encountered cattle barons, rubber tappers, oil
drillers and cocaine growers, all trying to exploit the land in different ways.
"He travels the wilderness as it should be traveled, at the level of the
people," Alex Shoumatoff said here in 1984.

PASSION PLAY, by W. Edward Blain. (Avon, $3.95.) As students at a prep school in
rural Virginia rehearse for a production of "Othello," they are interrupted by a
series of deaths that bear a striking resemblance to a recent murder in a Times
Square porno theater. "Mr. Blain creates a rich, claustrophobic world where
reputations and even lives might be lost at a student mixer or faculty tea,"
Marilyn Stasio said here last year.

THE PLEASURES OF THE PAST, by David Cannadine. (Norton, $10.95.) When this
collection of reviews of works on British history was published in 1989, our
reviewer, Edward Hower, said reading it "is like taking an eclectic survey
course given by a professor who enjoys dazzling us with his enthusiasms for
ideas and personalities."

LOAD-DATE: August 4, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Fredric Dannen (Nick Romanenko)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              78 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  August 4, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Arms Makers and Military Face a Wrenching New Era

BYLINE: By DAVID E. ROSENBAUM,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 1; Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 2899 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 3


For dozens of communities, hundreds of companies and tens of thousands of
workers who have thrived off the nation's vast weapons industry, life may never
be the same. But early indications are that for the nation over all, the effect
of sharply lower military budgets will be less severe than many had feared.

Some find the deep military cuts astonishing, some alarming and others long
overdue, but no one doubts any longer that the end of the cold war and the
monstrous Federal budget deficit make these reductions unavoidable.

The initial jolt for some individuals and regions has been severe, to be sure.
Some towns may yet lose their largest employer. Some companies will merge, and
others will go out of business altogether. Some engineers, managers and
assembly-line workers will have to find new jobs.

Adjusting to New Climate

But more than 30 years after Dwight Eisenhower warned of the difficulties of
restraining the military-industrial complex, after decades when threatened
weapons programs found ways time and again to stay alive, many communities and
companies that have relied on Pentagon money have reconciled themselves to the
fact that their world has changed. Since protest would be futile, they are
concentrating on adapting to the new climate.

For example, in the St. Louis area, a center of the weapons industry and now
nearly a year into significant cutbacks, the overall economy has shown
encouraging resiliency.

One reason why the pain may not be so severe after all is that although the
military budgets have grown over the years, the economy itself has grown faster.
So military cuts have much less impact than they once did. The military and its
suppliers now make up only about 5 percent of the $5.5 trillion in goods and
services Americans produce each year.

Another reason is that many American cities and towns have diversified and
become less dependent on manufacturing.

Moreover, new work may be found in a vast program the Pentagon has quietly
embarked on to clean up environmental hazards at military bases.

Congress actually began cutting funds for the military five years ago. But
because of the lag between the time money bills are enacted and when the funds
are spent, the effects are only now beginning to be felt.

The Bush Administration plans for military spending to fall by another 20
percent over the next five years. Many politicians and military analysts expect
Congress to cut even more.

Purchases of aircraft, ships, tanks and missiles -- the lifeblood of an industry
larger than the auto industry -- could well be halved.

Illustrating the pressures on businesses dependent on military contracts, the
General Dynamics Corporation announced in May that it might cut its work force
by nearly a third over the next four years. Most stunning, the announcement came
barely a week after the company, the nation's second-largest weapons supplier,
had won a share of the biggest military contract up for grabs in this decade.

"Our defense establishment is shrinking at an alarming rate," William A. Anders,
the former astronaut who has been General Dynamics' chairman and chief executive
since the first of the year, explained in a letter to employees. "As our market
shrinks, we should plan to shrink as well."

To a large extent, according to more than two dozen Defense Department
officials, out-side military experts, corporate executives, politicians,
economists and social scientists interviewed over the last two months, the
decisions on just which individuals and communities will be hit most turn on the
answers to some fundamental questions that are only beginning to be addressed:

*Which companies, industries and arms-research projects must be kept alive in
case someday a rapid military buildup is warranted?

*Should the Government keep companies alive just for the sake of competition?

*How many large military contractors will the shrunken market bear, and how many
small, specialized companies can the country afford to lose?

*Can military suppliers diversify into civilian work?

*Can the Pentagon learn to use equipment and component parts made primarily for
civilian consumption?

"I don't think the Administration, the military or the Congress has really
decided where we want to be," said Senator William S. Cohen of Maine, a senior
Republican on the Armed Services Committee.

 Politics, as Usual

To a degree, of course, decisions on who wins and who loses in an ever-shrinking
arena will depend on politics. It is not coincidental, for example, that the
House of Representatives, over the objection of Defense Secretary Dick Cheney,
insisted in June on producing the V-22 Osprey, a tilt-rotor aircraft that takes
off and lands like a helicopter but flies like a plane. Much of the work would
be done in Pennsylvania, the home state of Representative John P. Murtha, a
powerful Democrat who heads the Appropriations Committee's Subcommittee on
Defense.

The decisions will also depend on how a basic institutional disagreement between
the military and Congress is resolved. The Pentagon generally wants the latest
in high-technology weapons. Congress, on the other hand, usually favors building
the same old planes and ships so that existing jobs are not lost.

However these decisions are made and whatever the short-term adverse
consequences, economists generally agree that the country will benefit in the
long term from spending less of its resources on the military.

The Background
Military Boom
Draws to Close

From 1980 to 1986, the Pentagon's budget doubled, to $281.4 billion from $140.7
billion. After inflation, that represented a 50 percent increase, the biggest
peacetime expansion of the military in the nation's history. Most of it was
defended on the basis of the possibility of a war with the Soviet Union. Around
Boston, Los Angeles, Seattle, St. Louis, Washington and dozens of other
metropolises, the military buildup fueled an economic boom.

But by 1986 the budget deficit was out of control, and Congress put on the
brakes. In the last half of the 80's, despite the Reagan Administration's
requests for increases, the money Congress allocated to the Pentagon fell by
more than 20 percent after inflation.

Until last year, however, actual spending cuts were made by stretching out
contracts and taking other relatively painless steps rather than by actually
eliminating weapons systems. But the diminished threat from the Soviet Union and
the Government's great budget deficit led the Bush Administration last year to
propose military spending reductions of 20 percent through 1996.

"In the last 12 months," said Gordon Adams, director of the Defense Budget
Project, a nonpartisan, authoritative research organization in Washington, "the
Pentagon abandoned the pinking shears approach and took a dagger to the heart."

Pentagon Spending Fixed

Last October, President Bush and Congress struck a five-year budget deal to
reduce the Federal deficit by nearly $500 billion. Pentagon spending was fixed
through 1993. But beginning in the fiscal year 1994, military and domestic
programs will once again be competing for funds.

Congress's instinct will be "to cut even deeper because of competition from
popular domestic programs, no doubt about it," said Representative John M.
Spratt Jr. of South Carolina, an influential Democrat on the Armed Services
Committee.

The Administration's plan is to reduce active-duty troop strength from 2.2
million in 1987 and 2 million last year to 1.6 million by 1995. The Army and Air
Force face the largest cutbacks. The Administration wants to make deep cuts in
the Reserves and National Guard as well. Spending for research and development
would be cut slightly over this period, and the purchase of weapons could fall
by more than 40 percent.

Even if Congress cuts no more than the Pentagon recommends, the military's share
of the gross national product will fall to 3.6 percent by 1996, from 6.5 percent
in 1985 and about 5.5 percent in 1990.

In dollar terms, the cutbacks will be equivalent to those after World War II,
Korea and Vietnam. But the overall economy is much larger than it was in those
days, so military production is a much smaller proportion of national output. In
World War II, military spending reached 39 percent of G.N.P; it was 13 percent
during the Korean War and 10 percent at the height of the war in Vietnam.

Though the decisions have been made to cut spending, the battles have barely
begun over how and where.

This spring, for instance, the House voted to continue producing a number of
weapons that the Pentagon wanted to terminate, including the M-1 tank and the
F-14 and F-16 fighter planes. To pay the bills, the House wants to slash
billions of dollars from two of the Pentagon's favorite projects, the B-2
stealth bomber and the "Star Wars" missile defense system.

The Senate voted this week to provide the money the Pentagon wants for the B-2
and the Star Wars system and to discontinue production of the M-1 tank and the
planes.

The issues will be settled in a House-Senate conference committee this fall. But
whatever the immediate outcome, calculations by experts in and out of the
Government show that the amount of money available by the middle of the decade
will not be sufficient to pay for the weapons programs and troop strengths the
Pentagon is planning on.

The Industry
Some Companies
May Not Survive

For industry, the changes mean different things to different companies.
Basically, there are four types of military contractors:

*Large companies whose business primarily is with the military and almost
entirely with the Federal Government. Among these companies are General
Dynamics, the Grumman Corporation and the Martin Marietta Corporation.

*Large military contractors that also do a substantial amount of civilian work.
This group includes McDonnell Douglas, Boeing and Raytheon.

*Primarily commercial companies with military divisions like General Electric
and Westinghouse.

*Small businesses that supply the prime contractors and major subcontractors.

For the first two groups of companies, the next few years will be a fight to the
finish with many not surviving. For instance, seven big companies now make
aircraft frames. Most analysts believe that by the end of the decade, two or
three at most will remain.

Some Have a Leg Up

Those already with large amounts of civilian work have a distinct leg up.
Boeing, for example, has a backlog for commercial jets that will last into the
next century.

These companies, said Robert Paulson, an adviser to military contractors for the
management consulting firm McKinsey & Company, realize they must lower their
ambitions, but each insists that it will be able to survive by increasing its
slice of the shrinking military pie.

Renso L. Caporali, Grumman's chairman, acknowledged that some executives were
overly optimistic about the prospects for their company's survival. "All of us,"
he said, "are hoping that somehow we'll dance through the raindrops."

The announcement by General Dynamics in May that it will cut its work force from
90,000 employees now to as few as 63,000 by 1995 came only nine days after it
won a share of the contract to build the F-22 Advanced Tactical Fighter, the
biggest weapons contract of the 90's. The Air Force plans to buy 648 of these
planes at a cost of $95 billion.

Others Take Similar Steps

General Dynamics has not said where jobs will be cut; its biggest plants are in
Texas, Ohio, Michigan, California and Connecticut.

Other large military contractors are taking similar steps. McDonnell Douglas,
the biggest Pentagon contractor, has cut thousands of jobs in the last year,
mostly in St. Louis and Long Beach, Calif., and further cuts are in the offing.
Grumman, with headquarters on Long Island and plants in Florida and Texas, is 25
percent smaller than it was five years ago and will shrink 5 to 10 percent more
in the next year alone, Mr. Caporali said.

Many companies in the third category, those with businesses that are primarily
commercial, have sold or are divesting themselves of their military divisions;
among them: Goodyear, Honeywell and Chrysler.

No one knows for sure how many small businesses work on military subcontracts or
how many people they employ. Paul H. Nisbet, first vice president for research
at Prudential Securities, estimates that 120,000 such suppliers existed five
years ago, that only 25,000 are in the business today and that half of these
will get out of military work in the next five years.

Military planners are not overly concerned that some aircraft companies might go
under. Commercial needs guarantee that the necessary technological edge will be
maintained and that a base will remain if a production increase is required in a
crisis.

Ships are another matter. The few remaining shipyards rely almost entirely on
the Defense Department. A similar problem exists in the case of tanks. General
Dynamics plans to close its tank plant outside Detroit this fall, leaving only
one tank factory, another General Dynamics plant in Lima, Ohio.

Officially, the Bush Administration's view is that the Government should rely on
"market forces" and not be in the position of subsidizing companies or factories
to keep them alive. But in the case of weapons production, said Mr. Caporali,
chairman of Grumman, "the Government is the only market."

The Defense Department estimates that 2.75 million Americans work in industry
jobs financed by contracts with the military. Most of them hold jobs that are
indistinguishable from those in the civilian world, driving trucks, say, or
writing computer programs. These people, if they are laid off, should have
little trouble finding other work.

Only about 500,000 workers are actually making weaponry, according to the Labor
Department, and Government analysts doubt that more than 10 percent of them will
lose their jobs. In a country with nine million people unemployed and an
additional six million unable to find full-time work, 50,000 more on the street
is statistically insignificant.

The problem could be worsened by several factors: The job losses will be
concentrated in particular communities, the jobs that are lost tend to be
high-paid positions, and minority workers are likely to be disproportionately
affected.

 California Biggest Loser

Economists in and out of the Government generally believe that large
metropolitan areas with many military-related jobs but diverse economies should
quickly produce enough new jobs to take up the slack. The Center for the
Continuing Study of California, a research organization in Palo Alto, estimates,
for instance, that despite the military cutbacks, three million net new jobs
will be created in the state by the end of the decade.

More worrisome are the isolated areas. In southeastern Maine, for instance, the
Bath Iron Works Corporation's shipyard is the main employer in a five-county
region. The shipyard soon will have only one contract, to build Arleigh
Burke-class destroyers for the Navy. If the Navy cancels that, as it well could,
the shipyard would have to close and the region might not recover for years.

Diversification
Little Success
Converting Plants

Weapons plants have rarely been converted profitably into civilian factories.

The list of companies whose weapons divisions have failed to make the transition
is legion. Grumman tried without success to sell buses, and Boeing's helicopter
division to sell subway cars. "When it comes to diversification," said Norman R.
Augustine, chairman of Martin Marietta, "the defense industry's record is
unblemished by success."

Murray Weidenbaum, director of the Center for the Study of American Business at
Washington University in St. Louis, said there were three main reasons: Military
contractors do not have the experience or the network of distributors to market
commercial products; they are not used to producing at the mass scale needed for
commercial success, and they do not know how to cut costs to sell a product.

While most executives of these companies have given up on commercial products,
some hope for work from other Government agencies. Martin Marietta, for example,
is working on an automation program for the Postal Service, and Grumman builds
postal trucks.

The military contractors may be further disadvantaged if, as politicians and
academic experts have been advocating for years, the Pentagon begins rewriting
the specifications for weapons parts so that more commercial products can be
used.

Donald J. Yockey, Acting Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition, pressed on
this point at a recent Senate Armed Services Committee hearing, conceded that a
small edge in technology might have to be relinquished to get rid of "impossible
specs."

Senator Sam Nunn, Democrat of Georgia, the committee's chairman, said he was
skeptical that anything could be accomplished in this area. "How are you going
to do that?" Mr. Nunn asked. "You're talking about changing the culture of
military procurement. You have thousands and thousands of people over there
writing military specifications."

But to some degree, that may be precisely what will be taking place in the
coming years: changing the way the military does business.

NEXT: A huge environmental cleanup.

LOAD-DATE: August 4, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

SERIES: Military-Industrial Upheaval/First of five articles.

GRAPHIC: Photos: After four decades, the portion Americans spent on arms and
personnel has steadily and strikingly declined -- despite four periods of
significant buildup. The changes were symbolized by American bombers in World
War II, like the Air Force's Flying Fortresses maneuvering through flak over
Berlin (1); by marines discharging a rocket launcher in Korea in 1951 (2); by
helicopters, G.I.'s and rice paddies in Vietnam (3); by kinetic energy weapons
and other "Star Wars" devices during the Reagan buildup of the early 80's (4)
and, finally, by the end of the cold war and, last week, the signing of a United
States-Soviet arms treaty (5). (pg. 34)

Graph of National military spending as a percentage of gross national product,
in fiscal year, 1940's-1980's. (pg. 34)

TYPE: Series

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              79 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  August 4, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Street Patrol Gives Veterans Purpose and a Home

BYLINE: By DAVID GONZALEZ

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 42; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1010 words


Bathed in the harsh light of a corner bodega, Joseph Durant and Bruce Weems cast
a stony glance at the cars that whooshed down Classon Avenue in Brooklyn past
blocks lined with abandoned buildings. Neighbors lounged on nearby stoops and
children darted about the sidewalk as the two men stood in warning to the drug
dealers who once swaggered on the corner.

"We want the kids to get outside of their houses and do it with safety," said
Mr. Weems, a man with an imposing build and easy smile. "We want the people who
come to this area to know they definitely can't sell drugs here."

Mr. Weems and his friends, all members of the Veterans Civilian Observation
Patrol, or Vcops, have the street smarts and survival skills to make that
happen. The patrol was founded in 1988 by homeless veterans at the Borden Avenue
Men's Shelter in Long Island City, Queens, to help the men adjust to life
outside the shelter system.

Last September about two dozen of the men traded the barracks-like homeless
shelter they lived in for a renovated apartment building at 675 Classon Avenue
in the Prospect Heights section of Brooklyn.

Their arrival has been bittersweet. Their new home had chronically jammed locks,
a leaky roof, chipped ceilings and a faulty heating system. The veterans also
say that their community patrols, which were supported by the police in Long
Island City, have only recently received encouragement from police officials at
the 77th Precinct in Prospect Heights.

And the drug dealers and gaunt-faced prostitutes who lurk in the Brooklyn
neighborhood test their resolve to start new lives.

'This Is the True Test'

Some of the veterans have stumbled. Others have vanished completely, leaving
behind suitcases and plastic bags full of clothes that Otis Caldwell, the
patrol's commander, keeps in his apartment. But four of the original group of
veterans living in the building have found better jobs or rejoined their
families.

"A better neighborhood would be better for our recovery," said Mr. Caldwell, a
recovering alcoholic who was awarded two Bronze Stars and the Purple Heart in
Vietnam and is now the house manager at the Brooklyn building. "If you can make
it here, you are well on the road to recovery. This is the true test."

Twenty-three men live in the studios and two-room duplex apartments in the
renovated four-story, red-brick building. It was leased from a local developer
through the Veterans Service Corps, a nonprofit group whose aim is to provide
homeless veterans with long-term affordable housing and counseling, training and
support services.

The corps was founded two years ago by Russell T. Hicks, a former caseworker at
the Borden Avenue shelter. He said he had grown weary of seeing men leave the
shelter only to return weeks later, dazed, dirty and forlorn. Program members
are referred to Mr. Hicks by the Veterans Administration.

An Address of His Own

Since he moved into the building three months ago, Freddie Threewittes often
writes to his wife and children in California, sending them part of the money he
receives steering customers to a Manhattan electronics store.

The biggest changes in his life, he said, are the kind that most people take for
granted -- waking up in his own bed, having his own address and staying off
crack.

"This is real nice," he said. "It helps you to get started and on your feet to
do something for yourself."

Mr. Caldwell proudly tells of how his 9-year-old daughter, Dyon, can now visit
him for games of checkers or walks.

"She knows she can come by anytime she wants," Mr. Caldwell said, "and my head
is going to be held high."

In order to live in the building and be eligible for $30-a-day stipends from the
Veterans Administration, the men must be employed, in counseling or attending
school.

Their enthusiasm has been tempered by frustration with getting the building's
defects repaired. After a dispute, the landlord agreed to forgive $41,000 in
back rent, reduce the monthly rent and apply it to a lower sale price of
$630,000.

While the veterans have settled the dispute with the owner, they have waged
their own battle with officials at the 77th Precinct. They say they need police
recognition to gain respect among their neighbors.

Members of the veterans patrol say they witnessed a robbery late last year and
called the police, only to have the responding officer -- gun in hand -- push
Mr. Caldwell against the wall while the robbers escaped.

"That sent a bad signal," Mr. Caldwell said. "We were mocked by the
neighborhood." Police officials at the 77th Precinct said they did not recall
the incident.

Such incidents, the veterans say, have discouraged them from patrolling more
than two blocks from their building.

Deputy Inspector Charles Reiser, commander of the 77th Precinct, acknowledged
that communication with the veterans had not been good, and that members of the
precinct's community council, a police and civilian advisory board, thought the
veterans were either vagrants or vigilantes.

But in a recent meeting with the veterans, Inspector Reiser promised to give the
patrol radios and to assign a beat officer to patrol with them twice a week. He
also said they could use a station house annex for their headquarters, so that
the patrol could be expanded to include a nearby subway station that had been
robbed repeatedly.

"We have not reached out enough to them," Inspector Reiser said. "I really would
like to make this work; the community could certainly use them."

But even on a limited patrol, their neighbors have noticed an improvement in the
month the veterans have patrolled the neighborhood.

"It's slowed down since they started the patrol," Eloise Brown, vice president
of the We the People Block Association, said of crime and crack use on the
block. "We don't see the folks who used to hang around like they used to."

Mr. Weems suspects they will return. "The corner here still has a 'For Sale'
sign on it," he said. "I fully expect bullets are going to fly on this corner."

LOAD-DATE: August 4, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: A corner of Classon Avenue in the Prospect Heights area of
Brooklyn being patrolled by two members of the Veterans Civilian Observation
Patrol, or Vcops. The group was founded in 1988 by homeless veterans who later
moved into a renovated apartment building in the neighborhood. (Michelle V.
Agins/The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              80 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  August 4, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Down From The Summit;
On the World Stage, Moscow Now Plays Second Banana

BYLINE: By SERGE SCHMEMANN

SECTION: Section 4; Page 1; Column 1; Week In Review Desk

LENGTH: 1356 words

DATELINE: AMMAN, Jordan


SITTING side by side last week to announce that they would jointly try to
convene a Middle East peace conference in October, Presidents Bush and Mikhail
S. Gorbachev made for a heartening sight. To all appearances, the great
superpowers were laying aside their swords and propaganda mills to join hands
and try to bring peace to one of the most stubbornly volatile parts of the
world. "Partnership" was the new buzz word of great-power relations.

Yet when Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d took his new mandate back to the
Israelis and Arabs, only one superpower was really in play. The other -- for all
the MIG's, Scuds and Kalashnikovs still littering the region -- was nowhere to
be seen.

That inconsistency seemed to capture the new reality of global politics that was
already evident in the gulf war, and that peeked throughthe glittering
choreography of the Moscow summit. Broke and groping for a new foundation, shorn
of its mystique as champion of a new order, the Soviet Union no longer can serve
as armorer and ally to third-world rebels and troublemakers or as the global
foil to American might. Nor is it really the full-fledged new partner in peace
that the Moscow summit portrayed. The renewed search for a Middle East peace is
essentially an American show, and Moscow's role is basically to provide a veneer
of universal solidarity.

The development is not without irony, since the international conference that
Mr. Baker has been shuttling about to convene as a means of bringing Israel face
to face with its Arab neighbors is something Moscow has demanded for years. In
the old days, before Mr. Gorbachev, the call for a peace conference cosponsored
by the two superpowers represented Moscow's perennial quest for a recognized and
formal acceptance as an equal to Washington in shaping the world. For those very
reasons, the United States did its best to prevent the conference.

With the waning of Soviet powers, however, Washington suddenly decided that such
a conference was really not such a bad idea after all. The advantages could be
substantial: The Soviet Union could complete the international shell under which
the Israelis and Arabs could square off one-to-one to sort out their quarrels,
and Moscow could thus publicly demonstrate to its former clients, most notably
Syria, that there really is no place left to run. If the United States could get
Moscow to sit by its side, the Arabs might come to believe that defying
Washington is no longer a practical option. And the disadvantages of teaming up
with Moscow have become marginal; there is little chance that Moscow will soon
rear up as a major contender again.

Some Soviet officials did squirm at the walk-on role. During the gulf war, many
a general or die-hard Communist chafed at the spectacle of a lucrative former
arms client getting pulverized by high-tech Western weapons -- with Moscow's
endorsement. And when Mr. Gorbachev traveled to London to seek aid from the
seven major industrialized nations last month, unreconstructed cold warriors
grumbled at the notion of holding the hat out to the ideological foe.

Now, on the Middle East, some Soviet officials privately complained about
Western commentaries that implied that Moscow is being treated more as a
superpuppet than as a superpower. The "palisade of missiles," as Yuri Andropov
once called it, is still there, they noted darkly.

It is, of course. And if superpower status is measured by throw-weight, by
potential or by sheer size, the Soviet Union qualifies in anybody's book. But it
is equally obvious that without resorting to raw nuclear blackmail, Moscow no
longer can muster real clout. A last-minute effort to broker peace with
President Saddam Hussein of Iraq in February did nothing but irritate the
Western allies, and in the current initiative the choice really has been to
accept the proferred role or simply get bypassed.

The new shape of the American-Soviet relationship was hard to miss even in the
carefully staged visit by Mr. Bush to Moscow, and "partnership" was not the word
that came automatically to mind. Mr.  Bush's public lecture to the Soviets about
what they are doing right and what they are doing wrong -- the list of missteps
included retention of islands disputed by Japan, continuing support for Fidel
Castro and a still-sizable level of military spending -- reflected a presumption
in Washington and the West that the democracies have a duty and a right to tutor
Moscow in the etiquette and organization of their world.

The relationship is not all one-sided. To Mr. Gorbachev, beleaguered from all
sides, a ceremonial role in the Middle East peace process provides at least a
semblance of the international glamour that forms his strongest claim to remain
the paramount chief of his restless and assertive republics.

The Middle East peace process in particular offers Moscow a mechanism to
extricate itself with some honor from past relationships. Unlike the war with
Iraq, in which the Soviet Union left a former client to the mercies of Western
smart bombs, in the Arab-Israeli dispute Moscow can perhaps be seen to be
guiding former proteges toward the general peace that all sides say they want.

To anyone who remembers the Soviet Union when its reach extended from Nicaragua
to Afghanistan, from Vietnam to Angola, however, the veneer of new partnership
is rather transparent. Certainly there was a major measure of courage and "new
thinking" in Mr. Gorbachev's willingness to pull back. But it is also obvious
that Moscow's ideological and economic bankruptcy have left it with few other
serious choices -- that to stand any chance of emerging from the quagmire into
which it had sunk, it had no alternative but to abandon the roles of
super-threat and super-pest.

At the London summit, as in Moscow, Western leaders seemed prepared to accept
that Moscow really had embarked on a new road. But the insistence that Moscow
has yet to embrace real economic and political reform, the reserve on pumping
new credits into Moscow, the offer of only associate membership in the
International Monetary Fund, the patronizing profusion of lectures and advice --
all contribute to the conclusion that the Soviet Union is still on probation.

The West seems prepared to support Mr. Gorbachev, to give him an honored seat in
their councils, to dismantle the accumulated baggage of the cold war, to pay
homage to the great potential of the Soviet Union, but it is not ready by a long
shot to welcome its President as a full member of their club.

Now and then during Mr. Bush's visit, Soviet officials let their pique show. If
the cold war is over, why do the Americans still restrict high-tech imports to
the Soviet Union? If the Americans are prepared to make deep cuts in strategic
missiles, the backbone of the Soviet nuclear deterrent, why is there not similar
readiness to curb Star Wars, that child of the Reaganite right? If Mr. Bush
deems it possible after 40 years to grant the Soviet Union a favored trading
status already bestowed on all but the most naughty of countries, where are the
credits and trade that the West dangled as a carrot throughout the cold war?

And yet, even as the powers explore and test the new order taking shape in the
aftermath of the cold war, even as Moscow chafes and Mr. Baker uses his new
leverage in the Middle East, there is something indisputably heartening in the
memory of the two Presidents bantering on stage.

These are still two powers that could destroy each other and much of the world
in a matter of minutes, that until a short while ago stood toe to toe in every
global hot spot. However unequal, they are both still superpowers, masters of
vast expanses of land, awesome resources and formidable arsenals.

Yet at this summit they no longer needed to talk of managing their rivalry, but
about how to rescue the Soviet economy and how to defuse conflicts they had so
recently helped to sustain. This meeting, at this time, seems to have been
almost boringly routine. And if they have managed to disengage, then perhaps
even the Middle East is not hopeless.

LOAD-DATE: August 4, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Mikhail S. Gorbachev at his country retreat last week during
talks with President Bush. (Tass via Agence France-Presse)(pg. 1); Secretary of
State James A. Baker 3d with Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir last week.
(Reuters)(pg. 2)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              81 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  August 4, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Editorial Notebook;
How to Look for M.I.A.'s Travel Barriers Invite Scams

BYLINE: By DAVID C. UNGER

SECTION: Section 4; Page 14; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 560 words


Even during the peak of America's influence in Vietnam two decades ago, many
G.I.'s felt there was something otherworldly about the place. Since then,
Vietnam's mysteries have deepened. Cumbersome Treasury regulations imposed after
the war strongly discourage U.S. citizens from traveling to Vietnam and
Cambodia. Hanoi's own bureaucratic rules have multiplied the obstacles.

That double paper curtain has worked to the advantage of unscrupulous con
artists who prey on the emotional vulnerability of families of servicemen
missing in action. In the absence of real information, it is all too easy to
persuade M.I.A. families and friends that many middle-aged American slave
laborers populate Indochina's jungles, villages and cities.

Pentagon investigators, who do have access to Vietnam and Cambodia, insist that
almost all reported M.I.A. sightings turn out to be erroneous or fraudulent.
Many Americans, however, are reluctant to take the word of faceless officials. A
better response would be to reduce the obstacles to travel, giving ordinary
Americans a chance to look around for themselves.

Last summer, I got some idea of what that might be like, visiting Vietnam on
assignment. I spent most of my time in major cities and none of it trying to
track down M.I.A. reports. If Americans were being held in rural villages or
jungle prison camps, I wouldn't have run into them.

But my trip did have the salutary effect of demystifying Vietnam. And it
suggested, further, that allowing Americans to visit Vietnam freely might do
much to demystify the M.I.A. issue.

I saw an ideological police state, but the repression was not so tight as to
smother unsolicited expressions of popular discontent. A sizable proportion of
Vietnamese adults speak some English, and many have regular contact with
relatives who now live in the U.S. If there were any number of living M.I.A.'s,
it would be hard for Vietnamese authorities to prevent some detailed and
verifiable information reaching Pentagon investigators -- or the ears of
ordinary tourists.

I also found that even hard-line Communist authorities, aware of their country's
catastrophic economic failures, were eager for outside investment. Vietnam may
still be isolated from the United States but it is not isolated from the larger
capitalist world. In addition to growing numbers of Western business people,
Vietnam hosts a well-informed and inquisitive diplomatic community, including
Australians, Japanese and Swedes. This international presence would surely
complicate any hope of keeping large and explosive secrets.

The best reassurance, however, would come from changes permitting a sharp rise
in the number of American travelers to Vietnam.

Hanoi has recently started doing its part, upgrading its hotels and simplifying
paperwork. Washington still resists. The Bush Administration's policy is that
normal diplomatic relations -- including freedom of travel -- cannot begin until
there is government-to-government progress on resolving the M.I.A. issue, as
well as Vietnamese cooperation in international peace efforts concerning
Cambodia.

On the M.I.A. question, that seems to be putting things exactly backward. If
there are in fact significant numbers of living M.I.A.'s in Indochina,
encouraging American travel would greatly improve the odds of finding them.




LOAD-DATE: August 4, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              82 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  August 4, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

SPECIAL REPORT;
A Milieu Apart

BYLINE: By Laura Mansnerus

SECTION: Section 4A; Page 18; Column 1; Education Life Supplement

LENGTH: 1187 words


AT TEMPLE University in Philadelphia, about 350 students pledged fraternities
and sororities last year. Staff members at the university's day care center
estimate that they fielded inquiries from more than 1,000 students. And the
university's Adult Program, whose hottest workshops are "Assertiveness Training"
and "Going to College as an Adult," heard from about twice that many.

At Temple, as at many American universities, to be 25 is to be more typical than
noticeable. But it is also to be an adult, with adult concerns and an
unmistakable sense of purpose. For mny students, college is no longer a stage of
life but a place to do work.

The campus "is not my life, as it was when I was 18," said Brenda McBride, a
25-year-old senior majoring in journalism, during a break from her job as a
lifeguard, which pays tuition.

Ms. McBride lives in Philadelphia's suburbs, works in center city, rarely
socializes with students and seems to be talking about another person when she
recalls her days at the University of Arizona, where she enrolled at age 18 and
quit three years later. "Those were my friends, the people I was going to spend
four years with," she said. "Now, I do my work, I listen in class and I leave."

A Sizable Majority Over 22

So do many other Temple students, judging from the university's demographic
profile. In the spring semester, more than three-quarters of its 20,000
undergraduates were 20 to 29 years old, with a sizable majority over 22; only
8.7 percent were 18- and 19-year-olds.

There are, of course, plenty of students on campus who took the direct route
from high school. There are fraternity mixers and football games and group
bar-hopping.

There is even enough youth around to make some of the older students feel
conspicuous. "At first I had a complex," said Patty Kahn, a 30-year-old senior
literature major. "I wouldn't tell anybody how old I was." (She was 27.)

But Ms. McBride said that she, like other older students interviewed, does not
feel self-conscious in the least. As to how these students fit in with younger
students, "The only contact I have with them is in the classroom," she said.

These students do not socialize with classmates partly because they have no
time, partly because they completed adolescent rites of passage at some other
time and place don't want to relive them. "Freshman dorms are terrible," said
Ms. Kahn, who lived in one at Ithaca College in New York 12 years ago. "Girls
crying on the telephone, men sneaking into bathrooms . . ."

Kate Bovich, who enrolled at Temple at age 32 and graduated with a journalism
degree last year, fondly recalls her teen-age years at Reed College in Oregon.
But she says that as an older student -- a working, divorced student with a
small daughter -- "getting drunk and stupid and worrying about my love life was
not something I missed."

"There is a generational difference," said Ms. Bovich, who is now the college's
adviser for student publications. "Their experience is different from mine. They
watch different TV shows. They didn't go to school when I did. They didn't have
the Vietnam War."

At the same time, there seems to be a consensus on the nation's campuses that
age does not matter the way it did a generation ago. As young people delay life
decisions, it seems that 30-year-olds are dressing and talking more like
20-year-olds than they used to. "I've met 25-year-old mothers of three who look
like everybody else to me," said Rebecca Alpert, associate director of Temple's
Adult Program, the counseling service for adults (anyone 22 or older, by
Temple's definition). "They wear jeans and blend right in."

It is not just to their elders that so many older students look like, well,
students. Dina Levy, a 20-year-old junior at the University of Wisconsin, said:
"The freshmen somehow you can pick out, and the oldest people you can pick out.
But otherwise, when I sit in class, it's not easy to tell how old anybody is."

At the University of California at Berkeley, where in 1964 students were
cautioned against trusting anyone<pl48,3.2over 30, age differences are
"overwhelmed" by disparities in cultural and economic background, said Anthony
J. Cascardi, a professor of comparative literature.

Still, Professor Cascardi said that in class older students were noticeable for
taking strong positions. "And when you're teaching literature," he said,
"sometimes you're just dying for a solid position to use, other than the one you
want to tease out of the students, for the basis of a dialogue."


Where the Age Difference Shows

In Paul Sunstein's Intellectual Heritage course at Temple, which runs from
Genesis to Kafka, there is much probing of characters' emotional crises. In
those discussions the difference between 18 and 28 shows.

"The older ones are better at dealing with the emotional content of literature,"
Professor Sunstein said. The 18-year-olds, he explained, "think everyone's a
fanatic. They're all rational calculators. When in their lives have they ever
had a strong experience?"

Jonathan Friedlaender, a Temple anthropology professor, said of his older
students: "They're much more likely, if they're paying instead of mommy and
daddy, to demand more out the course than just a good grade."

Older students acknowledge that they are nervier than many classmates. Patty
Kahn said she often doesn't bother to raise her hand before she speaks. Bill
Roper, 34, who returned to the University of Pennsylvania's Wharton School, said
he found class discussions more interesting -- if sometimes elementary --
because of his experiences after dropping out in 1977. Besides starting a
textbook-sales business, writing computer programs and running a
mortgage-finance corporation, Mr. Roper served on the Republican City Committee
in Boston, the finance committee of the Massachusetts Republican Party and the
National Highway Safety Committee. In Philadelphia, he is active in ward
politics.

"Now, if you're sitting in a survey course in political science, you know some
of that," he said, adding that he is delighted to debate with the recitation
leader.

The same is true of her undergraduates who have worked, said Frances E. Zollers,
a professor of law and public policy at Syracuse University's School of
Management. "They'll draw a parallel with what they're hearing in class and
offer it as an example if I'm struggling," she said. Older students are not
necessarily better students, Professor Zollers warned. "They make the same
reasoning errors that everybody going through a first-year law class does.
They're also not in test-taking mode, which hurts them."

But most professors say older students compensate by asking what they are doing
wrong. "Age changes the nature of the exchange," said Jim Gibson, who also
teaches Intellectual Heritage at Temple. "They're able to negotiate." Then, he
said, they improve quickly.

"I beg for them," said Professor Gibson, who spends much of his class time
coaxing and lighting upon hesitant comments from students. "And when they walk
in the door I thank them and I coddle them."

LOAD-DATE: August 4, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: September 15, 1991, Sunday

CORRECTION:

An article in the special Education Life section on Aug. 4 about older
undergraduates misidentified Temple University's adviser for student
publications. She has pointed out in a recent letter that her name is Kate
Bozich.


GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              83 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  August 4, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

PRACTICAL TRAVELER;
Access to the Jersey Shore for the Wheelchair-Bound

BYLINE: By EDWARD BROWN;  EDWARD BROWN is author of "Just Around the Corner in
New Jersey" (Middle Atlantic).

SECTION: Section 5; Page 3; Column 1; Travel Desk

LENGTH: 1895 words


EARLY last summer beachgoers at Harvey Cedars on Long Beach Island, N.J.,
discovered that something new had been added over the winter at the 80th Street
beach. A sturdy wooden structure stood at the entrance between the dunes at the
head of the street, with a wide ramp leading from designated disabled parking
spaces to a center deck with built-in benches, and another walkway going from
there down to the beach sand. An open-air shower and drinking fountain were off
to the right.

It was Harvey Cedars' answer to providing beach access to wheelchair users. Word
of the initiative spread quickly; the first week the ramp was opened to the
public, residents of a home for the disabled in North Jersey used it for daily
excursions during their vacation on Long Beach Island.

Harvey Cedars is not alone in providing beach access for the disabled.  A number
of towns up and down the coast have found money for such facilities. A major
financial source for these projects has been the Federal Community Block Grant
Program, which funnels Federal funds via the states to counties and ultimately
to municipalities for projects of their choosing.

Although the recreation section of the Barrier-Free Sub Code of the Uniform
Construction Code N.J.A.C. 5:23-7 mandates disabled accessibility to public
recreational facilities, it extends only to new construction in the public
sector. Moreover, the requirement does not apply in those places where, in the
words of the code, "wave action would render the provision of a ramp
impractical." Emily Templeton, research analyst for the New Jersey Department of
Community Affairs, says, "It really depends on what's already in place and
what's practical . . . Largely undeveloped beaches of dunes and sand probably
wouldn't fall under the requirement."

Another consideration is the configuration of the shoreline. An area of mature
and sizable dunes might be unsuitable since a ramp cannot have too steep an
angle for the wheelchair-bound to negotiate.

When the phasing in of the Americans With Disabilities Act begins, it is
possible that interpretations under its public accommodations section -- which
takes effect in January -- may result in extending requirements across the
country for disabled access to beaches, lakes and swimming pools.

At the moment, New Jersey is not in the vanguard of providing wheelchair access
to public facilities to the same extent that California and Florida are,
according to Robert Zywicki, publisher of Itinerary Magazine, a bimonthly
focusing on travel and recreation by the disabled. Those states, which are
"light-years ahead of anyplace else," he said, saw the earliest initiatives for
disabled access and facilities, particularly during the Vietnam War.

In most resorts along the Jersey Shore wheelchair users theoretically can get
close enough to the beach to enjoy the sea breeze and the ocean view, but by no
means will they easily get onto the beach itself. Even getting close can be
difficult. One wheelchair user, Martin Irons, who is an advocacy coordinator for
United Cerebral Palsy, has found some resorts' ramps "virtually impossible for
anyone to negotiate on their own."

When he goes downhill on some of the older ramps, he added, "friends of mine
have had to pull backward on the chair to keep it in control."

Once a wheelchair user has successfully negotiated a ramp, "navigating a chair
through the sand is very difficult with standardized tires," he said, although
an adaptation has been produced that can make it somewhat easier, particularly
with one of the newer, lighter chairs on the market.

Among the provisions for wheelchair access in New Jersey shore towns are ramps
sloping down off boardwalks or through dune lines; movable catwalks extending
onto the sand; the adaptation of beach entrances to allow cars and vans to drive
up on the sand, and a jitney service provided by four-wheel-drive lifeguard
vehicles.

The following is a sampling of facilities allowing beach and boardwalk access by
wheelchair users along the shore, organized from north to south.

Sandy Hook.  The Sandy Hook unit of Gateway National Park is "becoming
disabled-accessible," in the words of a spokeswoman, but some of the older
facilities, such as the Visitor Center, built as a Life Saving Station in 1880
and designated a Historic Landmark Structure, are difficult to modify ("The
doors are just too narrow, for one thing").

Currently the best facilities for the disabled at this section of Gateway
National Park, the northernmost resort on the Jersey Shore, are at Area D, which
is one of the large bathing areas. A ramp from up-front disabled parking goes to
the rest rooms and concession stands at Area D and another ramp extends westward
over the marsh to the bayside. This section of Sandy Hook wetlands is regularly
frequented by ospreys and other waterfowl.

Smaller beach centers with full access have been planned for Sandy Hook for some
time, but the building date has been postponed a number of times and is not yet
firm. The most optimistic prediction is that these may be in place by next
summer. Telephone: (908) 872-0115.

Asbury Park.  There are no ramps allowing access from the boardwalk to the
beach. Ten streets from Asbury to Eighth, which debouch onto the milelong
boardwalk, have ramps that are wheelchair negotiable. All parking lots have
modified curbing. (908) 775-0900.

Lavallette.  Ramps from the boardwalk onto the beach are at Philadelphia, Kerr
and Reese Avenues. The boardwalk itself is generally flat enough for wheelchair
access from the street at any point. (908) 793-7477.

Seaside Park The oceanfront, which extends almost two miles, has wheelchair
access to the boardwalk which parallels it from all east-west streets (250 feet
apart). The ramps that provide this access are of varying pitch, with a few
being quite formidable owing to the irregular configuration of the beach. "We're
trying to modify the ramps, some of which have greater rise than others, to make
for easier access," says the Borough Clerk, Jay Delaney, "but it's a big job and
it takes time. We're also in the process of removing curb lines on streets
leading to the beach and I'd say by now we have about half of them modified for
easy wheelchair passage."

There is one ramp from the boardwalk to the beach at Seaside Park, a portable
one that is usually found in the vicinity of M Street. This ramp extends about
75 feet onto the beach, roughly half the width of the sand here. (908) 793-0234.

Island Beach State Park.  The north bathhouse at Island Beach State Park has two
long walkways extending from the ocean side of the building out over the
duneline and onto the beach. The north walkway has wheelchair "parking" on an
enlarged deck (15 by 15 feet) at the terminus. A ramp leads down to the sand
from the deck, and in the summer season lifeguards position portable walks here
that go from these ramps to the high water mark. The north bathhouse has no
curbs or barriers that would impede wheelchair access. The south end bathhouse
has a rather shorter fixed ramp running from the building out over the duneline
onto the beach, but no enlarged deck. Both bathhouses have disabled-access rest
rooms with showers and toilets. (908) 793-0506.

Long Beach Island.  Though there is no boardwalk here, several of the
municipalities on this 18-mile island have built access points to the beach, for
the wheelchair-bound, at the ends of streets regularly used by beachgoers. These
access points go through the Island's protective duneline. Barnegat Light has
ramps going from streethead to beach at 8th and 29th Streets, Harvey Cedars has
one at 80th Street (with shower and drinking fountain), and Ship Bottom a ramp
at 20th Street. Besides two disabled-access points in Holgate, Long Beach
Township has another at 68th Street in Brant Beach and permits picnicking here
for all as well, a rare dispensation at the crowded Jersey Shore. On the bayside
at 68th Street the municipal park has two ramp-equipped gazebos, and among the
playground amusements is a child's swing designed to accommodate a wheelchair.
Farther down the island, 5th Street in Beach Haven is accessible to the
disabled. (609) 494-7211.

Atlantic City.  There are six locations from which wheelchairs can get to the
beach from the Atlantic City boardwalk: Albany and Texas; Martin Luther King
Boulevard; New Jersey and New Hampshire Avenues, and South Carolina Avenue.
Concrete ramps from the street to the boardwalk are at St. Charles Place and
Missouri Avenue. (609) 347-5312.

Ocean City.  A ramp at 12th Street goes from the boardwalk down to the sand, but
extends only a few yards onto the beach, which is quite short here. Another ramp
at the south end of Ocean City at 34th Street has a contiguous wooden walkway
that allows wheelchairs to get about 100 feet out onto the beach. There is also
wheelchair access (a hardened surface path) to that portion of the beach
landward of the boardwalk at 5th Street, but not to the bathing area beyond.

There are concrete wheelchair access ramps to the boardwalk runningfrom every
street in Ocean City that runs up to the beach. (609) 399-6111.

Avalon.  Avalon's 10-block boardwalk has no wheelchair ramps to the beach, but
provides hardpack driveways to the head of the beach for vehicles offloading and
onloading wheelchairs at 8th, 15th, 20th, 32d, 38th, 60th and 79th Streets.

The Avalon Beach Patrol four-wheel drive will also pick up wheelchair users at
32d Street for two-way trips to the beach. (609) 967-7587.

Stone Harbor.  The seawall which runs along the beachfront at Stone Harbor has
ramps at 85th, 96th, 102d, 106th, 118th and 122d Streets; pavilions at 89th and
101st, and a deck at 95th. Drinking fountains are also located at these beach
entrances. (609) 368-5102.

Wildwood.  There are access ramps to the Wildwood boardwalk at every street head
in Wildwood, but none from the boardwalk to the beach. The beaches at Wildwood,
arguably the broadest along the Jersey Shore, require something special in the
way of access for wheelchairs. Wildwood Beach Patrol vehicles will shuttle the
disabled from the boardwalk to the beach in the morning and back again in the
afternoon. Arrangements should be made at least a day in advance with the
Information Center here, though during the week it is sometimes possible to
arrange a lift on shorter notice. (609) 522-8258.

Cape May.  A hallmark of this old resort on the southern tip of the Jersey Shore
is a one-and-one-half-mile promenade parallel to the beachfront; ramps provide
wheelchair access at 17 points. There are ramps from the promenade to the beach
at Broadway, Grant and Gurney Streets. (609) 884-5508.. At Cape May Point State
Park, just to the south, the Environmental Education Building and Museum are
equipped with ramps; water fountains and picnic tables are designed for
wheelchair users, and there is disabled parking. A ramp runs from the parking
lot here to a deck (about 8 by 18 feet) on the beach (no surf bathing) joined by
a wheelchair-accessible walkway to a larger covered pavilion, with charcoal
grills nearby for picnicking. A second ramp leads from the parking area to a
half-mile boardwalk nature trail through a freshwater wood. The boardwalk is
five feet wide and has numerous built-in turnarounds. (609) 884-2159.

LOAD-DATE: August 4, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: At Ocean City, access ramps allow wheelchairs onto the boardwalk
from several streets, and at a few spots, from the boardwalk to the beach. (pg.
3); On the Ocean City boardwalk. (pg. 21) (Kit Kittle for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              84 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  August 4, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

His Dog Tags Don't Come Off

BYLINE: By Joseph E. Persico;  Joseph E. Persico has written biographies of
Nelson A. Rockefeller, Edward R. Murrow and William J. Casey. He is currently
writing a book on the Nuremberg trials.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 6; Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 827 words



HAZARDOUS DUTY
An American Soldier in the Twentieth Century.
By John K. Singlaub with Malcolm McConnell.
Illustrated. 574 pp. New York: Summit Books. $24.95.

Singlaub? The name resonates vaguely. Isn't he the general who got himself in
hot water with Jimmy Carter? Didn't he have something to do with the Iran-contra
affair? "Hazardous Duty" is a memoir of the 45-year career of Maj. Gen. John K.
Singlaub, most recently in the public eye for his role in supplying the
Nicaraguan contras. He emerges as a conundrum -- an archconservative soldier who
favored racial integration of the armed forces early on, who agreed that
President Harry Truman had to fire Gen. Douglas MacArthur from his Korean War
command, who found the My Lai massacre in a league with Nazi atrocities and who
calls Oliver North the "gullible dupe" of international arms hustlers.

General Singlaub's career alternated upfront Army billets with shadowy missions
in clandestine wars: behind enemy lines in Nazi-occupied France, in China on the
eve of the Communist victory, with the C.I.A. in the subzero season of the cold
war, running covert operations in South Korea. In Vietnam, General Singlaub
headed an outfit opaquely entitled the Studies and Observations Group. His real
job was to organize sabotage, guerrilla warfare and psychological dirty tricks.
Some of those tricks sound more like postadolescent pranks. General Singlaub
gleefully describes a sham resistance movement that broadcast news to North
Vietnam about Communist officers at home seducing the wives of soldiers fighting
in the South.

In the most off-the-wall Singlaub enterprise, North Vietnamese peasants and
fishermen were kidnapped and taken to an island that had been set up to look
like a piece of "liberated" North Vietnam. There the captives were fed banquet
meals, had their ills tended to and their teeth fixed, were showered with
luxuries and finally allowed to go home, presumably to spread the word about the
joys of life under South Vietnamese rule. Your tax dollars at work.

General Singlaub emerges here as a cold war die-hard, even with no cold war left
to fight. Perestroika, glasnost and the meltdown of the Eastern bloc are to him
merely strategic retreats while "the Soviet Union is regrouping."

Despite its political rigidity, however, this memoir does have a rewarding
dimension. It is a revealing self-portrait of that perennial figure of history
-- the professional soldier. General Singlaub recalls sailing home from World
War II as the men with him "talked longingly of normal peacetime lives, of
college, families, of the dream homes they would build in the suburbs and the
cars they would drive to them." General Singlaub opted instead for long
separations from his family while he dared death in global hot spots. One cannot
help feeling a certain sympathy for this gruff, honest soldier. He tells of
enrolling in his spare time in college, where some instructors looked upon him
as a curious relic of a bygone age. Their prejudices puzzled him. Do liberals
really believe that the military enjoys war, he wondered. That, he reasoned, is
"as logical as assuming surgeons enjoy cancer."

But in the end, the good soldier self-destructed. The Washington Post quoted
General Singlaub, in what the general assumed was an off-the-record briefing, as
criticizing President Carter's proposal for cutting United States forces in
Korea. He was called on the White House carpet by Mr. Carter himself. General
Singlaub managed to escape with his skin and his rank, but less than a year
later, during a lecture at a college, he publicly questioned Mr. Carter's
national security policies and was essentially forced to retire.

In mufti, General Singlaub became a missionary for the gospel of the right: "The
Soviets are not born-again Christians. They are in fact born-again Bolsheviks."
He revived the American chapter of an outfit called the World Anti-Communist
League and announced he was going to keep out the racists, anti-Semites,
neo-Nazis and other kooks who he admits infested the organization in the past.

When, in 1984, the Boland Amendment cut off military aid to the contras, General
Singlaub found a new cause. He solicited foreign governments and American fat
cats for contra aid. Then, after the Iran-contra affair blew up, Ollie North,
General Singlaub feels, tried to suck him into the morass. Mr. North, he
believes, told Congressional investigators that the arms company General
Singlaub used to supply the contras was engaged in espionage against the West.
But no illegality ever attached to General Singlaub's efforts.

He confesses that, 13 years out of the Army, he still wears his dog tags. That
pretty much sums him up, a soldier to the core. In this readable, often engaging
memoir (written with Malcolm McConnell), Jack Singlaub sounds like the kind of
guy you would want with you in the trenches. But not necessarily after the
shooting stops.

NAME: John K. Singlaub

LOAD-DATE: August 4, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: John K. Singlaub being sworn in before testifying at the
Iran-contra hearings in 1987. (Jose R. Lopez/The New York Times)

TYPE: Review; Biography

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              85 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 6, 1991, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Airline Denies Seat to Disabled Official

BYLINE: By STEVEN A. HOLMES,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 10; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1063 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 5


In an act that has outraged some advocates for the disabled, a commuter airline
affiliated with Northwest Airlines refused to allow the head of a White House
committee on the disabled and his assistant to board a flight on Saturday
because both were in wheelchairs.

Workers at the commuter airline, Mesaba Aviation, told the chairman of the
President's Committee on the Employment of People with Disabilities, Justin Dart
Jr., and his executive assistant, John Lancaster, that they would not be allowed
aboard its flight from Minneapolis to Pierre, S.D. Mr. Dart and his party were
then flown in a larger aircraft to another city in South Dakota and driven 165
miles to Pierre.

Officials with the airline say they have a policy of denying people in
wheelchairs access to aircraft that seat fewer than 30 passengers. Such a policy
is allowed under Federal law, according to Department of Transportation
officials and legal experts with groups representing the disabled. An official
of the Federal agency explained that at the time regulations were being
formulated to specify what airlines must do to provide access to people with
disabilities, hydraulic lifts had not been designed that could be attached to
the smaller craft used by commuter airlines.

"What really got me angry or upset -- no, anger is not the right word --
depressed and sobered, was the abrupt and shocking revelation of just how far we
have to go," Mr. Dart said today in a telephone interview from his hotel in
Pierre. "If this thing can happen to a Presidential appointee, someone they know
is a Presidential appointee, you wonder what happens to others."

Airline Informed in Advance

Mr. Dart said he was particularly upset because his office had made the
reservations and bought the tickets in advance and had informed the airline that
he and Mr. Lancaster used wheelchairs. But until the two men actually tried to
board the aircraft, no one informed them that they would be barred.

The incident was, in some ways, one of the more glaring examples of what
advocates for the disabled view as the difficulties endured by those with
physical and mental handicaps who travel by plane. It also highlighted two
trends that appear to be on a collision course: the increasing mobility of the
disabled and the steady rise of commuter airlines, which often use smaller
aircraft on which it is difficult to accommodate the needs of people with
physical impairments.

Jeffrey Jones, director of market planning for Mesaba Aviation, said the policy
was not meant to discriminate against people with disabilities. He said the
narrow aisles and doorway on the 19-seat Fairchild Metro III aircraft that his
company flies between Minneapolis and Pierre made it impossible for company
workers to carry someone in a wheelchair onto the plane.

Yet, such a policy places some cities virtually off-limits by air to some people
with physical disabilities. Other than Continental Airlines, which provides
service from Denver, Mesaba Aviation is the only passenger airline serving the
South Dakota capital. Mr. Jones said that because Pierre was so small the
company decided earlier this year to stop using a 50-seat Fokker F-27 aircraft,
which had been used on the route. The airline now flies only the smaller craft,
the Fairchild Metro III.

Airline Under Contract

Mesaba Aviation is a publicly held corporation that has a contractual
relationship with Northwest Airlines, which is also Mesaba's largest
shareholder. Although it is a separate company, it uses the same colors as
Northwest and operates at airports under the name Northwest Airlink. In
addition, reservations on its flights are often made through Northwest.

Mr. Jones said that the refusal to allow Mr. Dart and Mr. Lancaster to board at
the Minneapolis airport was the first incident of this type that he knew of
involving Mesaba Aviation and that it could prompt the company to revise its
policy.

Advocates for the disabled insist that such incidents are a frequent occurrence
because Federal regulations allow it.

"This doesn't surprise me," said John Bollinger, an official with Paralyzed
Veterans of America. "It's the kind of thing that travelers with disabilities
face all the time. Unfortunately, the final rules that the Department of
Transportation wrote provide a technical way out for the airlines not to board
Justin and others like him."

Special Lifts Being Developed

Several companies are developing special hydraulic lifts and wheelchairs that
can be used to help disabled people to board small commuter aircraft. On June
12, the Federal Aviation Administration ruled that the Federal Government would
reimburse airports for as much as 75 percent of the cost of such devices.

Mr. Dart, 60, is the son of a prominant California Republican who was an adviser
to President Ronald Reagan. The elder Mr. Dart died in 1984. The younger Mr.
Dart was disabled when he contracted polio at the age of 19.

On the trip, Mr. Dart was accompanied by his wife, Yoshiko. They and Mr.
Lancaster reached their destination only after the company arranged to have them
fly in a larger airplane to Aberdeen, S.D., and then had a van take them to
Pierre. But, Mr. Dart said, the van provided by the airline had no back seats,
forcing him and his wife to spend the three-hour trip sitting on the floor amid
two wheelchairs and luggage.

"It made me feel like a real second-class citizen," said Mr. Lancaster, a former
marine who has been in a wheelchair since suffering spinal-cord damage when he
was wounded in Vietnam in 1968. "I thought these kinds of problems were pretty
much behind us."

To help the official and his party to make a connection to their next
destination, Anchorage, South Dakota officials had chartered a plane to fly them
back to Minneapolis.

But after inquiries from reporters, officials at Mesaba Aviation apparently
changed their minds. Late Monday afternoon Mr. Dart called to say the airline
was sending one of their larger aircraft to pick up his party in Pierre.

Mr. Dart and his party have been traveling around the country talking with
people in business, state officials and advocates for the disabled on how to
implement the Americans with Disabilities Act, a landmark civil rights law
enacted a year ago banning discrimination against people with physical or mental
impairments.

LOAD-DATE: August 6, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Justin Dart Jr., left, the chairman of the President's Committee
on the Employment of People with Disabilities, and John Lancaster, his executive
assistant, during an interview in Pierre, S.D. They were refused entry to a
commuter airplane on Saturday because they were in wheelchairs. (Chris Hippie)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              86 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 7, 1991, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Harry Reasoner, 68, Newscaster Known for His Wry Wit, Is Dead

BYLINE: By RICHARD SEVERO

SECTION: Section D; Page 21; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1205 words


Harry Reasoner, whose wry wit and low-key unflappable delivery were mainstays in
network newscasting for four decades, died last night at Norwalk Hospital in
Norwalk, Conn. He was 68 years old.

He died of cardiopulmonary arrest, said a CBS News spokeman, Tom Goodman.

Mr. Reasoner had been in declining health for some time. He had operations for
lung cancer in 1987 and 1989. On June 12, he underwent surgery for removal of a
blood clot on the brain, and later developed pneumonia.

Mr. Reasoner, who retired from regular participation on "60 Minutes" on May 19,
spent most of his career at CBS News, where he served two hitches as a reporter
and correspondent: from 1956 to 1970 and from 1978 to his retirement. From 1970
to 1978, he worked for ABC News, as an anchor of "The ABC Evening News," working
at first with Howard K. Smith and then with Barbara Walters.

When "60 Minutes" began in 1968, Mr. Reasoner was an anchor. He rejoined the
show when he returned to CBS and remained with it until his retirement, when he
became editor emeritus and agreed to appear occasionally.

'Brought the Midwest With Him'

Don Hewitt, the creator and executive producer of "60 Minutes," recalled his
long association with Mr. Reasoner and said: "Harry Reasoner was not the only
broadcaster from the Midwest, but he was the only broadcaster who brought the
Midwest with him to television. He not only had craggy good looks but also that
Iowa sense of what's important."

Mr. Hewitt said Mr. Reasoner "was a dream to work with" and "knew what a lot of
journalists fail to learn: that everybody needs an editor."

"When Harry was edited, he took it beautifully," Mr. Hewitt said. "His head was
so chock-full of ideas that he was never above listening to somebody else."

Dan Rather, anchor and managing editor of the CBS "Evening News" said: "Harry
Reasoner was an American original. He was an influential and important voice in
American journalism that will be sorely missed."

With his pliancy, Mr. Reasoner nevertheless gained a formidable reputation as a
good writer that he kept even when others began writing for him.

'Easy to Write For'

Andrew A. Rooney, who wrote many memorable essays for Mr. Reasoner over the
years, said: "I have found in television that it's easy to write for someone who
doesn't need you and impossible to write for someone who really needs you. Harry
was easy to write for."

Other writers agreed. In the 1960's, when Mr. Reasoner was coming into his own
at CBS News, writers highly regarded assignments to any of the programs in which
he was involved. He had established a style occasionally verging on
impertinence, and he encouraged writers to turn a phrase. If a writer won Mr.
Reasoner's approval, it assured a close working relationship with a newscaster
who was said to prize good writing above all else.

In contrast to some of his fellow newscasters, Mr. Reasoner said he did not feel
that the success of his programs depended on the quality of the visual material.

"The script's the thing," he told a writer who worked for him on the "Sunday
News" in the early 1960's. "You give me a literate script, let the camera move
in for a tight shot and everything will be fine."

He had a writer transferred from one program when, in one script, the writer
referred to the Pope as "the Pontiff," a term that was not only correct but was
also used by the CBS News correspondent in Rome.

"A pope is a pope is a pope," Mr. Reasoner said, "and that is what we are going
to call him."

Hal Haley, who produced the "Sunday News" during the 1960's, said many would
listen for Mr. Reasoner's comments at the end of the program. "They were usually
humorous, often poignant, but they were always moving," he said. "People wanted
to know what Harry would say, and he never let them down."

Career Began in Minneapolis

Harry Reasoner was born in Dakota City, Iowa, on April 17, 1923, the son of
Harry Ray and Eunice Nicholl Reasoner. His parents were both educators. His
father became a school superintendent; his mother was a teacher. When he was a
teen-ager, the family moved to Minneapolis. .

He studied journalism at Stanford University and at the University of Minnesota.
In 1943, he entered the Army and a year later won his first recognition as a
journalist: first prize in a nationwide essay contest sponsored by the
Republican Party. Mr. Reasoner's entry told Republicans what he thought they
should do in the postwar years.

After the war, he worked for The Minneapolis Times and became its drama critic.
He lost the job, he later confessed, when he gave a touring production of the
musical "Up in Central Park" an unfavorable review. In Minneapolis in those
days, he said, drama critics weren't supposed to pan touring productions from
New York, for fear that they would cross the city off their tours.

At the same time, he produced his only novel, called "Tell Me About Women."
Years later, Mr. Reasoner told friends: "It was warmly received. That means it
didn't sell too well." When it was reissued in 1964, Mr. Reasoner said he winced
at some sentences.

In the early 1950's, he worked as a newswriter for WCCO, the CBS Radio affiliate
in Minneapolis, then moved to the United States Information Agency, for which he
traveled extensively in Asia. When he returned to the United States, he became
news director of KEYD-TV in Minneapolis.

From Turkeys to Rebels

He joined CBS News in New York in 1956 and carried out a variety of assignments,
ranging from politics to events at Cape Canaveral, at least one Thanksgiving Day
Parade and interviews with Fidel Castro's rebels in Cuba.

CBS asked Mr. Reasoner to become co-host of a television show called "Calendar"
in 1961, with the actress Mary Fickett. Jack Gould, reviewing it for The New
York Times, called it "a delightful oasis of fun and intelligence."

His stature at CBS continued to grow with reports and essays on the CBS "Evening
News," "The CBS Morning News," "CBS Reports" and various news specials. But Mr.
Reasoner said he wanted to be the anchor for a nightly newscast, and at CBS.
Since the network had the services of Walter Cronkite, that was not possible,
but he did substitute for Mr. Cronkite on dozens of occasions.

In 1970 he moved to ABC News, where he continued to win plaudits, but not from
everyone. Bruce Herschensohn, a special assistant to President Richard M. Nixon,
attacked several reporters for "false prophecies" about the Vietnam War, and Mr.
Reasoner's name appeared on a list of reporters with whom the White House was
especially displeased.

Among Mr. Reasoner's many prizes were two Emmy Awards, a George Foster Peabody
Award, and citations from the Society of Silurians, the Overseas Press Club, the
Friars Club, the University of Missouri and the University of Minnesota. In
addition to his novel, his books were "The Reasoner Report" (1966), "The World
Today" (1975) and "Before the Colors Fade" (1981).

His marriage to Kathleen Ann Carroll ended in divorce. He is survived by his
second wife, the former Lois Webber, whom he married in 1988, and by the seven
children of his first marriage: Harry Stuart, Ann, Elizabeth, Jane, Mary Ray,
Ellen and Jonathan.

NAME: Harry Reasoner

LOAD-DATE: August 7, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Harry Reasoner (CBS, 1985)

TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              87 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 7, 1991, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

U.S. Military Team to Advise Peru In War Against Drugs and Rebels

BYLINE: By CLIFFORD KRAUSS,  Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1281 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 6


The Bush Administration plans to send military trainers to Peru to help the
Peruvian military deal with drug traffickers and guerrillas involved in
producing and smuggling cocaine, senior State Department officials said today.

Administration officials said the dispatch of more than 50 advisers, including
Green Berets and Navy personnel, reflected an emerging view that Lima was losing
control of its Andean mountain provinces to the drug barons and to the rebels of
the Maoist Shining Path movement, who protect the traffickers.

No Combat Role, U.S. Says

The new aid program, which the Administration plans to make public once it works
out the details with Lima, will mark a break from more than 20 years of limited
contact between the United States and a Peruvian Army known for a dismal
human-rights record.

Officials insisted that President Bush had no intention of sending the trainers
anywhere near combat. But noting that 70 percent of the world's cocaine
originates in Peru, Bernard W. Aronson, the Assistant Secretary of State for
Inter-American Affairs, said: "You can't have a serious counternarcotics program
if you write off the largest cocaine producing state and if you won't help the
Peruvians provide security for counternarcotics efforts. Peru desperately needs
our help."

President Alberto Fujimori and his high command agreed last month to the
outlines of a $34 million American military program for Peru that will include
the training of two combat batallions, the creation of a river patrol force and
the refurbishing of army helicopters and air force combat jets.

The program is also to include American supervision of a reform of the Peruvian
military justice system and instruction led by Army lawyers aimed at improving
the human-rights record of several Peruvian military units.

It is not known when the trainers are to leave, but their departure is expected
within the next few months.

Human rights advocates, noting that Peru's army has the worst record of torture,
disappearances and summary executions in the hemisphere, have been highly
critical of the recent thaw between Washington and Lima.

Told of the military aid program, Juan E. Mendez, executive director of the
human-rights group Americas Watch, said: "The United States is involving itself
in a very dirty war. I think the Administration would do a lot better if it
demanded reform first."

Melvyn Levitsky, the Assistant Secretary of State for International Narcotics
Matters, said the aid package was intended to increase the army's ability to
improve security in the Upper Huallaga Valley, where the rebels serve as
middlemen between the peasant coca growers and the traffickers by negotiating
prices and collecting taxes for their own operations.

"Drug trafficking and Shining Path activities are inextricably tied together,"
he said. "You can't fight one without fighting the other."

Mr. Levitsky said another aim of the training program would be to increase the
coordination between the Peruvian Army and the police in anti-narcotics efforts.
The two army batallions are to be trained to defend the flanks of police units
engaged in interdiction and eradication operations from rebel attacks.

Officials hope that increased cooperation between the army, the police and
American trainers will reduce instances in which army units tip off drug dealers
and protect clandestine airfields used for trafficking.

Similar Programs in Place

Officials said the trainers would not remain permanently in Peru but would
rotate for three to four months at a time. Each combat batallion would be
assigned 25 trainers. An undetermined number of military personnel would be
assigned to human rights training and to developing the river patrol force
intended to intercept transportation of chemicals used to make cocaine.

The Administration already has similar military training programs in Bolivia and
Colombia, but neither nation has as serious a guerrilla insurgency as Peru.
Shining Path is the most violent and radical guerrilla group in Latin America,
targeting health and other social workers as well as intimidating peasant
villages. It has sometimes been compared to the Khmer Rouge in Cambodia.

Mr. Fujimori had rejected a previous proposal for military aid, but helped
fashion the latest plan to include American financial assistance for Peruvian
Army units to build roads and bridges and otherwise win the support of peasants
in drug-cultivating areas.

The military aid accompanies a $60 million economic assistance package that is
partly intended to encourage coca growers to switch the crops they farm. Coca
growers have learned that the demand for cocaine in the United States makes
their crop far more profitable to grow than others.

'This Is Not Vietnam'

The Administration last week moved to release the military and economic
assistance, which it had held up since last year, based on its determination
that Lima was working to improve its human rights record. Three of four
Congressional committees with jurisdiction over foreign policy and
appropriations have put a hold on the money.

Several Congressional officials said the hold was temporary as members and the
Administration worked out a number of points in the aid package.

The United States has increased its involvement in the war against Peruvian
cocaine over the last four years. Since 1987, Drug Enforcement Administration
officials and anti-drug officers under State Department contract have worked at
an American-built base in the Upper Huallaga Valley advising the police on
eradication and on maintaining copters and other equipment.

Over the last two years, American military advisers have been engaged in the
training of police units that conduct operations in areas where guerrillas
defend growing areas or are directly involved in trafficking themselves.

Representative Robert G. Torricelli, Democrat of New Jersey and chairman of the
House subcommittee on Western Hemisphere affairs, predicted that Congress would
lift the hold after the August recess because "in the final analysis, the United
States has to get involved in Peru."

Sensitive to the charge of several members of Congress that its unfolding Peru
policy will lead to ever greater levels of intervention, State Department
officials insist that their policy goals are narrowly restricted to fighting
drugs and human rights abuses.

They said that the American trainers would be restricted to bases outside combat
zones and that the American personnel would not accompany Peruvian units into
the field. "This is not Vietnam or even Central America," said a State
Department official.

U.S. Focus on Rights

Representative Gus Yatron, Democrat of Pennsylvania and chairman of the House
subcommittee on Human Rights, said, "The Administration's decision to send
military trainers to Peru represents an unwarranted escalation of United States
military involvement in a country whose security forces have one of the worst
human rights records in Latin America."

Administration officials insisted that an improvement of Peru's human rights
performance was central to their anti-narcotics strategy. Richard Schifter,
Assistant Secretary of State for Human Rights, said the Administration went
ahead with the project only after President Fujimori and military commanders
made headway in purging violent officers and in reducing the number of people
who have disappeared while held by the army.

Officials said that when Mr. Schifter traveled to Peru last month, he warned
President Fujimori and the military that they could lose the war if they
continued to mistreat the Inca peasantry.


LOAD-DATE: August 7, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              88 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 7, 1991, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

With Military Set to Thin Ranks, Blacks Fear They'll Be Hurt Most

BYLINE: By LEE A. DANIELS

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 4; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 2345 words


As the military goes through one of its biggest contractions since World War II,
it seems clear to all who have studied the matter that American blacks will be
among those who will suffer most.

This is basically because blacks make up a far higher percentage of the military
population than of the general population, and, by virtually universal
agreement, they have been given greater opportunity for advancement in the
military than in civilian life.

So this period of national transition, while clearly difficult for everyone
serving in the military, looms as much more difficult for blacks.

Making the Transition

Some Government programs are already in place or are to be started next month
dealing with the overall problem of helping people who are forced out of the
military. But there is a significant concern among leaders of black groups and
among others about whether the nation adequately understands the complexity of
the transition or has adequate plans to cope with it.

Even so, no one is suggesting that special programs be created just to assist
minorities.

Indeed, some prominent blacks, particularly in the military itself, believe that
if it is in the best interests of the nation to cut the military sharply, then
so be it; blacks should take their lumps along with everyone else and go ahead
and reforge their own futures.

An equally strong countersentiment is welling up, however, in black civil rights
groups and among some experts on social policy. This view holds that since the
nation has relied heavily on young black males to make up the military -- they
fought in greater proportionate numbers than whites in the Persian Gulf and
Vietnam, for example -- it cannot or should not simply discharge them now and
forget.

They argue, too, that blacks still encounter substantial discrimination in the
private-sector workplace and will find it especially difficult to start new
careers.

Exercising Restraint

Still, Edwin Dorn, a specialist on military affairs for the Brookings
Institution, a Washington research center, said the traditional civil rights
groups and the Congressional Black Caucus had refrained from asking that blacks
in the military be protected from cutbacks.

For one thing, he said, those groups have long favored spending less on the
military. "In the past they've been in the forefront of those calling for a
reduction of the military budget," Mr. Dorn said. "They can't very well turn
around on a dime now and say, 'Don't cut so much.' "

Mr. Dorn also said these groups might think that whatever the short-term
problems caused by the cutbacks, the black population would benefit in the long
run if money formerly spent on the military was redirected toward social
programs.

In February, President Bush, with Gen. Colin Powell by his side, hailed the
armed services as the nation's "greatest equal-opportunity employer." General
Powell, who is black, is Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.

But if this greatest of employers is going to cut 500,000 jobs by 1995, as
Defense Secretary Dick Cheney proposes, then much of the opportunity it presents
could vanish.

The experts say that present indications are that the cuts will come most
intensely in just those areas where blacks are heavily concentrated, like combat
and logistics.

Col. Michael J. Shane, who as the new director of the Army's enlistment
distribution center will have a crucial role in the cutbacks, told a recent
conference that "at least 100,000 fewer blacks can be expected on active duty
five years from now."

Of that prospect, Charles C. Moskos, a Northwestern University sociology
professor and former Army officer who has written widely on the military, said
in an interview: "I can only think: negative, negative, negative. This could
cause great hardship to many black families and black communities, because
blacks as a group are far more dependent on the military for employment than
whites."

One General's Opinion

Brig. Gen. Clara Adams-Ender, who has been in the Army 32 years, is head of the
40,000-member Nurse Corps and is president of a predominantly black organization
of Army officers that studies racial issues in the military. She addresses the
problem with a different emphasis.

In remarks not untypical of other blacks of various military rank who were
interviewed for this article, she said that as blacks have benefited from the
military, so must they share in whatever difficulties develop.

"Top command has done a very good job of getting the information out to the
field," she said. "We just need to be sure that the information gets dispersed
all the way down the ranks, so that if people aren't kept on, they're in the
best position they can be to make the transition to civilian life."

Insuring Opportunity
A Warning About Business as Usual



Part of Professor Moskos's reason for feeling so pessimistic is that he sees the
reverse side of President Bush's assertion: the military's record on equal
opportunity looks so good, he says, because so much less opportunity exists
elsewhere for blacks.

"In no other sector of society," Professor Moskos said, "do blacks have such
broad opportunities to develop and exercise their abilities, and nowhere else
will you see blacks so likely to be in positions of authority over whites."

Colonel Shane said that though the cutbacks will affect military personnel of
all races, "blacks in uniform will be forced into a job market that is decidedly
less friendly to them than to others."

"Work must begin now," he added, "to insure that once the welcome-home parades
are over, those displaced by the downsizing can be absorbed into the civilian
work force."

Clifford L. Alexander, Secretary of the Army under President Jimmy Carter, put
it more bluntly. He said a substantial responsibility for the lasting impact of
any layoffs rests with the hiring practices of white corporate leaders.

"If they provide opportunities in the form of jobs, the impact will be
minimized," said Mr. Alexander, who is now a consultant. "If they continue
'business as usual,' the impact is going to be severe."

Love of the Military
Getting a Career And Pride, Too



Finding limited opportunity outside the military was certainly the experience in
the late 1950's of General Adams-Ender after her sophomore year at North
Carolina Agricultural and Technical College. She found that enlisting was about
the only way she could get money to complete her college education. "I intended
to leave after two years," she said, "but I stayed because I enjoyed what I was
doing and I felt positions of increasing responsibility were available to me."

Her words were echoed by Sgt. Maj. Tony L. Salter and Sgt. Mark Clifton, both
stationed at Fort Dix, N.J. As sergeant major, Mr. Salter, a 29-year veteran, is
the sprawling base's top-ranked noncommissioned officer. Sergeant Clifton, an
eight-year veteran, won this year's Army-wide competition for drill sergeant of
the year.

Both men enlisted after high school graduation and both speak with pride of
finding, as Sergeant Major Salter put it, "the opportunity to do things with
more responsibility earlier" than they believe they could have found in civilian
life.

Limited Options

Martin Binken, a fellow at the Brookings Institution, said most black high
school graduates still did not have many options other than the military to gain
the skills needed for good jobs.

Mr. Binken and others say that this broader military role as an agent of social
reform -- for example, combating discrimination by strictly adhering to the
principle of equal pay for equal rank -- has helped inculcate a sense of pride
and determination in black military people.

Moreover, Dianne M. Penderhughes, a professor at the University of Illinois at
Champaign-Urbana, contended that the regulations against discrimination that the
military has adopted over the last 30 years are "the most coercive" in American
society and are the fundamental reason many blacks in the military are able to
express great pride in being black and yet also see themselves as military
people who just happen to be black.

Don Miller, a senior vice president with Dow Jones & Company, who retired from
the Army as a major in 1968 after a 21-year career, said: "Military service
isn't for everyone, but it was the most wonderful thing in the world for me. It
gave me a sense of purpose and self-esteem. It helps you determine your
priorities, discipline your behavior to achieve those priorities, and manage
people and tasks."

"I'm a retired regular Army officer first," Mr. Miller, said, "and then I am
whatever else I am." Then he laughed. "Do you get the feeling I love the
military?"

The Demographics
Populating The Military



Blacks make up 12 percent of the country's population and 14 percent of its 18-
to 24-year-olds. But Pentagon statistics show that they account for 23 percent
of the 2.2 million men and women on active duty: black men make up nearly 21
percent of the two million men in the military and black women nearly 31 percent
of the 223,000 women.

They total 17 percent of the officers and enlisted personnel in the Navy, nearly
21 percent in the Marine Corps and nearly 18 percent in the Air Force.

But the most significant figures come from the Army, which with 730,000 members
is by far the biggest branch; the Navy has 572,000 personnel on active duty; the
Air Force has 526,000 and the Marines have about 200,000. Thirty-two percent of
the Army's officers and enlisted personnel are blacks: 29 percent of the
enlisted men and women, 35 percent of the noncommissioned officers and 11
percent of the officers.

Further, blacks re-enlist at rates nearly twice as high as that of whites and a
higher proportion of black servicemen and women take advantage of the military's
educational benefits than do their white counterparts.

Perhaps even more important than the statistics is the symbolic importance of
the high leadership positions held by blacks in the military. Consider two of
the top jobs. General Powell, of course, as Chairman of the Joint Chiefs, in the
last year or so has emerged as a significant figure to whites and blacks. Some
have compared his importance as a symbol of racial progress to that of George
Washington Carver, Marian Anderson or Jackie Robinson.

And the boss of the Army, Secretary John W. Shannon, is black. He is,
incidentally, a retired lieutenant colonel, who was captain over Second Lieut.
Colin Powell in a platoon in the 1950's.

Awaiting the Pain
For Recruits, A Closing Door



Janice H. Laurence, a senior scientist with the Human Resources Research
Organization, a consulting firm in Alexandria, Va., said that not only would the
layoffs disproportionately affect blacks now in the military, but also black
enlistments.

The Pentagon is preparing for major cuts in recruiting. Plans call for 200,000
new recruits this year; by comparison, it took in 293,000 in the fiscal year
1989 and 232,000 in 1990. Since blacks both enlist and re-enlist in greater
proportions than whites, Ms. Laurence said, "the numbers could produce a very
bad impact."

Representative Beverly Byron, Democrat of Maryland, the chairman of a House
subcommittee on military personnel, said, "It's too early to determine exactly
what will happen as the draw-down unfolds." But she said of herself and her
Congressional colleagues, "We'll be watching very carefully." "

General Powell has said on several occasions that the Pentagon must be sensitive
to the reduction's impact on minorities. Other top military officials have held
discussions with the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People
and other groups on the issue.

One Group's Stand

John J. Johnson, director of armed service and veterans affairs for the
N.A.A.C.P., said the group has sought no special treatment for blacks as the
military shrinks.

"We're in frequent contact with each other," Mr. Johnson said, referring to
military officials. "They know our concerns are that blacks not bear a
disporportionate share of the impact. They've been open and forthright with us,
and we want to give them a chance to do their work as they see fit."

By the end of September, the Army plans to have 61 Transition Assistance Centers
set up around the country to help personnel and their families with job
counseling and such. Linda White, the civilian director of the Army's program,
said the Army was also developing a list of businesses that have pledged to give
special consideration to returning servicemen and women.

The precise impact of the military cutbacks on blacks is, of course, unknown.
There have been no really adequate studies of the economic importance of blacks
in the military to the black community as a whole. Moreover, many specific
details of the reductions have yet to become clear.

Several black junior grade and noncommissioned officers said in interviews that
the cutbacks were already apparent within the services. One sergeant, who asked
to remain anonymous, said he had decided to leave. "The Army's no place to be
now," he said. "They say they're downsizing by this much. But who can say if
that's really going to be all?"

Secretary Shannon said: "I don't know how easy it will be for our black
personnel who are discharged to assimilate into the private sector. But I
promise you it will be hard for the private and public sector not to take them
because we'll make sure that they know these are people who served their country
admirably and have the attitudes and the skills to continue to do so."

But promises are often difficult to keep. Blacks participate in the military
"more than in any other sector of society," Professor Penderhughes of the
University of Illinois wrote in the annual report of the National Urban League.
"The question that should be debated with the greatest intensity is when will we
be able to share in the benefits of this economy at home?"

NEXT: The effect on communities.

LOAD-DATE: August 7, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

SERIES: Military-Industrial Upheaval -- Fourth of five articles.

CORRECTION-DATE: August 9, 1991, Friday

CORRECTION:

A front-page article on Wednesday about the military's plans for cutbacks, and
the possible impact on black service members, misidentified John W. Shannon and
referred incorrectly to his rank at retirement and his service with Gen. Colin
Powell. Mr. Shannon is the Under Secretary of the Army; the Secretary is Michael
P. W. Stone. Mr. Shannon retired from the Army as a colonel, not a lieutenant
colonel. During the 1950's he served in the same brigade as General Powell, but
not in the same unit of the brigade. The article also referred incorrectly to
the Army service of Prof. Charles C. Moskos of Northwestern University. He was
an enlisted man, not an officer.


GRAPHIC: Photos: Staff Sgt. Mark Clifton, shown training recruits at Fort Dix,
N.J., won this year's Army-wide contest for drill sergeant of the year.; Sgt.
Maj. Tony L. Salter, the top-ranking noncommissioned officer at Fort Dix, N.J.,
says he found "the opportunity to do things with more responsibility earlier" in
the military than he could have found in civilian life. (Photographs by William
E. Sauro/The New York Times); Brig. Gen. Clara Adams-Ender enlisted in the
military for only two years. She stayed because she liked the work. (Department
of Defense) (pg. D5)

Graphs: "More blacks enlist in the Army..." compares percentage of blacks in the
general population and among army recruits for December 1990 (Source: U.S.
Army); "...And More Re-enlist" compares percentage of U.S. Army soldiers, by
race ro ethnic group, eligible to re-enlist who did so, 1989 (Source: U.S. Army)
(pg. D5)

TYPE: Series

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              89 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 8, 1991, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Home Video

BYLINE: By Peter M. Nichols

SECTION: Section C; Page 18; Column 3; Cultural Desk; Word and Image Page

LENGTH: 1119 words


It's getting harder to find a good $25 movie these days -- a new one, that is.
Prices of $90 and more for new titles do not bother video store customers who
only rent films. But for those who occasionally like to buy a hit film at a low
price when it is first released on video, the supply has dried up.

With the exception of "Home Alone," which is to be released Aug. 22 at $24.98,
big hits in the $25-to-$30 range are not being released the way they used to
when "Pretty Woman," "Batman," "Honey, I Shrunk the Kids," "Lethal Weapon 2" and
"Total Recall" came out

In fact, all the hits in theaters this summer -- "Terminator 2: Judgment Day,"
"Robin Hood, Prince of Thieves," "Naked Gun 2 1/2: The Smell of Fear" and "City
Slickers" among them -- will probably be released early next year at about $95.

Some dealers see a shift in studio strategy. "They're backing off on titles they
should be selling," said Ken Dorrance, owner of three Video Station stores in
Alameda, Calif., and a board member of the Video Software Dealers Association. "
'Terminator 2' will do $200 million at the box office by the time it goes on
video," he said. "When it does go on video, it should also be on sale. A couple
of years ago it would have been."

Mr. Dorrance also said that the two-stage pricing schedule used by the studios
has been accelerated. In the first stage, the movie does its turn as a rental.
"From a cost standpoint, it should be released for sale then at $59 or $69," Mr.
Dorrance said, "but because the studios want to make the most from rental, they
add an extra $20 or $30." The effect is to increase rentals and inhibit sales
until the film's best renting days are over.

Three or four months later the sale price is lowered, he said. "In the past that
usually has come six months or a year later. Now we see the gap narrowing."

Customers don't want to buy everything, he said, giving "Misery" and "L.A.
Story" as examples of films that he thought would not sell well. But he said
that if the price had been lower, many of his rental customers would have bought
"Kindergarten Cop," "Look Who's Talking Too" and "Edward Scissorhands." Mr.
Dorrance also reported strong demand for a moderately priced "Dances With
Wolves," which is to be released as a rental on Aug. 28. "If they just came out
with one sales title a month, it would whet the buying appetite," he said.

NEW VIDEO RELEASES



New Jack City
1991. Warner. $92.99. Laser disk, $29.98. 1 hour 41 minutes. Closed captioned.
R.

The flamboyant and very cool crack kingpin Nino Brown (Wesley Snipes) tries to
hold things together while staying just out of range of rivals and the police.
Mario Van Peebles's film hauls out every gimmick of the drug-film genre, but he
directs "with as much flash and energy as this weary formula will allow" (Janet
Maslin).

Scenes From a Mall

1991. Touchstone. $89.95. LD, $39.99. CC. PG-13.

Perhaps only Southern California could produce a couple like Nick (Woody Allen)
and Deborah (Bette Midler). She's an exuberant, prominent psychiatrist; he's a
neurotic lawyer who represents sports stars who endorse sneakers. In one
afternoon together at a shopping mall they manage to run through personal
confessions, life crises, a breakup and a reconciliation. Though awfully thin at
times, Paul Mazursky's film is redeemed by the performances, which rescue a
"peculiar but, finally, very engaging comedy" (Vincent Canby).

The Rock and Roll Collection: Dick Clark's Golden Greats
1991. MPI. Four tapes, $99.95. 4:00. No rating.

Fifty-six performances strong, here is a history of rock-and-roll from the
1950's to the 80's. Numbers by the Beach Boys, Buffalo Springfield, Steppenwolf,
Jim Croce, Jackie Wilson, Otis Redding, the Mamas and Papas, the Everly
Brothers, Three Dog Night and James Brown are among the memorable renditions,
all introduced by the neatly tailored Mr. Clark.

28 Up
1984. Fox Lorber. $79.95. 2:16. No rating.

In 1963 the British director Michael Apted worked on a documentary about the
aspirations of a group of 7-year-olds from various racial, social and economic
backgrounds. Since then he has visited the same group every seven years to see
if their lives have lived up to the dreams they had as children. Here they are
at 28 and relatively upbeat, if not altogether pleased with themselves, in a
vivid film that is "alternately hugely funny and extremely moving and, even more
remarkable, comparatively optimistic about the human condition" (Canby).

Rosencrantz and Guildenstern Are Dead
1990. Buena Vista. $92.95. LD, $39.99. 1:59. CC. PG.

Tom Stoppard's hit play of 1968, adapted for the screen, looks at "Hamlet"
through the eyes of a couple of fall guys, played by Gary Oldman (Rosencrantz)
and Tim Roth (Guildenstern), brought to Elsinore to cheer up their old school
chum, the Prince of Denmark. They specialize in windy philosophizing well above
their station. On stage that's fun, but on screen "so many words can numb the
eardrums and weigh upon the eyelids like old coins" (Canby).

PLAYING IT STRAIGHT

Film documentaries aren't the best-represented genre in video stores, but many
fine tapes are available. Here are some examples.

COMMON THREADS: STORIES FROM THE QUILT -- AIDS victims tell their stories,
narrated by Dustin Hoffman. 1989. HBO. $39.95. 1:19. CC. No rating.

GATES OF HEAVEN -- Errol Morris's study of questionable doings in a California
pet cemetery. 1978. RCA/Columbia. $79.95. 1:25. No rating.

GREY GARDENS -- A reclusive mother and daughter, relatives of Jacqueline
Onassis, hide out in the Hamptons in a film by David and Albert Maysles. 1975.
Maysles Films. $79.99. 1:34. No rating.

HARLAN COUNTY, U.S.A. -- Coal miners and their families battle management
through a 13-month strike. 1976. RCA/Columbia. $29.95. 1:43. No rating.

HEARTS AND MINDS -- Peter Davis's hard-hitting film about the Vietnam War won an
Oscar. 1974. MPI. $19.95. 1:52. No rating.

NANOOK OF THE NORTH -- With spectacular photography Robert J. Flaherty's silent
film classic chronicles the perils of Eskimo life on Hudson Bay. 1922. Home
Vision. $29.95. 1:09. No rating.

SHOAH -- Claude Lanzmann's exhaustive examination of the Holocaust is told
through the memories of survivors, former Nazis who ran the death camps and
other witnesses. 1985. Paramount. $299.95, five cassettes. 9:30. No rating.

STREETWISE -- Seattle street kids grub and battle and love one another amid
danger and extreme deprivation. 1985. Starmaker. $59. 1:32. No rating.

THE THIN BLUE LINE -- The murder of a Texas policeman gets a long second look in
another harrowing film by Errol Morris. 1988. HBO. $89.99. 1:46. CC. No rating.


LOAD-DATE: August 8, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Arnold Schwarzenegger, Joe Morton and Linda Hamilton in
"Terminator 2: Judgment Day," which is to be released for about $95. (Tri-Star
Pictures); Woody Allen in Paul Mazursky's "Scenes From a Mall." (Touchstone
Pictures)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              90 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 8, 1991, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

In the Nation;
The Peru Syndrome

BYLINE: By TOM WICKER

SECTION: Section A; Page 21; Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 722 words


After quick military victory in the desert war, President Bush exulted that the
nation had "kicked the Vietnam syndrome" -- its supposed reluctance, after
defeat in Indochina, to send U.S. troops to fight elsewhere in the world. Did
that conviction embolden Mr. Bush to embark on military intervention against the
Shining Path in Peru?

Or have Presidents suffered more, and for longer, from what might be called "the
Peru syndrome" -- the idea that U.S. forces are required, and can prevail,
anywhere U.S. interests appear to be threatened, or might be advanced?

Desert Storm may have strengthened such a Peru syndrome, at least until the
fighting ended. But developments since then in Iraq, in Kuwait, in Saudi Arabia
should have raised the question -- even in the White House -- whether military
intervention necessarily or even usually achieves the ends originally sought.

Most often it has been some vague "Communist threat" that had to be countered
with troops, as in Lebanon and Grenada. In Panama, Mr. Bush sought to restore
democracy to a country unaccustomed to it. In the Mideast, the U.S. went to the
aid of Western oil sources (under the fig leaf of "resisting aggression").

But in Peru, the Administration says, U.S. forces and a $34 million program of
assistance are needed to thwart cocaine traffickers and the guerrilla forces
that aid them. The latter are not supposed to be the main target, though they're
said to be "Maoist" and what little is known suggests similarity to the
murderous Khmer Rouge in Cambodia.

More than 50 U.S. military men, including Green Berets and Navy personnel, will
be sent to Peru -- a prime source of coca -- to train two combat battalions,
create a river patrol force and rebuild and repair military helicopters. These
are intended to help the Government in Lima regain the support of peasants and
the control of provinces in the Andes. There, Shining Path guerrillas -- the
most violent in South America -- are in virtual occupation.

If Peruvian forces are to stop the drug trade, they must fight the Shining Path;
Bush Administration officials insist, therefore, that if U.S. military men are
to help stop drug trafficking, they must help Peruvian forces in their war
against the guerrillas. The officials add, of course, that U.S. troops will not
fight; they will be "trainers" only, as they originally were in Vietnam and as
they have been for years in El Salvador.

These forces, however, will be allied to an unstable Government and a brutal and
repressive army, whose promises to reform can hardly be taken more seriously
than those often heard from El Salvador. The Shining Path is certainly not a
beacon of democracy and humanity; but this is a dirty war in which support for
either side is likely to entangle U.S. forces in atrocious abuses of human
rights. Witness, again, El Salvador.

President Fujimori of Peru at first resisted, then helped design U.S. military
and aid programs. With all due regard to him, however, his Government may come
to feel, as have others in like cases, that U.S. interest and U.S. aid amount to
U.S. responsibility to win the war. That would not encourage the reforms Peru's
Government and army need to make.

The guerrillas, moreover, may well target even noncombatant U.S. trainers, with
unpredictable political consequences for the White House and the U.S. public.
Just such attacks were a major factor leading to the expansion of the U.S.
effort in Vietnam, until a massive U.S. presence transformed that land and
turned its civil war into an American war.

Or, again, if the remote and vicious struggle in the Upper Huallaga Valley of
Peru proves hard to win even with limited U.S. help -- and who can believe it
will be anything else? -- the temptation to escalate could become irresistible
in Washington. The greater the effort, the more the fear of losing would prolong
the war, at terrible cost and perhaps beyond hope of victory.

Or maybe these fears only reflect the Vietnam syndrome the nation kicked last
winter. Maybe 50 trainers and relatively few successors, at manageable cost,
will block the Shining Path, restrict the cocaine traffic, put Peru on its feet
and come home unscathed -- perhaps to a parade up Broadway. That's the Peru
syndrome, isn't it? Which the nation clearly hasn't kicked.

LOAD-DATE: August 8, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              91 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  August 9, 1991, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Review/Film;
Martin Short as Another Bumbler

BYLINE: By CARYN JAMES

SECTION: Section C; Page 15; Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 694 words


Martin Short seems to be on a mission: to save "Pure Luck" from itself. When he
looks at the camera, his eyes always seem about to cross, as if he's ready to
burst into his Jerry Lewis impression. When he dances, he almost leaps into his
overenthusiastic nerd character, Ed Grimley. He walks through a burned-out
jungle village and yells, "Anybody home?" as if he were in the suburbs. It's as
if he were frantically trying to stay in character as an accident-prone
accountant and at the same time inject some comic surprise into this
pure-formula film. Against the odds, he makes "Pure Luck" always painless and
sometimes genuinely amusing. Martin Short can do anything, it seems, except find
the right movies to star in.

"Pure Luck" is yet another Hollywood remake of a French comedy -- a trick that
pulled in so much money for "Three Men and a Baby" that everyone seems to have
forgotten about Richard Pryor in "The Toy," Tom Hanks in "The Man With One Red
Shoe" and Mr. Short himself in "Three Fugitives," just to mention remakes based
on Francis Veber's films. "Pure Luck" is a version of another Veber film, "Le
Chevre," with Danny Glover in the Gerard Depardieu role as the straight man and
Mr. Short in the bumbling role created by Pierre Richard. Like the other lame
remakes, it sounds good on paper.

When a wealthy man's disaster-prone daughter disappears during a vacation in
Mexico, he hires Ray Campanella (Mr. Glover) to find her. Ray fails, because
he's a professional detective and therefore much too logical. But a scientist
comes up with a theory: Someone just as unlucky, who attracts disaster like a
magnet, might stumble onto the missing woman's path. Eugene Proctor (Mr. Short)
is the kind of man who walks down the street and falls into holes. Together they
take off for Mexico, with Eugene, the meek accountant, led to believe he's in
charge of the search.

This is a setup for one sight gag after another, but they are announced so far
ahead of time that the audience might as well be waving them in for a landing.
When Mr. Short is called to the baggage-claim area at an airport, it doesn't
take much to guess what's waiting for him. He drives a jeep to the edge of a
cliff. A bee lands on his cheek, he announces that he's allergic to bee stings,
and it's just a matter of time before the bee stings him. The form his allergic
reaction takes is one of the film's few surprises (unless you've seen the
trailer, which gives it away).

But Mr. Short goes on bumping into glass doors with real gusto. He is duped into
an off-screen barroom fight, then crawls back to his hotel. His collapsible body
saves every tired routine. And he puts on an endearing authoritative air to mask
his incompetence.

Ray goes on hiding his annoyance until late in the film, when it seems that bad
luck is contagious and he comes in for his share. Then Mr. Glover gets to let
loose too, which seems like a tremendous relief to him and gives the film a
fresh and funnier twist.

"Pure Luck" was directed by Nadia Tass, who made the small, quirky Australian
films "Malcolm" and "Rikki and Pete." But this broad script leaves no room for
quirks.

It does leave viewers hopeful about Mr. Short's future on the screen, though.
Robin Williams, who may be Mr. Short's only equal in comic invention and mania,
had his own string of failed films before he found "Good Morning, Vietnam."
Martin Short can't go on stumbling through Americanized French films forever,
unless he has Eugene's bad luck.


                                    .  .  .

"Pure Luck" is rated PG (Parental guidance suggested). It includes one murder by
gunshot.

Pure Luck

Directed by Nadia Tass; written by Herschel Weingrod and Timothy Harris;
director of photography, David Parker; production designer, Peter Wooley; edited
by Billy Weber; music by Jonathan Sheffer; produced by Lance Hool and Sean
Daniel. Released by Universal Pictures. Running time: 96 minutes. This film is
rated PG.

Eugene Proctor . . . Martin Short
Ray Campanella . . . Danny Glover
Valerie . . . Sheila Kelley
Highsmith . . . Sam Wanamaker
Grimes . . . Scott Wilson
Monosoff . . . Harry Shearer

LOAD-DATE: August 9, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              92 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 10, 1991, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Your Taxes;
States Collecting For Many Causes

BYLINE: By Robert D. Hershey Jr.

SECTION: Section 1; Page 34; Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 743 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


Once the Federal Government introduced its political campaign checkoff, which
since 1967 has allowed taxpayers to designate $1 of their taxes for Presidential
races, it was perhaps inevitable that tight budgets and interest-group activism
would combine to make the idea almost irresistible to states.

With North Dakota the last to fall into line, each of the 40 states with a
broad-based personal income tax now has at least one checkoff box. In all, there
are 125 programs, or an average of more than three for each state, according to
a survey by the Federation of Tax Administrators. Most of the state checkoffs
are taxpayer donations, rather than a diversion of tax money.

Since 1988, 16 programs have been added in 10 states, with Massachusetts
installing the first in the nation to benefit AIDS patients; Arkansas,
Mississippi, Utah and West Virginia adding educational checkoffs, and
California, Illinois and Oregon providing the opportunity to help fight
Alzheimer's disease.

The other two dozen causes include the arts, the United States Olympic
Committee, the homeless, drug education, historic projects, child abuse, the
aged, Vietnam veterans and trees.

Alabama and California have eight checkoff programs each, while Idaho and Rhode
Island have six each; only seven states have just one.

"The most popular by far is non-game wildlife," said Ronald W. Alt, senior
research associate for the federation. This category, which includes land
preservation, is on the tax forms of 37 states, including New York, New Jersey
and Pennsylvania. Eighteen states have a political checkoff.But while the money
raised by state checkoffs isrelatively small -- $30.1 million in 1989 -- the
practice seems here to stay. Louisiana, dismayed by the unwieldiness of 12
checkoffs, eliminated all of them from 1988 returns. By 1990, however, the state
had three.

"With declining state resources and growing social demands, voluntary donations
gathered through the income tax are likely to be seen as a potential source of
revenue by an increasing number of causes," the federation predicted.

 Debating the Luxury Tax

For the better part of two years -- until it reversed course in the 1990 budget
agreement -- the Bush Administration adamantly opposed tax increases. Now it is
against a tax cut, one that many people contend would benefit the economy, not
to mention an important political constituency of the Administration.

At issue is the luxury tax imposed last autumn on high-priced boats, aircraft,
jewelry, furs and automobiles, a tax estimated by the Joint Tax Committee to
raise almost $1.5 billion over five years -- and comforting to many politicians
because most taxpayers would view it as a tax on the rich.

But the numbers projected, a growing number of critics charge, largely disregard
changes in people's behavior, including the fact that lower demand for these
items puts those who make and sell them out of work. According to two Republican
members of the Joint Economic Committee, Representative Olympia Snowe of Maine
and Senator Connie Mack of Florida, the luxury tax will cost 9,400 jobs in the
yacht, airplane and jewelry businesses alone this year. They say the Government
will lose nearly $5 for each $1 the tax generates.

More than 250 members of Congress have co-sponsored repeal measures -- half a
dozen have been introduced -- said Walter E. Huizenga, president of the American
International Automobile Dealers Association.

But the Treasury has said it does not favor repeal "at this time," noting that
the luxury tax has been in place for barely half a year and that the economy has
been in recession. It is thus "too early to assess what the tax's impact will be
in terms of effect on the industry, revenues realized or difficulty of
administration."

The unstated reason, however, is undoubtedly the fear that any tampering might
begin to unravel the budget deal.

Footnotes



* Total corporate taxes, including payroll taxes, at all level of government
rose to 83.8 percent of profits in 1990 from 58.9 percent in 1980, according to
the Tax Foundation, a business-supported research organization.

* The I.R.S. will conduct a two-day conference on electronic filing in New
Orleans on Aug. 29-30.

* Representative J. J. Pickle, Democrat of Texas, head of the Ways and Means
subcommittee overseeing the I.R.S., is urging a second "taxpayer bill of rights"
to improve the one adopted in 1988.

LOAD-DATE: August 10, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              93 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 10, 1991, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

U.S. Says Its Fire Killed 20 Americans in the Gulf

BYLINE: By ERIC SCHMITT,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 4; Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 934 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 9


After a painstaking review, the military has concluded that about 15 percent of
the American forces killed or wounded in the Persian Gulf war were victims of
American fire.

Allied fire accounted for less than 2 percent of American casualties in World
War II, the Korean War and the Vietnam War, according to an Army study. Pentagon
officials said, however, that the whole nature of war had changed drastically
since then, and cautioned against drawing comparisons between those conflicts
and the 43-day war waged in the desert with much more sophisticated weapons.

Military officials said today that about 20 of the 148 Americans killed in
combat died from United States aircraft or ground fire. That total of 148
includes the 28 soldiers killed in the Scud missile attack on an American
barracks in Saudi Arabia. Of the 458 American troops wounded, 60 to 70 were
wounded by their own forces.

The military experts said that while advanced weaponry had increased the
precision and deadliness of United States firepower, the technology to
distinguish between friend and foe in difficult combat conditions lags slightly
behind. Senior military officers attributed most of what they call "friendly
fire" incidents to the large amount of fighting in the gulf war that took place
at night, in bad weather and at long distances.

'Fast-Moving Systems' Cited

"When you have fast-moving systems with deadly accuracy attacking at night in
all the elements, you have a higher probability of friendly fire," said a senior
military officer, who spoke on the condition of anonymity.

The casualty figures, which Defense Secretary Dick Cheney reviewed on Thursday,
confirm earlier Pentagon expectations that the casualties from American fire
would rise from the preliminary tally of 11 dead and 15 wounded after the Army
and Marine Corps completed detailed casualty investigations.

The United States Central Command in its report for the Pentagon also said 9
British soldiers had been killed and 13 wounded by allied fire. The British
authorities have been counting 24 deaths from combat in the war, including 11
from accidental attacks by American forces.

The increased count of casualties from American fire was first reported on
Thursday by NBC News and CBS News.

The incidents involved Army and Marine forces. The Navy and Air Force had no
casualties resulting from attacks by American forces.

Uranium Traces Detected

Military investigators raised the count after a careful analysis of the
battlefield that included examining M1-A1 tanks, Bradley fighting vehicles and
other vehicles involved in the incidents.

In many cases, investigators were able to distinguish casualties caused by
American fire because American ground forces used anti-tank rounds made of
depleted uranium and Iraqi troops did not. The rounds left radioactive traces of
uranium that could be detected with Geiger counters.

Pentagon officials have cautioned against comparing the gulf war's rate of
American casualties from American fire with that of previous wars because of the
gulf war's terrain, short duration and unprecedented destructive weaponry.

The Persian Gulf war "is so totally different from the kind of warfare that went
on in World War II, Korea or even Vietnam -- it's just not comparing the same
thing," the Pentagon spokesman, Pete Williams, told reporters recently.

A senior military official said, however, that the latest figures were "very
concerning."

Preventive Devices Used

The military used an array of devices and tactics in the gulf war to prevent
casualties from allied fire, ranging from infrared beacons mounted on tanks to
"kill boxes," zones off-limits to American ground forces where allied aircraft
attacked Iraqi targets.

In addition, the Pentagon rushed hand-held, satellite-based navigational systems
to commanders in the field. These global positioning systems gave pilots, tank
crews and ship captains their precise locations, a tremendous combat advantage
at night or in foul weather.

But the Army, in particular, did not have enough of the devices to equip every
unit in the field. Army officials had had long-term plans to integrate the
devices into its armored vehicle ranks in the next few years.

Since the war's end, the Pentagon has created a senior-level interservice task
force to come up with ways to prevent casualties from allied fire in future
conflicts.

Led by Army experts at the service's training and equipment commands, the team
is reviewing military doctrine, training, organization and equipment, and will
submit its recommendations this fall to Gen. Gordon R. Sullivan, the Army Chief
of Staff.

Problems at Long Ranges

Experts say preventive measures used in the gulf were fairly effective at short
ranges, but not with M1-A1 tanks firing at targets one or two miles away, and
Apache helicopters shooting Hellfire missiles five miles.

"In the gulf war, we had no positive means on each vehicle or tank to identify
it as a 'friendly' at range we had to operate," said Richard M. Childress,
director of an Army team examining technical solutions to the problem. "We need
to move our identification technologies to the ranges where the weapons are
operating."

Mr. Childress said the Army was reviewing about 40 proposals submitted by
commercial companies for different technical devices.

Senior Army officers said the service was also considering changes in tactics
and doctrine to adjust friend-or-foe identification techniques to the rapid,
maneuver-style warfare now favored by American ground forces.

LOAD-DATE: August 10, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              94 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 10, 1991, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Hanoi Picks Reformer as Premier As It Moves to Unleash Economy

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section 1; Page 3; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 603 words

DATELINE: HANOI, Vietnam, Aug. 9


Prime Minister Do Muoi resigned today and was succeeded by Vo Van Kiet, a
reformer from the south who has struggled to shift the country away from central
planning and toward a market economy.

The resignation of Mr. Do Muoi, 74 years old, as Prime Minister had been
expected since he was appointed in June to lead the Communist Party.

As Vietnam's most powerful leader, Mr. Do Muoi is guiding the country through a
difficult period as it prepares to enter the world of open economic competition.
He has served as Prime Minister for three years.

The choice of Mr. Kiet was apparently intended to bolster reformists in the
leadership and insure the success of their ambitious economic program. A
Government spokesman said that 426 of the 445 National Assembly members who
attended a closed session voted for Mr. Kiet. The legislature has 490 members.

Do Muoi Remains Party Chief

"They announced at the National Assembly meeting that Vo Van Kiet is the newly
chosen Prime Minister," a National Assembly official said.

The official Voice of Vietnam radio said earlier that the assembly had accepted
the resignation of Mr. Do Muoi, who will retain his post as General Secretary of
the Communist Party.

Mr. Kiet, 68 years old, was the only candidate. He was nominated by President Vo
Chi Cong. The chairman of the National Assembly, Le Quang Dao, had nominated
Phan Van Khai, head of the State Planning Committee, for Prime Minister, but Mr.
Khai declined the nomination, the radio said.

Mr. Do Muoi became Prime Minister, or chairman of the Council of Ministers, in
1988 after his predecessor, Pham Hung, died.

Joined Party in '39

Mr. Kiet, who ranks third in the 13-member Politburo, has been a powerful voice
in helping unleash market forces to develop one of the world's poorest
countries.

He was born in Cuu Long Province in 1922 to a family of poor farmers. He joined
the anti-French revolutionary movement in 1938 and became a Communist Party
member in 1939.

After an abortive uprising in 1940, he fled to the jungle and by 1945 was a
cadre of the Vietminh, a Communist-led nationalist movement. He was the party's
political commissar for Saigon in 1958, at the beginning of the armed resistance
against the Government of Ngo Dinh Diem. He took the nom de guerre Sau Dan.

By 1960 he was a leading member of the Central Office in South Vietnam, the
Politburo arm running the Vietcong insurgency. Until 1971, he was in charge of
the western area of the south.

A Vietcong defector said that Mr. Kiet's wife and children were caught in an
American bombing raid and killed while on their way to an infrequent clandestine
meeting with him.

Ex-Mayor of Saigon

In 1976, a year after the Communists won the war, Mr. Kiet became Mayor of
Saigon, renamed Ho Chi Minh City, and a nonvoting alternate member of the
Politburo.

In the late 1980's he and his mentor, the former party chief Nguyen Van Linh,
broke with Stalinist central planning and the rigid dogma of the old
revolutionaries who had transformed Vietnam into a regional military giant but
had made no concerted effort to expand its weak economy.

"He wants to turn Vietnam into a newly industrialized country," an Asian
diplomat said of Mr. Kiet.

Vietnam still has a long way to go in freeing market forces, wiping out
corruption and reducing its Government bureaucracy, Mr. Kiet told the National
Assembly on Monday. "As far as private enterprise goes, the state must encourage
and help it," he said.

Vietnam survived the toughest part of the transition last year when Moscow
sharply cut aid, Mr. Kiet said.

NAME: Vo Van Kiet

LOAD-DATE: August 10, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Vietnam's National Assembly selected Vo Van Kiet, above, as the
country's new Prime Minister. (Agence France-Presse)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              95 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 10, 1991, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section 1; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1229 words



International 2-4

Israel came under growing pressure to help break the hostage stalemate by
unilaterally freeing Arab and Lebanese prisoners it holds. Britain called the
move "an opportunity not to be missed." Page 1

Efforts to release the French hostage kidnapped in Beirut were pledged by the
French Government. But the nation was reluctant to seek Iranian help until it
clarified the killing of an Iraqi opposition leader there.  4

Iraq rejects U.N. resolution allowing it to sell oil to buy food 4

About 15 percent of the casualties of American forces in the Persian Gulf war
were victims of "friendly fire," the military concluded. This type of fire
accounted for less than 2 percent of casualties in other recent wars. 4

Battles between South African police and right-wing militants ended in 2 deaths
and 54 injuries. The fighting began when pro-apartheid forces tried to halt a
speech by President F. W. de Klerk. 1

Italy turned back Albanian refugees, ordering thousands who fled there to return
home on military flights and requisitioned ferries. Some Albanians, penniless
and shirtless and even bootless, resisted the order. 3

Moscow Journal: Charity begins with new opposition parties 2

A meeting on the crisis in Yugoslavia among members of a European security group
ended with an endorsement of the Government's pledge to begin peace talks by
Thursday. 3

Relations between China and Japan are about to reach a virtual return to
normality, with the Japanese Prime Minister's visit Saturday to Beijing. But
their ties are more fragile than they appear. 3

Vietnam's Prime Minister resigned. Do Muoi was succeded by Vo Van Kiet, an
economic reformer who has struggled to pull the country toward a market economy.
3

National 6-8, 25

Salomon Brothers said it broke rules regulating the purchase of Government
issues and suspended two executives in charge of trading the securities. The
violations were an embarrassment for the prominent firm. 1

Producer prices dropped 0.2 percent in July, the fourth decline since February,
a Government report shows. The numbers reflect the general trend of prices
remaining subdued at the start of a recovery. 33

Vacationers are trying to economize this summer by staying with friends and
family, passing up on attractions and taking shorter trips. Experts say the
trend shows that Americans are still feeling the recession. 1

A family trip? $209.10 a day 25

A new wetlands management policy was proposed by the Bush Administration,
setting off a debate between commerical interests who praised the program and
environmentalists who criticized it. 7 Fifth of 13 students sentenced in U. of
Virginia drug raid 7

Fifth of 13 students sentenced in U. of Virginia drug raid 7

Thornburgh is stepping down to run for Senate 7

Suicide threat ignored, he slays family 7

The N.A.A.C.P. will permit dissent from members of a local branch who support
the nomination of Judge Clarence Thomas to the Supreme Court, so long it is not
the official position of the branch. 25

California police recruits homosexuals 25

Lawyers in the William Smith case asked to see the medical history and "all
relevant records of psychological or psychiatric treatment" of the woman who has
accused Mr. Smith of raping her.  6

The bitter struggle in Wichita erupted again after three days of uneasy calm as
scores of abortion opponents rushed the gates of a clinic and defied a Federal
court order against blocking the entry.  6

Limits for doctors with the HIV virus are being drafted to determine procedures
they should not perform. Preliminary signs are that the task, charged to doctors
and dentists, will not be an easy one. 6

Fayette Journal: Bittersweet legacy for victim of AIDS 6

Regional 21-24

A small cable company in the Bronx quietly wired 1,200 homes, digging trenches
and laying cables in the area. The only problem, officials say, is that the
hookups were illegal. 1

A debate over the Bronx New School is raising questions about the fairness of
the budget cuts and whether new ideas in the school system will truly be
rewarded. The elite public school may be merged with another. 1

Seven hundred tombstones in Queens were overturned by what the police described
as a group of marauding youths. Family members rushed to St. Michael's Cemetery
to check -- and repair -- the graves. 21

A witness tells of a second threat of arson 23

More money for bridge maintenance in New York City will be spent, 20 times as
much as five years ago. The increase came amid reports that more than half the
bridges are structurally deficient.  23

Long Island homes are out of reach for many low- to middle-income residents,
despite the much-touted drop in real estate prices. The only hope for many are
affordable housing projects, of which there are few. 21

AIDS tests on patients of the dentist on Long Island who died of AIDS-related
pneumonia show that none have contracted the disease. But state officials want
to test about 1,000 more of his patients. 21

Representative Christopher H. Smith of New Jersey is an anti-abortion activit
who first won election a decade ago in what some observers said was a fluke. But
now he is on the brink of national attention. 21

A temporary budget in Connecticut was signed by Governor Weicker, the state's
fourth since the start of the fiscal year. The measure, which expires on Aug.
18, was needed after the Governor's latest budget veto. 22

Business Digest 33

Sports

Baseball: Laredo slider fails Cone and Mets 27

Cardinals beat Pirates 28

Day is a mess for Maas 29

Mets Notebook 29

Boxing: Bowe knocks out Seldon in first round 31

Column: Berkow on the Mets 27

Football: Hostetler to start against Browns 30

Coslet wants Jets to rev it up 30

Golf: From long shot to leader at P.G.A.  27

Pan Am Games: U.S. wins in basketball 30

Doom's speed powers U.S. women 30

SportsLeisure: Competitive aerobics 31

SportsPeople 31

Track and Field: Marathon puts South Africans on hold 31

Scott is racing the clock 31

Obituaries 26

James B. Irwin, an astronaut who walked on the moon and later founded an
evangelical religious organization, died of a heart attack in Glenwood Springs,
Colo. He was 61 years old and lived in Colorado Springs.

Herbert Levine, a manufacturer of women's shoes

Charles (Cookie) Cook, tap dancer

Arts/Entertainment

Iran tries to save treasures 9

Computer service is tripped up 46

Theater: "My Son the Doctor" 12

Film: Bingo and his bag of tricks 9

Music: Classical Band 9

All Mozart with Rampal 13

Mendelssohn Quartet 13

Dance: Iso Dance Theater 13

Consumer's World 48

What's best after exercise: a special "ade" or just water?

Sending money quickly when someone needs it

To make a damp basement drier

Guidepost: Medical data that travels with you

Using asthma inhalers correctly

Editorials/Letters/Op-Ed

Editorials 18

Crack may be cracking

Time to end the hostage ordeal

Little bonds for the big city

Letters 18

Russell Baker: The unsuitable suit 19

Anna Quindlen: Hidden agendas 19

Gary Milhollin and Gerard White: Stop the nuclear threat 19

Peter Irons: Little Rock, 1957. Wichita, 1991.  19

Eric Leed: Why we camp 19

LOAD-DATE: August 10, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              96 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 11, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

HERS;
Trying On the 60's

BYLINE: By Francine Prose;  Francine Prose's novel, "Primitive People," to be
published by Farrar, Straus & Giroux, concerns the brutalities of social life in
the 90's.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 18; Column 3; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 1188 words


MY FRIEND'S 16-year-old daughter believes she was born too late. If only she'd
lived in the 60's, when Jim Morrison was alive and everyone wore awesome clothes
and marijuana was practically legal. Sitting at our kitchen table in a clean,
crisp tie-dyed T-shirt and jeans she's frayed to perfection with scissors and a
safety pin, she asks if we have, stored somewhere, any real clothes from the
60's -- some vintage fashion relics that one of us actually wore.

As it happens, we have everything in that reliquary we call our attic.
Obligingly, my husband goes upstairs and returns some time later with a denim
jacket he beaded by hand and wore, circa 1967. Our teen-age guest considers it
with evident horror and distaste, as if what we are showing her is not just an
outgrown coat, but the powder-burned, bloodstained shroud of some assassinated
martyr. "That's gross," she whispers. "I'm gagging. Take it away."

After a decade of use and abuse and a hard retirement among the moths, the
jacket does look rather the worse for wear, ripped and riddled with holes. But
what has upset our young friend has more, I think, to do with the beaded image
on the back -- a glittery figure of a grinning pre-Columbian sacrificial totem,
holding in one little fist an unmistakably spermlike snake. This is not at all
the 60's that this teen-ager had in mind. It was in every way stranger, wilder,
more inventive and complicated than old photos and film clips of mellow
celebrants at Woodstock, or scratchy copies of "Mr. Tambourine Man" and "Light
My Fire."

A 60's revival, a wave of 60's nostalgia, is sweeping the baby-sitter
population, so that I am often being asked by one young person or another what
it was like -- what it was really like -- to be alive in that glorious era. It's
difficult to answer without sounding like some dreary old geezer recalling the
days when men were men and milkshakes cost a nickel.

And yet it seems important to address the misconceptions widely promoted by
films like "The Doors," Oliver Stone's dream of 60's culture as a home-front
Vietnam: yet another delirious orgy of male bonding and self-destruction. I'd
like to sit down for a chat with the high-school senior describing a college
he's visited as a "60's kind of place," adding, "Everyone there is totally cool
and lazy and self-indulgent." Recent comedies about hippies -- "Flashback" and
"Rude Awakening" -- star stereotyped hirsute space-outs like Dennis Hopper and
Cheech Marin. Among the generation between my own and the baby sitters', I hear
the phrase "a 60's-type person" used as shorthand for a hopeless naif -- or
worse, a liberal. The term "60's-type" means brain-damaged beyond hope of repair
by years of peace marches, LSD and other forms of navel-gazing, while the savvy
and realistic had one eye on the bottom line or better, on the main chance.

It's this charge -- naivete -- that cuts closest to the bone, and makes it
tempting to leave the jacket in the attic and evade the baby sitters' questions.
Mostly we can forgive ourselves the excesses of our youth -- except, for some
reason, our youthful, excessive faith in the future. It's embarrassing to
describe or even remember a time when so many of us assumed that social upheaval
was imminent. Even relative skeptics (like myself) believed in our secret hearts
that we would live to see an era in which everyone had enough food and money,
unneurotic love affairs and jobs they enjoyed and believed in. All of us would
be free to make up our lives as we went along, work would resemble play, sexual
and political repression would fade into some distant, painful past.

All that sounds wildly innocent now, a very "60's-type person" fantasy; for
people with such great plans for the future, we didn't see the future sneaking
up on us. But what makes such innocence hard to condemn is that we wanted the
right things -- enough to eat for everyone and equal treatment for all-- even,
in theory, the women who did so much of the housework in "egalitarian" communes.
Compassion was high on our lists; we looked beyond buying the new car or the
condo. We felt that what happened to the Vietnamese was happening to us, though
we were too young and stupid to extend our compassion to American kids our own
age fighting that costly war.

What's hard to explain now to the baby sitters is that the 60's wasn't just a
fashion statement, wasn't principally about the clothes, scruffy jeans and
designer tie-dye. The point was individuality: all of us were supposed to be our
own designers, to bead our jackets like voodoo flags if that's who we happened
to be. Nor was it about getting stoned and listening to Jimi Hendrix, everybody
feeling out of it and alienated and bored -- though the fact was, we were young,
and there was also plenty of that.

But who can blame a 16-year-old for not getting it right? These days, when even
a "soft" real estate market isn't soft enough for those living on the pavement,
when our baby sitters' older brothers are graduating from college and rejoining
mom and dad, it's hard for teen-agers to imagine the freedom of cheap rent --
the freedom we had to live where we wanted and improvise new ways to live there.
I knew artists in San Francisco who took over a huge abandoned hotel and carved
out astonishing living spaces, themselves works of art. They felt they were in
at the start of something, present at the creation, instead of -- as we
sometimes feel now -- sticking around for the end, hoping the world will limp
through our children's lifetimes. This, of course, was before we knew there was
a problem with the planet.

My friend's 16-year-old daughter, the baby sitters with their headbands and
sweetly dopey questions about Janis and Jimi and Jim -- how can they imagine a
world with fewer malls, no crack, unendangered rain forests, hardly any
homeless, relatively good public schools and relatively low unemployment? And
how could we -- at 16 -- have imagined that the social and political system some
of us believed we were changing would soon, with consummate trickiness, double
back on itself and re-create the conservative 50's?

We would have been less surprised by the ascendancy of greed during the Reagan
and Bush years than by the fact of so many people simply taking it for granted
-- and most surprised that we ourselves would have so little idea how to fix it.
We may have wanted all the right things, but we predicted all the wrong ones.
And my teen-age neighbors can't hear the story without knowing how the story
seems to have ended; no view of the past can be unaffected by all that's
happened since.

Any revival appreciates -- and simultaneously misses -- the point. I'd rather my
friend's daughter yearn longingly for the 60's than for the 80's. But what she
envisions, and the attitudes she tries on, in her affection for that time are no
more like the 60's than the work of pre-Raphaelite artists is, finally, like art
before Raphael. It's so hard to see accurately forward or back across even 20 or
30 years -- long enough to turn a new denim jacket into scary antique textile.

LOAD-DATE: August 11, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              97 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 11, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

ART;
Sculpture With Canaries

BYLINE: By VIVIEN RAYNOR

SECTION: Section 12NJ; Page 10; Column 1; New Jersey Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 907 words


AT the Snug Harbor Cultural Center, on Staten Island, there are spears strapped
to the columns of one portico, stony extraterrestrials parked on the steps of
another and canaries incarcerated in the main gatehouse. The Snug Harbor
Sculpture Festival has struck again.

As usual, the sculptors purport to address the site, and some even mention it in
their statements. Nevertheless, there are few works that complement or enhance
it, the bird installation least of all. The last time the reviewer saw wildlife
pressed into service for art was when the Bergen Museum used canaries as an
exhibition accessory a year or two ago.

But in that case there was a specially constructed aviary with greenery and
lights. All the Snug Harbor prisoners get is a perch like an upturned table and
sunlight at certain times of day.

Titled "Out of Order," this depressing spectacle is one-half of a comment on
man, nature and entropy (what else?). The other half, installed in the
building's twin, is earth stashed against the windows that occasionally emits
steam through a small vent. Walter de Maria did something similar more than a
decade ago when he deposited soil to the depth of about two feet on the floor of
a SoHo loft.

From their classical location, the spears, attached by Jeffrey Schiff, point to
the present, as epitomized by the refineries across the Kill van Kull. They are
meant, Mr. Schiff says, to point up the conflict between old and new and the way
culture comments on scientific and industrial values. Graffiti sprayed on this
lovely old building would do the same.

As for the extraterrestrials, they are actually monoliths composed of shapes
like tentacles, sponges, the enlarged bodies of seahorses and so on. The artist,
Arnold Zimmerman, concedes the intrusion on "such an austere and proper facade"
(the building is the one housing the Newhouse Center Galleries) but says he
could not resist the impulse to substitute his own images for the conventional
statuary that might have been.

Indecipherable though they are, these weird organic objects, one with pink
"icing" poured over it, are not unwelcome visitors. Mr. Zimmerman may be the one
sculptor here who has a gift for the monumental.

Strewn on the grass before the statue of Captain Randall, who founded Snug
Harbor as a home for seamen, are whimsical shapes made of metal sheeting. They
include a bronze-colored piece that is half-bird, half-plane with swept-back
wings; two quaint squatting creatures painted blue and white respectively, and,
in unpainted aluminum, a pair of blimps with legs that stand one on top of the
other, together with something like a giant hand grenade with sunburst spikes.

Describing the crowd as a "bestiary of fabrications," the artist, Jude
Tallichet, proposes that they "create a context of interconnecting meanings and
confusions." Confusions, yes, but meanings?

Also in the area is Colin Chase's wood structure with three shovels and a pickax
attached as finials. Defined by the sculptor as "an enigmatic navigational tool
aligned to the four cardinal points," the piece has something in common with
Alvaro Garcia's "Sail House," situated on the slope down to the estate's Lower
Pond.

This is a kind of gazebo with four compartments that is made of beams and rigged
with symbolic sails and is a reflection of the artist's amazement at man
responding to "something as vast and incomprehensible as the sea" by sailing on
it.

Linda DePalma and Paul Daniel, on the other hand, focus on the melancholy that
surely afflicted the beached sailors. Their contribution is a paddock fenced by
branches painted blue and furnished with chairs of the same color.

While this has the effect of reducing men who "rounded" the Horn in clipper
ships to the level of preschoolers, it does at least provide visual
entertainment. Visitors can admire the view through the blue stockade,
contemplate stagnant water in a metal mermaid-shaped container or scale the
black-and-white ladder to a crow's nest.

On the other side of the buildings, Pamela Lins reflects on the relationships
between cultural issues by way of a black-and-white goal post that has a chair
and a lunch box attached; Claire Lieberman commemorates the suicide of a Vietnam
veteran friend with a jungle gym occupied by hefty forms roughly carved out of
marble. The courtyards between the buildings house Eva Capobianco's well-crafted
facade of redwood and glass bricks that pertains to social interaction but looks
like a stage prop, Louis Mueller's three trapeazoidal blocks resembling coffins
and lying behind a fence of two-by-fours, and the circle of flat metal flowers
by Polly Apfelbaum. This has something to do with the French philosopher Michel
Foucault's view of heterotopia, meaning the displacement of a part in the body,
as the opposite of utopia.

Down by pondside, Elana Herzog has the final say on Snug Harbor with a
"mythology" pertaining to her view of the sailor's life as lonely and
incomplete. It is a group of exotic plants trained through holes cut in tacky
tables with metal legs that have been bisected and reversed. All protestations
to the contrary, most of these artists have imposed themselves on the landscape
instead of responding to it.

On view through Oct. 27, the festival can be visited seven days a week during
daylight hours. The Snug Harbor Cultural Center is at 1000 Richmond Terrace, not
too far from the ferry terminal.

LOAD-DATE: August 11, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: "Jungle Gym for Johnny Joe," by Claire Lieberman, at the Snug
Harbor Cultural Center. (James T. Murray)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              98 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 11, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Making a Difference;
From Calculators to a Computer Giant

BYLINE: By ANDREW POLLACK

SECTION: Section 3; Page 12; Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 351 words


Robert J. Crowell started in business selling calculators as a college student.
Now he is the head of a newly formed giant in personal computer retailing.

Mr. Crowell, who is 40, is chairman and chief executive of JWP Businessland
Inc., a company formed last week when JWP Inc., a technical services company in
Purchase, N.Y., bought Businessland Inc., a computer retailer, and combined it
with its own computer sales division.

JWP Businessland will have sales of roughly $2 billion, making it the largest
computer retailer that operates through company-owned outlets. The Computerland
chain has larger sales but sells mainly through franchisees. The acquisition is
part of a consolidation now occurring among computer dealers, which are facing
competition from newer superstores and other mass marketers.

"For some people, the consolidation is a matter of survival," said Mr. Crowell,
who was in charge of JWP's computer group before the acquisition. "For other
people, the consolidation is an opportunity, and that's the way it is for us.
Now we've got full national scale and scope." JWP Businessland, while called a
retailer, does not have traditional storefronts and concentrates on selling
directly to large companies.

After serving in the Vietnam War, Mr. Crowell majored in accounting at the
University of Massachusetts, where in 1972 he began selling what were then
new-fangled calculators out of his apartment. Soon he had franchisees on five
other campuses.

In 1977, he incorporated as the New England Electronics Company and expanded
into personal computers. Neeco, as it was later called, became known for a lean,
efficient operation and grew to sales of about $400 million in 1990, when it was
bought by JWP. Such a skill for keeping operations lean will be needed as JWP
tries to swallow Businessland, which was on the brink of bankruptcy because of
bloated costs. Much of the work merging the companies will fall to JWP
Businessland's new president, Harold D. Copperman, 44.

"We expect JWP Businessland to be a profitable entity in very short order," Mr.
Crowell said.

LOAD-DATE: August 11, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Robert J. Crowell.

Graph: "Doubling Up" shows the largest computer retailers formed through
mergers, based on their fiscal 1990 revenues (Source: Technologic Partners)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              99 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 11, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

U.S. RANKED NO. 1 IN WEAPONS SALES

BYLINE: By ROBERT PEAR,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 10; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 820 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 10


For the first time since 1983, the United States has surpassed the Soviet Union
as the biggest supplier of weapons to the third world, and has become the
biggest arms supplier to the Middle East, the Congressional Research Service
said in a new report.

The nonpartisan research agency, an arm of the Library of Congress, said
American arms transfers to the third world reached a record of $18.5 billion
last year, up from $7.8 billion in 1989. By contrast, Soviet arms transfers to
the third world declined for the third consecutive year, to $12.1 billion from
$12.7 billion in 1989, it said.

The study showed the United States sold $30.7 billion worth of weapons to the
Middle East from 1987 to 1990, while Soviet sales totaled about $17.5 billion in
the same period.

The Middle East is the largest arms market in the third world, accounting for
more than half of all arms purchases in the last eight years. In a series of
proposals since the Persian Gulf war, President Bush has called for measures to
curb arms sales to the Middle East.

Soviets a Major Supplier to Iran

The author of the report, Richard F. Grimmett, said the decline in Soviet arms
sales reflected the winding down of regional conflicts and the inability of some
Soviet client states to pay cash urgently needed by Moscow. In the last few
years, he said, the Soviets have substantially reduced sales to two of their
bigger customers in the Middle East, Syria and Libya. In Asia, he said, the
Soviets continue to sell arms to Vietnam and India, but orders are lower than in
the early 1980's.

But the report also documented a new trend, the emergence of the Soviet Union as
a major supplier of arms to Iran. Moscow signed $10 million worth of arms sales
agreements with Teheran from 1983 to 1986, but this figure increased markedly in
the next four years as the Soviets concluded more than $2.7 billion in arms
agreements with Iran, it said.

The report said, "Saudi Arabia and Iraq have been, by a wide margin, the top two
third-world arms purchasers from 1983 to 1990." In that period, third-world
countries signed arms agreements totaling $301.7 billion. The Saudis bought
$57.3 billion worth of weapons, or about 19 percent of the total. Iraq bought
$30.4 billion, or about 10 percent of the total.

"The extraordinary increase in the value of United States arms transfer
agreements in 1990 is directly attributable to very costly new orders from Saudi
Arabia," the report said. The agreements with Saudi Arabia, totaling $14.5
billion, accounted for about 78 percent of all American arms sales agreements
with the third world last year, it said.

$41.3 Billion in Arms Sold in 1990

The report emphasized that the sales to Saudi Arabia were not merely a reaction
to the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait. Nearly half of the American arms agreements
with Saudi Arabia last year were consummated in the first seven months of the
year, prior to the invasion, it said.

The report showed the United States provided 36 percent of all conventional
weapons sold to the Middle East from 1987 to 1990, as against 16 percent from
1983 to 1986. The Soviets accounted for 20 percent of arms sold to the region
from 1987 to 1990, down from 32 percent in the previous four years.

Despite the end of the cold war and the winding down of many regional conflicts,
the study predicted demand for American-made weapons would continue for two
reasons: The successful performance of such weapons in the Persian Gulf war
"undoubtedly enhanced the prestige of these arms in the Middle East and
elsewhere in the third world," and American companies are trying to increase
foreign arms sales to compensate for shrinking domestic orders.

The total value of arms transfer agreements concluded with third-world countries
by all suppliers last year was $41.3 billion, the highest for any year since
1987, when the Soviet Union received a surge of new orders, Mr. Grimmett said.

China Is Third Biggest Seller

The report said: "In 1990, the total value, in real terms, of United States arms
transfer agreements with the third world increased dramatically from the
previous year's total. For the first time since 1983, the United States ranked
first in arms transfer agreements with the third world."

The report noted that some of the Saudi-American agreements in the first seven
months of 1990 were "quite large." They included, for example, a $3 billion
package of more than 1,000 light armored vehicles and 2,000 TOW II antitank
missiles for the Saudi National Guard; a $3.1 billion agreement to provide
ground weapons, including 315 M1-A2 battle tanks, and a $600 million package of
equipment to upgrade Saudi E-3A Awacs radar planes.

After the United States and the Soviet Union, the biggest sellers of weapons to
the third world last year were China, with $2.6 billion worth of agreements, and
France, with $2.3 billion, the report said.

LOAD-DATE: August 11, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Graph: "Third World's Arms: The Sellers," tracks sales of arms to
third-world countries by the U.S., the Soviet Union, China, Euorpean countries
and other countries, 1983-1990 (Source: Congressional Research Service)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              100 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 11, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

From Brazil to Peru to Jamaica, Gun Smugglers Flock to Florida

BYLINE: By LARRY ROHTER,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 1; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1881 words

DATELINE: MIAMI, Aug. 10


Lax gun control laws in the United States and a hunger for weapons in Latin
America have combined to make Florida the hub of a booming illegal trade in
arms, say law-enforcement and military officials here and abroad.

Alarmed at the flow of weapons, from cheap pistols to sophisticated assault
rifles, Latin American and Caribbean governments are urging the United States to
stop the traffic, which in the last decade has become so extensive and
well-organized that gun-smuggling groups can now offer the most powerful weapons
on the market to clients anywhere in the world.

For its part, the United States has stepped up efforts to stop the arms
trafficking and is increasing cooperative efforts with other nations. On Friday,
four men were arrested here as they tried to buy $12 million in guns and
missiles for use in Yugoslavia's civil war.

In 1989 and 1990, weapons bought over the counter at gun shops in Miami were
used to assassinate three candidates in Colombia's presidential election, says
the United States Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms. Guns illegally
exported from Florida have also been used to kill organized crime figures and to
kidnap businessmen in Brazil, to arm guerrillas in Peru, to mount a coup in
Trinidad and to disrupt elections in Haiti, Jamaica and Panama, officials in
those countries say.

"We have the reputation as being the No. 1 supplier of weapons in this
hemisphere, and that reputation is probably well-deserved," said Stephen E.
Higgins, director of the firearms bureau. "My experience has been that most of
the countries we deal with have much more stringent controls on firearms than
the United States does, with very strict laws and a lot of limits on who can own
weapons."

Because laws governing the purchase and ownership of weapons in Latin American
and Caribbean countries are typically so strict, there is much money to be made
in the illegal export of guns. It is "second only to narcotics trafficking," one
law-enforcement official here said. A pistol bought for $300 at a gun shop here
typically sells for four times that in South America, and premiums for
high-power weapons like the Uzi, AK-47 and AR-15 automatic assault rifles can be
even larger.

No American city is more deeply identified with the illicit arms trade than
Miami, which one senior Brazilian police official, speaking on the condition of
anonymity, called "the arms supermarket of the Americas." With its large Latin
American population, busy airport, extensive sea links and sophisticated banking
network, Miami has become the principal base of operations for gun smugglers all
over the Western Hemisphere.

"What you have is a bazaar down there, a world of drugs, weapons, con men and
rip-offs," said Donald De Fago, a munitions specialist at the United States
Custom Service's division of strategic investigations in Washington. "Miami has
an atmosphere that lends itself to that type of thing. Because of its location
and culture, it's a big market with a lot of international flavor. When you put
everything together, that definitely makes Miami a hot spot."

Miami's Emergence in 80's

Miami's emergence as a top arms trafficking center has coincided with the rise
of political insurgencies in Central America and the growth of the drug trade in
the 1980's. Even now, United States officials say, weapons used by the
Nicaraguan rebels are entering the resale market here. But the illicit trade has
been given a boost, officials say, by a history of liberal gun control laws in
Florida, which until recently did not include provisions for a waiting period or
a criminal records check of purchasers.

"Because of state gun laws, there is a lot of availability of weapons in
Florida," Mr. De Fago said. Then, referring to two Miami streets with large
numbers of gun stores, he went on: "With so many shops near each other, the
Tamiami Trail and Bird Road are like an arsenal. If you don't see what you want
on the counter, you can just ask for it, and they've probably got it. In a lot
of other states, you don't have that variety or ease of purchase. In South
Florida, the guns are available, and the people are willing to sell them."

American officials point out that while Miami is the largest gun smuggling
center, problems are often encountered in other large cities or border areas.
Los Angeles, for instance, has emerged as a major shipment point for guns bound
for the Philippines, Japan and other Asian countries, and Texas is a major base
of operations for traffickers intent on shipping guns into Mexico.

Because of the underground nature of weapons trafficking, it is impossible to
estimate with any precision how many guns or what amount of money is involved.
But Robert J. Creighton, the top Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms agent
here, puts the figures "in the realm of thousands and thousands of guns out of
South Florida every year, worth millions and millions of dollars."

Flashing Wads of $100 Bills

In one case last year, Louis Haneef, the owner of a cleaning business in Pompano
Beach, became a familiar figure at gun stores and weapons shows all over South
Florida, in the process arousing the suspicion of Federal agents. Flashing wads
of $100 bills, Mr. Haneef bought dozens of assault rifles, shotguns, carbines
and pistols, all of them intended, he maintained, for use at the All American
Gun Club he operated.

His story fell apart last summer, when a group of Muslim extremists took the
Prime Minister of Trinidad and Tobago and most of his cabinet as hostages after
blowing up the police headquarters in that Caribbean nation. Of the 135 weapons
seized by Trinidadian authorities when the coup attempt collapsed after a siege
of several days, 105 proved to have been bought here by Mr. Haneef, who was then
arrested.

The authorities say that no particular nationality dominates the gun trade, and
they point to recent arrests of Argentines, Brazilians, Colombians, Dominicans,
Haitians and Jamaicans.  Many traffickers also dabble in drugs, they say, or
have developed ties to drug smugglers, if only not to return home empty-handed.

"Guns are smuggled out the same way that drugs are smuggled in, often by the
same people," said Bruce Snyder, a veteran firearms bureau agenthere.

Weapons Shipped in Refrigerators

Officials here say arms traffickers have tried to ship weapons out in
refrigerators, washing machines, scuba tanks, fire extinguishers and even
stuffed animals and toys. Mr. Haneef, scheduled to go on trial later this month,
is said to have sent guns and ammunition to Trinidad in a legal shipment of
wallboard.

In many cases here, the weapons were obtained through what are known as "straw
purchases," in which one person buys a gun and lists himself as its owner on
Government purchase forms, but then turns the weapon over to someone else.
Typically, such straw purchasers, who include both American citizens and
resident legal aliens, will receive payments of $20 to $50 for each gun they buy
on behalf of a gun trafficker.

Federal authorities say many gun trafficking groups rely on specialists who
obliterate the serial numbers on weapons in an effort to make it impossible for
American and foreign police and military forces to trace their origin. Still
other gun smugglers purchase weapons legally and then soup them up by equipping
them with silencers or by converting semiautomatic rifles to fully automatic
machine guns. Both actions are a Federal offense.

On many occasions, however, customs and firearms agents find themselves
hamstrung by the law. It is usually legal for gun shops to sell even large
quantities of arms to a qualified buyer. A crime occurs only when the weapons
are exported without Federal registration forms or notification to the shipper.

"We've had many cases in Miami or on the border where we've had strong
suspicions that guns are going to be purchased for illegal export," Mr. De Fago
said. "But unless the purchaser violates the law by lying on the form or uses a
straw purchaser, he can go from dealer to dealer in a state like Florida and
literally purchase an arsenal and put it in his basement. Even if we have
information he's going to export it illegally, it becomes a waiting game."

In large part because of the ease with which arms can be purchased here,
Florida's notoriety is spreading beyond Latin America and the Caribbean. A grand
jury in West Palm Beach last month indicted a Finnish man for smuggling
9-millimeter Ruger semiautomatic pistols to his homeland, and other recent
incidents have involved shotguns and other weapons said to have been purchased
for shipment to the Soviet Union and the Middle East.

On Friday, United States customs agents here arrested three Yugoslavs and an
American gun shop owner who they say were behind a $12 million deal to purchase
several thousand M-16 rifles and 20 Stinger antiaircraft missiles. The
authorities have identified three of the men as Croatians and say they believe
the weapons were intended for use against Serbian forces in Yugoslavia's
mounting civil war.

'From All Over the World'

"People come from all over the world to do gun deals in Miami," said Keith
Prager, a United States Customs Service investigator here. "We're even seeing
cases from China and Vietnam.  All the worldwide players are coming through
here, and that's a new trend. You can use Miami as a barometer for world
conditions; wherever there is a flare-up, we inevitably have a case here."

Federal officials praise Florida for recent measures intended to more closely
regulate gun sales, and point to the Haneef case and many others as proof they
are making advances against gun traffickers. But both United States and Latin
American officials acknowledge that much remains to be done.

"The fact is, there is still that market in South America, Central America and
the Caribbean," said Mr. Creighton of the firearms bureau. "As long as that
market exists, someone else is going to come along and say, 'Hey, I can do
that.' It's just like narcotics."

In an effort to work more efficiently against arms trafficking groups, the
Federal Government has recently established an Arms Trafficking Intelligence
Unit, and both the firearms bureau and the Customs Service are represented on
it. In addition, the firearms bureau has more than doubled the number of agents
assigned to Florida in recent years.

At the same time, there is increased international cooperation, with the United
States shouldering most of the load. Firearms bureau representatives are now
stationed at the United States Embassy in Colombia and are soon expected to be
stationed in Mexico. Latin American police forces regularly visit their
counterparts here, and mechanisms have been set up so that a gun seized in a
Latin American country can be traced back to its point of purchase here.

"We are asking Latin American countries to cooperate with us to stem the flow of
narcotics here, which we say is subverting our society and upsetting our way of
life," Mr. Creighton said. "The same thing applies to guns going to Latin
America. If we are asking them to do something about what's coming at us, we
have the responsibility to keep the guns from coming at them."

LOAD-DATE: August 11, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: "Guns are smuggled out the same way that drugs are smuggled in,
often by the same people," said Bruce Snyder, an agent with the Bureau of
Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms, seen with seized weapons in Miami. (Susan
Greenwood for The New York Times) (pg. 24)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              101 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 11, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THE WORLD;
The Challenge in Peru: Drugs and Disarray

BYLINE: By NATHANIEL NASH

SECTION: Section 4; Page 3; Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 997 words

DATELINE: LIMA, Peru


A WESTERN military expert here tells of the time a member of the Peruvian
security forces was escorting him around an isolated town in the jungle that had
been the scene of repeated bloody confrontation between Shining Path guerrillas
and the army.

In conversation, the official learned that the young guard had only eight shells
in his rifle.

But it could have been worse. In his life, the guard had fired only six rounds
of live ammunition. And the day before, he had no bullets at all and was told by
his supply officer that the wait for ammunition was at least 15 days. The guard
traded a pack of cigarettes for the eight shells, half filling the magazine of
his rifle.

"You can imagine I was glad we didn't come under fire that day," the official
said.

Peru's internal fight against drugs and terrorism is doing little more than
limping along. The plight of the guard is typical in a country where police
officers and soldiers are underpaid, demoralized, frustrated and frightened, and
as such, they frequently resort to quick justice when they capture a suspected
terrorist.

The guerrillas and drug traffickers, on the other hand, are flush with money,
kill their victims with near impunity, and the sophistication of their weaponry,
though still very basic, is increasing.

Into this picture of Lima's dire military condition came the news last week that
the United States had agreed to send Green Beret units to train the Peruvian
military in jungle and anti-subversive combat.

But far from hailing the agreement, Peruvians greeted it with anger, confusion
and debate.

The Ministry of Defense at first said such reports were "totally false." Some
members of the Peruvian congress denounced the agreement. President Alberto
Fujimori was reported to have said that Green Berets would not come to Peru. One
radio station said that the United States was sending 50,000 combat marines.
(The actual number of personnel announced was about 50.)

When the dust settled, it became an issue of semantics. Any military personnel
sent to Peru, as part of a $34 million military aid package, would be "trainers"
not "advisers" and, as the initial reports said, would not be involved in, or
even come near, any combat situation.

Such rhetorical fine-tuning is of importance to the United States, since
"military adviser" conjures up memories of the early days of Vietnam when
advisers were actually involved in waging war against the North Vietnamese. For
Peruvians it is an issue of national sovereignty. The country seems resigned to
the need for training and aid, but does not want the United States to direct the
internal war that Peru has waged since 1980.

"Under no circumstances will American forces be permitted to engage in combat
and military operations," said Foreign Minister Carlos Torres y Torres Lara.
"Only in education."

The agreement to send military trainers to Peru represents a major shift toward
open military cooperation between the two countries. But it is not entirely new.
For almost two years, small groups of United States Marines have been secretly
training Peruvian marine units in river and jungle warfare.

Since October 1989, American Green Berets have instructed almost 800 Peruvian
police in jungle drug interdiction. And at any one time, 30 or more Drug
Enforcement Agency officials are manning the St. Lucia base in the Upper
Huallaga Valley, which is the country's main drug interdiction staging point.

What is perhaps the most important distinction with the new funds is that they
will be used not only in antidrug training, but for training in anti-terrorist
warfare, to combat what is now called "narcoterrorism," an alliance that has
developed in recent years between Colombian drug traffickers and the Maoist
Shining Path guerrillas.

Western experts say that the Peruvian military has almost entirely lost control
over the Upper Huallaga Valley, permitting drug dealers and terrorists to direct
villagers to grow coca leaf -- the raw material for cocaine -- and to control
municipal airports, roads and local governments.

Addressing Rights Abuses

Part of the American effort is to include working with the Peruvian Defense
Ministry to develop human rights training for the military and a military
justice code to prohibit rights abuses. Just as large a task may be rejuvenating
the military and discouraging corruption in the ranks, where a conscript's
monthly pay is no more than $7 a month and an enlisted man's just $90. Even a
senior officer makes only about $240. Thus, bribes that can range as high as
$50,000 for letting drug shipments pass are hard to resist.

The $34 million in American aid will have to be spread thin. It will go toward
buying trucks, fuel, some M-16 rifles, road building equipment, and primarily
spare parts for Peru's 60-odd helicopters and other fixed-wing aircraft, which
in their disrepair are grounded about 28 of 30 days each month.

By comparison, the previous American military training experience in Latin
America, in El Salvador, was less daunting. There, forces were far better
equipped. For example, the Central American country, which is one-sixtieth the
size of Peru, also had 60 helicopters, and most of them were in good working
order.

The Peruvian landscape offers another challenge. Many military and police
outposts in the highlands have no radios and telephones. Their only system of
communication is called "chasqui," a Quechua word for a system of runners that
relays messages from village to village. Transporation often involves
commandeering civilian-owned trucks and cars, and frequently there is simply no
fuel. Recruits are given one week of training before they are sent into combat
zones. Some have never fired a shot.

"This doesn't require sophisticated equipment, just basic good equipment, a lot
of money and time," said one Western official. "This is not Operation Desert
Storm. Is it going to work? I don't know. I think there is a chance."


LOAD-DATE: August 11, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: The United States announced last week that Green Beret units
would train the Peruvian military. Since 1989 American Drug Enforcement Agency
officials have operated from an Upper Huallaga Valley base. (Wesley Bocxe/Sipa)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              102 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 11, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

What the U.S. Can Do in Peru

SECTION: Section 4; Page 16; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 509 words


The Bush Administration has good reasons for helping to train and equip the
Peruvian armed forces and police to combat drug traffickers and the leftist
guerrillas who protect their trade. Sending 50 U.S. military personnel to assist
an army notorious for human rights abuse does not mean that Washington is
sliding toward another Vietnam, or even another El Salvador.

But to avoid being dangerously drawn into another country's political conflicts,
policy makers will have to keep the limited nature of their mission clearly in
mind: to help a democratically elected government implement its drug-control
strategy and fend off guerrillas who get in the way.

That does not require the U.S. to be neutral in Peru's larger guerrilla war. The
Shining Path rebels are brutal terrorists, with no strong base of popular
support. President Alberto Fujimori's Government is democratically legitimate
and economically competent. But Peru's present problems, including ethnic and
regional strains, disease, insurgency and declining living standards, have deep
historical roots and cannot be solved from abroad or by mainly military means.

The cocaine traffic is another story. The huge U.S. appetite for drugs helps
drive this lucrative industry. Thousands of Peruvian peasants have been drawn to
the remote Upper Huallaga Valley, where they can make far more money growing
coca than they could from more traditional pursuits.

Shining Path, which has its main base in the Andean highlands, has exploited the
cocaine traffic to open a new military front. The guerrillas pressure drug
traffickers to pay more for the farmers' coca crops, and offer farmers and
traffickers protection against army and police raiders.

Two years ago at the Cartagena summit meeting, the Presidents of the U.S.,
Bolivia, Colombia and Peru agreed on a joint strategy. The centerpiece was
military cooperation, although useful new approaches, like Peru's crop
substitution program, have since been added. The U.S. training mission in Peru
is a result of the Cartagena understandings and has the support of the Fujimori
Government.

There are defects in any anti-drug strategy that concentrates mainly on supply.
Progress in squeezing Andean and Mexican traffickers has been partly offset by
the relocation of drug facilities to other Latin American locations.

There are also human rights concerns. Peru today has perhaps the worst rights
record in South America. The army, which ruled until 1980, remains a law unto
itself; efforts to contain the violent insurgents of Shining Path have often
caught innocent peasants in the middle.

The Fujimori Government has tried to rein in abuses, but has limited power. U.S.
military trainers are likely to have no more success in changing the Peruvian
Army's internal culture than they have had in El Salvador over the last decade.

Still, limited military cooperation against traffickers makes sense; and in
Peru, no such campaign can succeed without also attacking the connection between
the coca industry and Shining Path.

LOAD-DATE: August 11, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              103 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 11, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

CHINA BACKS PACT ON NUCLEAR ARMS

BYLINE: By SHERYL WuDUNN,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 1; Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1431 words

DATELINE: BEIJING, Aug. 10


China announced today that it had decided "in principle" to sign the Nuclear
Nonproliferation Treaty, becoming the last major nuclear power to commit itself
to the terms of the agreement to curb the spread of atomic weapons.

The announcement came during a summit meeting today between Prime Minister Li
Peng and Prime Minister Toshiki Kaifu of Japan, whose nation last week marked
the 46th anniversary of the two American atomic bomb attacks. Mr. Kaifu, who
arrived today for three days of talks, is the first leader of any industrialized
country to visit China since the Tiananmen crackdown on pro-democracy
demonstrators in June 1989.

'Things Have Changed'

"On many occasions in the past, China made clear its reasons for not acceding to
the treaty," Wu Jianmin, China's Foreign Ministry spokesman, said tonight. "Now
things have changed. This is for the purpose of attaining the complete
prohibition and thorough destruction of nuclear weapons."

In recent months, China had hinted it might join the Nuclear Nonproliferation
Treaty, and today's announcement, while not entirely a surprise, is expected to
be a boost to the international effort this year to curtail the spread of
nuclear and conventional weapons, particularly to trouble spots like the Middle
East.

The Foreign Ministry spokesman did not say when China would sign the treaty, nor
did he say whether "in principle" meant that there were any issues China still
wanted to discuss before it signed. He did say, however, that China has not
"imposed any conditions" for signing the treaty.

China was the last of the five major nuclear powers to hold out against the
accord; on June 3, France committed itself to the terms of the treaty, although
it has not yet signed it.

Only a handful of countries -- including India, Pakistan, Israel, South Africa,
Argentina and Brazil, which are thought to possess advanced nuclear technology
-- have yet to sign the accord. But among the nations that have accepted it are
countries like Iraq and North Korea that are believed to have ambitions of
developing nuclear weapons.

[The Bush Administration welcomed China's announcement, saying the move was
something the United States had long sought. "We welcome this development and we
look forward to early ratification by China of the treaty," the White House
spokesman, Marlin Fitzwater, said in Kennebunkport, Me., where President Bush is
vacationing.]

Mr. Li's announcement appeared to be a friendly gesture toward Japan, which has
been more eager than Western countries to re-establish normal ties with China.

Ties 'Returned to Normal'

In the last two years, Japan and China have rebuilt strong economic, commercial
and even diplomatic ties, without focusing on the Tiananmen crackdown or human
rights abuses. Some Western countries, particularly the United States, continue
to have frosty relations with China because of concerns about Chinese violations
of human rights and weapons sales.

Prime Minister Li suggested to Mr. Kaifu, in a comment repeated by the official
New China News Agency, that China regarded the summit meeting as an indication
that Chinese-Japanese relations are now back to normal.

"We are pleased to see that our bilateral relations have returned to normal,"
Mr. Li said. "We hereby express our appreciation for the positive efforts the
Japanese Government and Prime Minister Kaifu have made to restore and develop
the bilateral relations."

Treaty Took Effect in 1968

One of the aims of Mr. Kaifu's visit was to encourage China to play a more
active role in controlling weapons sales and the proliferation of nuclear arms.

Mr. Wu today did not explain why his country had long opposed the treaty, but
China in the past has suggested that the pact was an effort by the superpowers
to dominate other countries. Beijing has said the treaty discriminated against
developing countries and hindered international cooperation for peaceful uses of
nuclear energy.

The treaty, the subject of intensive negotiations between the United States and
the Soviet Union in the mid-1960's, bans the export of nuclear weapons and
nuclear-arms technology. It went into effect in 1968.

The treaty was controversial because it sought to make permanent the
nuclear-weapons monopoly of those nations that then possessed such weapons --
the United States, the Soviet Union, Britain, France and China -- and sought
pledges from other countries nt to acquire any. The treaty also committed the
nuclear powers to work toward total nuclear disarmament and to help nonnuclear
nations that sign the accord to develop peaceful uses of nuclear energy.

Arms control experts say China's nuclear arsenal is much smaller than those of
the United States, Soviet Union, Britain or France. According to a report by
Jane's Information Group, China has a nuclear arsenal that consists of 1,455
devices, both strategic and tactical. Many of those include warheads on
land-based missiles, but China also has bombs, submarine-launched ballistic
missiles and mines and shells.

The Wisconsin Project on Nuclear Arms Control has reported that China has
transferred sensitive nuclear material or technology to Pakistan, India, South
Africa, Algeria and countries in South America.

In addition to seeking Chinese acceptance of the nonproliferation treaty, the
United States has been pressing Beijing in the last year to curb its missile
sales. Nevertheless, China went ahead recently with the sale to Pakistan of a
package of M-11 missiles, which can carry nuclear warheads. It is apparently
considering the sale of M-9 missiles to Syria.

China indicated recently that it was considering joining the Missile Technology
Control Regime, an international agreement to curb the spread of missiles, but
the issue was not raised at today's meeting, according to a Japanese Foreign
Ministry spokesman, Sadaaki Numata.

Issue of Arms Transfers

Mr. Numata said Prime Minister Kaifu had pressed China for support in Japan's
effort to sponsor a United Nations resolution calling upon countries to report
weapons transfers. But China said only that it was willing to discuss the
subject and gave no commitments.

Japan is now offering low-interest loans to China, and the Chinese have made a
request for more economic assistance. But the only announcement of economic aid
today was a new donation, worth $1.5 million, in disaster relief for Chinese
regions devastated by flooding last month. Japan already had given $500,000
worth of aid.

One reason bilateral ties have improved relatively smoothly is that Japan has
tended not to criticize China's human rights abuses harshly. In today's meeting,
Mr. Kaifu seemed to touch lightly on human rights issues, referring to the
concerns expressed at the recent summit meeting of the seven major
industrialized countries about China's process of democratization.

Mr. Kaifu did not seem to win any assurances from China that Communist North
Korea would allow international inspection of its nuclear installations.

                             --------------------


BEIJING-HANOI TIES WARM

BEIJING, Aug. 10 -- China and Vietnam announced today that they hoped to
normalize relations, and called for further consultations in the near future.

A reconciliation between the two Communist neighbors, after a dozen years of
enmity and occasionally armed conflict, would reflect the steps taken toward
resolving the civil war in Cambodia. A reconciliation would also improve the
chances that a lasting peace could be achieved in Cambodia.

China supported North Vietnam in its war against the American-backed South, but
Beijing and Hanoi turned on each other after the Vietnamese invaded Cambodia at
the end of 1978 and ousted the Chinese-supported Khmer Rouge Government. In the
spring of 1979, China and Vietnam fought a border war.

The announcement today came in a joint communique issued after three days of
talks between Chinese Foreign Ministry officials and Nguyen Dy Nien, Vietnam's
Deputy Foreign Minister.

The communique said Hanoi and Beijing agreed that a comprehensive political
settlement in Cambodia should be achieved "on the basis of a framework document
of the five permanent members of the United Nations Security Council." That
seemed to be a sign that Vietnam and China favor a United Nations plan for
elections in Cambodia.

The statement may have been meant to allay fears that the two countries planned
to have Cambodian factions loyal to them simply share power in Cambodia without
ever consulting the Cambodian people.

LOAD-DATE: August 11, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: August 18, 1991, Sunday

CORRECTION:

Because of an editing error, a front- page article last Sunday about China's
announcement that it would sign the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty referred
incorrectly in some editions to the recent anniversary of the American atomic
bombings of Japan. It was the 46th anniversary.


                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              104 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 11, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

LONG ISLAND Q&A: THE REV. COLEMAN COSTELLO;
Trying to Help Young People Out of the Quagmire of Drugs

BYLINE: By PHILLIP LUTZ

SECTION: Section 12LI; Page 2; Column 1; Long Island Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1648 words


AMONG their many concerns, Long Island drug-treatment officials often cite the
lack of residential beds for teen-agers as the most pressing. This summer that
concern should be addressed with the opening of a $4 million 40-bed
adolescent-treatment center on the outer grounds of the Pilgrim Psychiatric
Center in Brentwood.

The treatment center, financed with a $1.2 million state grant and private
donations, is the brainchild of the Rev. Coleman Costello of the Roman Catholic
Diocese in Brooklyn.  For the 49-year-old priest, who began counseling
teen-agers nearly 20 years ago, it is the second venture in residential drug
treatment. In 1984, he founded a 40-bed center for teen-agers in Ridgewood,
Queens.

The 36,000-square-foot center in Brentwood is to start opening this month. A
formal ceremony is scheduled for Sept. 20.

The Outreach Project Inc., under which Father Costello provides treatment, plans
to expand on the Island.  With $400,000 in Federal grants, the program will
offer outpatient services to 60 people at a new center in Bellport. At least
half the patients will be women and children, two groups that Father Costello
says have special needs.

Q. Do you have an overview of what is happening with drug use?

A. The use of drugs among young children is like what we thought about the use
of drugs by women years ago. Women didn't do drugs. That was the perception.

But today we're seeing that's not the case and, in fact, was probably never the
case. Therefore, there is the need to create more programs to address these
special groups.

Q. Is there an increase or decrease in the overall use of drugs?

A. It's my opinion that there's an increase, and an increase insofar as we're
able to now identify that population, put more of a focus on it and raise
people's awareness by giving them a definition of what happens when people get
addicted to drugs and alcohol. The problem doesn't go away.

The hope years ago was that it would go away. Then people began to understand
that that 13-year-old is now a 23-year-old. A lot of the children we're seeing
are children of alcoholics and substance abusers.

We're finding that most kids are dually addicted. They're using alcohol and
other types of drugs, crack, hallucinogens. They are huffing propane gas over in
England. It's pandemic, especially among young children.

Q. The population of your center in Ridgewood is 50 percent black, 20 percent
Hispanic and 30 percent white. Are minority patients increasing?

A. We are seeing an awful lot of minority kids. In a large number of cases, we
probably observe more of the middle-class kid's ability to go to a hospital-type
program. But even with after-care, it still may not be enough.

Residential treatment is the last treatment of choice for a young child. And
we're running into another problem. About 40 percent of the youngsters who
complete treatment we hate to send back to the house because of drug and alcohol
abuse that may be present.

Q. What happens to them?

A. We have a very strong after-care program, and we try to give them as much
support as we can. But in some cases there's been sabotage. The parents don't
follow through on the treatment plan, don't cooperate the way they should.
There's still denial.

Q. Are social services lacking for them?

A. One of the most ideal things would be if you could have available services
for a lot of kids. The fact of the matter is as we start to look at Long Island
there's really a lack of services there, especially for the young.

Quite frankly, if you look around the city, kids are not a priority. That's not
necessarily pointing blame at a politician. It's generally an attitude that
society has.

A lot of kids who become dysfunctional get swept out of the way until they
become real pimples. Then we'll readily arrest them and send them to jail.

Q. Do you expect that the population of your center on Long Island will be more
affluent than at the center in Queens?

A. I don't think so. I would see the minority kids we currently have still
coming in. But the fact is that we don't really know what's out there.

I could give you a number, like 24,000 kids 16 and under on Long Island need to
be in treatment.

But who are they and what are they?

Certainly they wouldn't all come for treatment at once.

Q. Does affluence present special problems?

A. All affluence has done is hide the problem. I see affluent families on Long
Island who have been able to deny that the problem exists until their child is
now in her or his 20's or 30's.

Q. What were the origins of your Long Island project?

A. We were getting kids from Huntington, Cutchogue, Garden City and Brentwood
whose families had to come once or twice a week for the program. As a result, we
became very aware of the need for a program out there.

At the same time, Suffolk County was looking to do a piece out there, and we
were approached and asked to consider doing a program. We saw what we had.

They knew that the kids from their county were coming to us, and we worked very
closely with the County Executive and Frank Jones, the Islip Town Supervisor,
and came up with a location.

Q. Did you run into the not-in-my-backyard problem?

A. We haven't run into the problem anywhere. I'd like to think that we do our
homework. We meet with significant groups in the area, talk to them about our
plan.

In Bayside, there was just a little bit of concern, but to this day we have
community people involved.

Civic groups are very supportive of us, and so we haven't had the problem. Will
we have it in the future? We may, but I don't think so.

Q. Were other sites considered?

A. We had another site in the Town of Islip. We looked at it, and it was
appropriate. We talked to the political community and civic groups and, even
though everything was O.K., they said there might be a problem if you open here.

So we said, "O.K., help us find a site."

They looked around. We looked around and found a second site that was pretty
good. The building is on Pilgrim's outer grounds, on Crooked Hill Road.

The reason we didn't use a building on the grounds themselves is that there was
a mixed message that a drug- and alcohol-abuser is crazy, and this is a
psychiatric hospital.

Q. What effect would the state's proposed budget cuts have on services?

A. It's going to affect us like it's going to affect every program in the state.
It's going to affect us in terms of the services we can offer. We're trying to
commit ourselves to continue to do as much as we can.

At the same time, we may find it impossible to maintain programs and not have
the quality of the programs affected. One of the things we won't do is prop up a
program without having the proper money available to do the right job.

Q. Won't you have 80 beds at Brentwood?

A. Yes, and certainly there's a need for a lot more. But we don't want to go out
and open five or six different treatment sites and run 200 beds ourselves right
off the bat. We've got a reputation. We're kind of slow-moving, and we'd like to
do things right.

Q.Have you studied where people go after they leave your program?

A. No. That may come down the road soon. We need to do that, because when I go
to the business community, the businessman says, "How successful are you?"

I tend to talk about cancer when they ask me that question. Does that mean leave
the cancer in the body if you don't think it can be successful? You try to pull
it out as much as you can and then continue to treat. It's a legitimate
question, in a way.

We do have research on jails. The majority of those people are there for drug
and alcohol offenses. Many people who spend any length of time in jail are more
than likely to go back into that system again, so I know that doesn't work for
the most part.

And then you start to look at cost. Treatment is a lot cheaper than jail, and
more humane, and it does start to get into the nature of the disease. In jail,
even if there is treatment, for the most part they are still in that structure.

Q. How did your attending the LaSalle Military Academy in Oakdale affect your
fight against drugs?

A. I had to be incredibly naive. I was not aware of drug and alcohol as a
problem. In the seminary I wasn't aware of the problem.

On a first assignment in 1967, I was thrust into the height of the heroin
epidemic in America, Vietnam and LSD, and all that was quite a shock to my
system. Right off the bat, I got involved in drugs and alcohol, because I saw so
many people involved and nobody knew what to do.

Q. What do you think of the war on drugs and financing priorities?

A. If a nation has a sense of purpose, then it can commit itself to a course. We
had a sense of purpose in Iraq, where we committed ourselves to go in there, do
a job and get out.

Clearly, the perception of drug and alcohol addiction has been that there is
"something wrong with you, pal."

"If you don't straighten up, if you use and possess drugs, you're going to
jail."

So we define it as a major character disorder that requires incarceration. It's
reflected in the statistics. In 1980 we had 300,000 people in jail. Today we
have 700,000.

It's frightening when you consider that drug and alcohol abuse is at the heart
of most of these incarcerations.

I worked at Rikers Island. I saw so many cases go through there. It's absolutely
nuts. These people no more belong in jail than the man in the moon.

Q. Is there a perception that drug treatment does not work as well as we would
like?

A. Drug treatment is 25 or 30 years old, a very new science. At first we thought
these people have to be disciplined, live away from society for the rest of
their lives, whether it be Synanon or Alcatraz.

Today, we understand differently. But I don't think there's been enough good
research to adequately demonstrate how well treatment does work.

LOAD-DATE: August 11, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: The Rev. Coleman Costello of the Roman Catholic Diocese in
Brooklyn standing beside rendering of adolescent-treatment center on the grounds
of Pilgrim Psychiatric Center. (Vic DeLucia for The New York Times)

TYPE: Interview

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              105 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 11, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

The G-String Murders

BYLINE: By Kinky Friedman;  Kinky Friedman is the author of five mystery novels,
the latest of which is "Musical Chairs."

SECTION: Section 7; Page 14; Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 743 words



TOPLESS
By D. Keith Mano.
240 pp. New York: Random House. $18.

"Topless" is the saga of an Episcopal priest assigned to a small-town parish in
Nebraska who, upon the mysterious disappearance of his brother, returns home to
New York to manage the brother's restaurant -- which turns out to be a topless
bar. In his eighth novel, D. Keith Mano spins an interesting tale, populated
with believable after-hours characters who are not without a certain sordid
charm. Unfortunately, he has chosen to write "Topless" in diary form, and Father
Mike Wilson's interminable self-analysis, within which he charts every spiritual
tic of his life, is almost as tedious as Nebraska.

Still, the story manages to jiggle and wiggle its way to a cross-cultural
conclusion that may, indeed, even be shocking to readers who are not
Episcopalian. At first, Father Mike (who has, of course, taken pains to avoid
revealing his true vocation) averts his gaze from the forces of darkness that
are magnificently manifested in the nearly nude, amoral dancers he must spend so
much time with. When this doesn't work, he finds himself compelled to confront
their nakedness mano a mano, so to speak. It is at this stage that good and evil
start becoming a little confused and, with what Emily Dickinson referred to as
"unfurnished eyes," the priest begins to notice some rather nice breasts.

Perversely enough, Father Mike's standoffishness seems appealing to the women,
who misinterpret it as natural shyness. "I'm feeling cruel," he notes of one
particularly awkward encounter, "and, worse for an Episcopalian, I'm feeling
uncivil."

As the sexual tension increases, the novel itself becomes suspenseful in quite
another way. Nude bodies start turning up in the club, which would normally not
be that startling -- except that these nude bodies happen to be dead. Mr. Mano
even provides us with a decapitated dancer, which allows him to play off a
well-known headline that actually appeared in The New York Post. His version:
"HEADLESS, TOPLESS. MURDERER STRIKES AGAIN."

Meanwhile, new vistas are opening for Father Mike as he searches for the killer,
for his brother and for a way to gently but firmly deflect the sexual advances
of a dancer named Bubbles, who tells him, "I'd like t'go skinny-dipping in your
eyes." Since "Topless" evolves into a mystery, it's perhaps best not to
demystify the situation further, except to say that Father Mike does achieve
some semblance of comfort in the steamy, karma-laden bed of a dancer before
something very unpleasant happens to her. Of course, it's not quite as
unpleasant as what's happened to Father Mike's brother, but you'll have to
either buy the book or read about that one in the tabloids.

Probably the most noteworthy thing about this novel is Mr. Mano's understanding
-- based, he tells us in the acknowledgments, on "perhaps two hundred
interviews" -- of the world of topless bars. He's got the ambience, the
psychology and the desperate yet seductive aura of the scene pretty well staked
out. Witness this little excursion by Father Mike into the mind of the topless
dancer at work:

"How often I've watched them, these naked children, absorbed almost to
unconsciousness by a reflected self. Upsweep the hair or let it pour down, braid
it, lap it over a shoulder, drape it -- how mysterious and beautiful I am.
Stomach in, lose weight, raise the G-string crotchline to give me more leg,
cover that spot on my buttock. Always with a thoughtful smile. In another world,
swept off their feet with self-longing -- in front of a hundred irrelevant men."

Hollywood, according to Mr. Mano's publisher, sees great promise in "Topless" --
enough, apparently, to pony up half a million dollars for the movie rights. No
one in Hollywood, of course, has read a book in the last 40 years, so they are
probably unaware that reading much of this diary is only slightly less laborious
than wading through mangrove swamps in Vietnam. But with its scenes of
dramatically posed, mutilated corpses -- not to mention Father Mike being
hoisted by the ankle onto a circulating dry cleaner's rack as a crazed woman
advances on him with a length of wire cable -- there's plenty of exciting
cinematic action. And yet (one assumes) with the movie also in mind, Mr. Mano
does not forget to give us a nice Disney ending. Fortunately, when all you're
doing is reviewing a book, no one is required to live happily ever after.

LOAD-DATE: August 11, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              106 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 12, 1991, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Under Desert Sun, Mourners Pray for 9 Killed at Temple

BYLINE: By SETH MYDANS,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 10; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1207 words

DATELINE: PHOENIX, Aug. 11


As police investigators were inside a Thai Buddhist temple today searching for
clues to the shooting deaths of nine people, Thai worshipers gathered on the hot
desert road outside, unable to enter to mourn their dead.

Except for the crackle of police radios, the plain red-roofed temple was silent,
one day after what investigators called the methodical but unexplained killings
early Saturday of six monks, a nun and two young acolytes.

Members of Arizona's sparse Thai population, many of them military wives, said
that they had gathered today at the temple as they often do in times of personal
trouble, but that now there were no priests left alive to comfort them or lead
them in prayer.

"Who would kill a monk?" asked Chintana Barker, a dental assistant from Tucson
who like many of the Thai women here met her husband while he was serving in
Thailand during the Vietnam war. "They are harmless."

No Motives Ruled Out

The Sheriff of Maricopa County, Tom Agnos, said that the investigation at the
temple, Wat Promkunaram, would continue for several more days and that he was
not ruling out the possibilities of robbery, personal retaliation, racism or
gang activity as motives for the murders.

He said the monks, some wearing their saffron-colored robes, were found
"methodically lying" face down on the floor of the living quarters, without
signs of struggle. He said at least two killers using different types of weapons
had been involved.

The sheriff said his deputies were exhaustively searching through the bedrooms
of the monks, emptying out drawers and turning over beds, following in the
footsteps of the killers, who he said had ransacked the living quarters and
ripped the telephones out of the walls.

But the temple itself appeared to be undisturbed, he said, including gold and
jade statues as well as a "money tree" with 20 one-dollar bills left as
offerings.

He did not disclose the names of the victims.

Gang Expert Called In

He said his investigators had been joined by an Asian gang expert from the
Phoenix Police Department, but did not say if this expert was Thai or spoke the
Thai language.

The killings aroused fears here that anti-Asian racism had been involved,
following the recent spray-painting of abusive graffiti on the walls of a
Chinese Christian church in Chandler, a Phoenix suburb.

"I can't believe this is a robbery, not with all the anti-Asian things going
on," Madeline Ong-Sakata, past president of the Arizona Asian Association, told
The Arizona Republic.

Members of Phoenix's Thai population of about 2,000 people were gathering at a
Thai restaurant this afternoon to talk over the killings, and others were
traveling here from around the state in the belief that monks from out of state
would be arriving to perform funeral services later in the week.

Temple Moved From City

The temple, built with donations from Thais, was moved nearly three years ago
from downtown Phoenix, partly because of the complaints of neighbors about the
comings and goings of worshipers and the chants and gongs of Buddhist prayer.

It is one of about 40 Buddhist temples that serve the nation's 91,000 Thai
immigrants, most of them in California.

Siripong Ariyawangso, a monk in Mount Vernon, N.Y., said the monks at the
Phoenix temple, as at the other Thai Buddhist temples in the United States, were
from Thailand. Usually, he said, the younger, more adventurous monks request to
serve in the United States, with a minimum three-year term. The older monks, he
said, are more set in their ways and have more trouble adjusting to the
language, the food and the weather in America.

In the winter, he said, "You have to put on a hat. That's very funny. You have
to put on socks. That's funny."

A Slice of Thailand

Here in the baking sun 20 miles west of the city, near Luke Air Force Base, the
temple offers worshipers a small piece of Thailand as it sits on a scrubby
plain. Beside a small, ornate spirit house, the monks have planted persimmon and
banana trees on its grounds as well as cottonwood trees whose heart-shaped
leaves are a reminder of Thai foliage.

But today, the temple grounds belonged to the Maricopa County Sheriff's office,
with its mobile command center, its search and rescue vehicle and its
identification unit.

Standing outside the yellow police tape, Sawas Chumpon, a restaurant worker from
Tucson, said: "I have come to pray for them, but there is no place to pray. We
cannot go inside because all the police are there."

Like others who gathered today outside the temple, he said he was certain that
the killers could not have been Thai.

"How can the Thai people kill the monk?" he said. "The Thai people, they cannot
kill the monk. They give food to the monk. They give everything."

Gathering for Solace

In Thailand, a highly devout Buddhist nation, monks hold a special place,
begging for alms in their bright robes and setting an example of an ascetic,
gentle life.

Tossapis Pholtosa, 33, of Phoenix, who said he had shaved his head and joined
the priesthood for a brief period after his father's death, as many Thai men do,
said he had come to the temple today for solace but had found only grief.

"When I have something in my heart I come to the temple, because we come from
another country and we are lonely," he said. "Now there is nobody here. I have
to find out what they do with the bodies."

Mrs. Barker, the dental assistant, who is 36, had brought with her a packet of
color photographs taken when she recently escorted some of the monks from the
temple on a visit to the Grand Canyon.

Among the tourists, the monks were an attraction themselves as they stood in
their orange-yellow robes against the pink and purple of the canyon walls.

Her photographs also showed the monks inside the temple as they led worshipers
in prayer under the breeze of a ceiling fan, the temple walls bare except for
portraits of Buddha.

'Life Goes On'

She said she had studied meditation with the monks and slept at the temple in
the area in which they were killed. Her studies, she said, helped her to
understand that even at a time of tragedy like this, "life goes on."

She said: "If I don't have that meditation they taught me, I would be crying and
screaming now. I wouldn't be standing here calm and smiling."

She said the monks had also helped her friend, Nuan Moore, with the problems of
loneliness and homesickness that so many immigrants face.

"Now she don't drink, she don't gamble, she stopped crying, her life has
changed," Mrs. Barker said.

But Mrs. Moore, also the wife of an American serviceman in Tucson, could only
say, through her tears: "I feel bad. That's all I feel."

Leaders of other religious groups offered their support today.

Among them was Tommy Thomas, pastor of the Cotton Lane Baptist Church just a
quarter-mile across the cotton fields from the temple. The church's worshipers
had sometimes joined the Thais for celebrations.

"It's a tragedy that strikes very close to home," he said. "In the darkness of
this tragedy God is working to bring light."

He offered a prayer for the monks, for their grieving congregation, and for
their unknown killers.

LOAD-DATE: August 12, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Sheriff's deputies removing the bodies of two of the nine people
found slain Saturday at a Buddhist temple in Phoenix. (Associated Press)

Map of Arizona highlighting Phoenix

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              107 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 13, 1991, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

U.N. Observers Set Up Outpost in El Salvador

BYLINE: By SHIRLEY CHRISTIAN,  Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 8; Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 701 words

DATELINE: SAN MIGUEL, El Salvador, Aug. 9


On a day when the Salvadoran Army and guerrillas fought battles in several
places around the country, the United Nations opened an outpost here recently at
the edge of a war zone in anticipation of the peace that may still be far away.

Nguyen Huu Dong, who left his native Vietnam 29 years ago to study and work
abroad, set up offices in a spacious house from which he and three other
civilians and four military and police officers in blue berets will roam El
Salvador's eastern mountains and valleys as human rights monitors.

"We are going to quickly establish our presence by traveling around continually
in the areas dominated by both sides," Mr. Dong said.

He said the teams going out in the four white Toyota Landcruisers assigned to
his office would establish permanent routes "so that people will know at what
time and on what day we are going to be in their area."

Five Offices Opening

A key part of the territory to be covered out of San Miguel will be the province
of Morazan, so long known as a guerrilla stronghold that some Salvadorans refer
to it as the "People's Republic of Morazan."

San Miguel is the first of five provincial offices being opened by the United
Nations Observer Mission in El Salvador, which established its headquarters in a
wing of the former Hotel Sheraton in San Salvador on July 26.

For the time being, the mission will be limited to monitoring human rights
violations by both sides in the 11-year-old civil war. Eventually, when there is
a political accord and a cease-fire, the mission will monitor compliance with
those agreements as well.

But that could be sometime distant. After more than a year of United
Nations-mediated negotiations, the only agreement signed by the Government and
the guerrillas of the Farabundo Marti National Liberation Front is that to
respect basic human rights.

A package of political reforms is awaiting ratification by the Legislative
Assembly, while both sides are still debating proposals to reform the armed
forces and the timetable and other arrangements for a cease-fire.

Two Complicating Factors

Iqbal Riza, a Pakistani who is chief of the observer mission and like several
other members a veteran of election observer missions to Nicaragua and Haiti,
said the work in El Salvador would be complicated by two factors.

For one thing, he said, this is the first time a United Nations observer mission
has been charged with verifying compliance with a substantive accord, in this
case on human rights, instead of relatively more clear-cut jobs like verifying a
cease-fire or observing elections. And possibly more important, this is the
first time the United Nations has sent an observer mission into a war-torn
country before a cease-fire has been agreed upon.

"The absence of a cease-fire does complicate matters because we will have to
determine, in many cases, if a violation is a human rights matter or the effect
of war," Mr. Riza said.

Mr. Riza said the mission now consisted of about 50 civilians, 30 police
officers and 15 military officers from more than 20 countries. He said it could
grow, depending upon the workload.

What the Teams Will Do

He said the mission in El Salvador would try to keep itself separate from the
peace negotiations, which are being directed by Alvaro de Soto, an aide to
Secretary General Javier Perez de Cuellar.

But he said that both sides had asked the Security Council to send the observer
mission without waiting for a cease-fire and that "there is a generalized hope
-- both here and in the other interested countries -- that our presence will
help in the negotiations."

Mr. Riza said that during the initial phase of the observer mission's operations
here, from now until sometime in October, the observer teams would receive
complaints of human rights violations, turn them over to judicial authorities
and observe how they were handled.

Later, he said, the mission will actively investigate the complaints itself and
will then present recommendations on how the cases should be handled. He said it
would never try to assume any judicial powers but would pass along the results
of investigations to Mr. Perez de Cuellar.

LOAD-DATE: August 13, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Map of El Salvador showing location of San Miguel.

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              108 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 13, 1991, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Phoenix Asking if Bias Played Role in 9 Killings

BYLINE: By SETH MYDANS,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 14; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1103 words

DATELINE: PHOENIX, Aug. 12


Without a clear motive in the slayings of nine people at a Thai Buddhist temple
last weekend, residents of this desert city were left to confront the question
of whether this was an anti-Asian hate crime.

Officials said they were still pursuing all possible motives in the crime, and
offered no evidence that racism was behind the killings of the six monks, one
nun and two disciples at the rural temple early Saturday.

The Maricopa County medical examiner, Dr. Heinz Karnitschnig, said that some of
the victims were hit by shotgun blasts as they had their hands raised, and that
all nine were then killed with shots from a small-caliber gun to the head or
neck as they lay face down on the ground. The authorities said there were no
signs of a struggle.

Some Asian and non-Asian residents voiced concern that the killings were a
racist hate crime, given a national context of concerns about harassment against
Asians and the rapid growth of the state's tiny Asian population.

In Arizona, according to the 1990 census, Asians and Pacific Islanders increased
by 150.6 percent since 1980, to 55,206. The census counted 16,303 Asians in
Phoenix; only about 2,000 of them are Thai. The city's total population in 1990
was abot 983,000.

Comfortable in Phoenix

Officials said the state had not experienced a significant level of anti-Asian
harassment to date, and some members of the Thai community here said they felt
comfortable in Phoenix.

A spokesman for the Phoenix Police Department, Sgt. Kevin Robinson, said the
city had not seen a pattern of harassment of Asians. Addressing another possible
motive in the killings, he said Asian gangs did not have a significant presence
here.

"Regarding hate crimes against Asians, we are not finding anything specific, no
sort of pattern that has been going on," he said.

At the Siam restaurant in Glendale, not far from the temple, the manager,
Prakong Garland, said she had always felt comfortable in Phoenix.

"We never bother anybody and I never have problems," she said. "I like the hot
place in Arizona. And over here are nice people."

Her restaurant was the site today of a meeting of 50 people along with
Thailand's Ambassador to the United States, who arrived here from Washington.
She said the main issue was the question of whether to return the remains of the
victims to Thailand for a ritual cremation.

The crime has been front-page news in Thailand and the Government there has
asked American authorities to give the investigation top priority, The
Associated Press reported. But it said news organizations there were not
focusing on the killings as a crime resulting from bias against Asians.

"The reaction has been very sad, shocked, quite strong," the Ambassador,
Birabhongse Kasemsri, said.

Low-Level Harassment

Ashok Jain, president of the Arizona Asian American Association, said Asian
residents faced a constant low level of harassment that ranged from verbal
insults to the throwing of eggs.

He and others cited two recent instances in which abusive graffiti, including
swastikas, were painted on a Chinese Christian church and on a wall outside the
Japanese-American Citizens League in Glendale.

The temple, Wat Promkunarum, moved to its rural setting 20 miles west of
downtown Phoenix after neighbors in the city had complained about the crowds of
worshipers it attracted and the sounds of unfamiliar Thai music.

Helen Zia, the president of the New York chapter of the Asian-American
Journalists Association, said that on the national level an anti-Asian climate
had been growing, fed both by angry memories of the Vietnam War and resentment
of Japanese economic success. In a telephone interview, she said these
sentiments seemed to be directed at Asians in general, ignoring national
distinctions.

Although no national figures have been gathered, she said, "There has been a
significant increase in anti-Asian hate crimes, from harassment to assault to
deadly violence."

She cited instances that ranged from attacks on Vietnamese fishermen in the late
1970's, to the killing of a Chinese man, Vincent Chin, in 1982 in Detroit by men
who resented Japanese auto companies.

In recent cases, she said two white men in Wilmington, N.C., had attacked a
group of Chinese and Vietnamese men, killing one of them, and in Houston last
August a group of white supremacists had beaten to death a Vietnamese teen-ager.

The shocking nature of the temple killings here and the absence of public
evidence about its motives have fueled fears of racism among some residents.

Rabbi Albert Plotkin of Temple Beth Israel here, said: "Hate crimes are a plague
around the nation. I call it a disease like the plague, like the black death,
that is spreading, and unfortunately we are as susceptible to it as anyone."

'Not an Asian Hate Crime'

But Manny Wong, publisher of The Asian-American Times, a monthly newspaper here
with a circulation of 5,000, said: "I hate to say this, but I don't think it is.
It is not an Asian hate crime, stereotyping these Asian people." His theory is
that the killing involved a war among religious sects.

Speaking to reporters outside the temple, Sheriff Tom Agnos of Maricopa County
said investigators were leaving all possibilities open, including robbery, gang
violence and personal vendetta.

But he offered the strongest evidence to support robbery as a motive, saying
bedrooms had been ransacked and rings may have been removed from the hands of
the victims.

But he said the temple itself had been left undisturbed, and worshipers said it
contained gold and jade statues as well as a "money tree" hung with donations of
dollar bills.

Searching for Vehicle

In the first public sign of a clue to the killers, investigators today asked for
help in finding a late-model red and white Ford Bronco II with tinted windows
that was seen leaving the scene on Saturday morning.

Voicing the sentiments of the community, Sheriff Agnos said, "I think this crime
is horrendous and I believe the community will not tolerate anything like this."

As small groups of Thai mourners stood outside the temple, where police
investigations continued today, Annie Walker, a resident of Phoenix who said she
had no ties to the Buddhist community, arrived in tears to place a large bouquet
of chrysanthemums by its gate.

"All I wanted to do is bring flowers," she said. "It doesn't hurt."

She placed them near a bouquet of bougainvillea that had been brought earlier by
other non-Thai mourners, bearing a card reading, "To the family and members of
Wat Promkunaram."

LOAD-DATE: August 13, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Asian and non-Asian residents of Phoenix are confronting the
question of whether the killings of nine people at a Thai Buddhist temple this
weekend were prompted by anti-Asian hatred. Two worshipers, Nuan Moore, left,
and Mali Kamerow, wept yesterday outside the temple. (Associated Press)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              109 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 13, 1991, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Those Who Can Bring Peace to Cyprus

SECTION: Section A; Page 16; Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 400 words


To the Editor:

Your editorial call for action on Cyprus (July 19) is useful even if it omits
some essential facts for understanding the divided island. For 17 years, Cyprus
has waited for justice, while the Vietnam War ended, the European Community
moved toward a single market, the cold war subsided and the Berlin Wall fell.
But the aspirations of the Cypriots have been forgotten as Greek and Turkish
intransigence was blamed.

The United States must accept great responsibility for the division of Cyprus
into occupied and free sectors. Our Government supported for seven years the
Greek dictatorship that finally fell after its disastrous attempt to colonize
Cyprus. Our Government encouraged resistance by the Turkish Government to
pressures to end its occupation of the northern third of the island.

It is not consistent for any country like Turkey, a member of the North Atlantic
Treaty Organization that aspires to join the European Community, to continue
armed occupation of a neighbor when those organizations are committed by their
charters to preserve democratic institutions.

Greece and Turkey have failed in their responsibilities to the Cypriots by
insisting on gaining or holding advantages for their ethnic segments on the
island instead of working for the tiny republic's integrity.

It will take more than a Presidential visit to Greece and Turkey to discharge
the American responsibility for nearly two decades of neglect. For nearly four
decades we have used the valuable real estate in those two countries for our
purposes, which were not always consistent with the interests of their citizens.
We were prepared to ignore awkward situations like Cypriot independence. Both
the United States and Britain have also used Cyprus for extraneous defense
purposes. It is time to pay an overdue debt for such use.

A forceful and joint movement is needed by the European Community, in whose
geographical area Cyprus lies and whose members have long ties to the island,
and by the United States, which is in military alliance with both Greece and
Turkey. Neither of those two countries should be allowed to retard or to veto a
fair settlement that preserves the integrity of the republic and full protection
for its Turkish and Greek populations.

CLIFFORD P. HACKETT
Washington, July 22, 1991

The writer was staff director of the House Subcommittee on Europe.

LOAD-DATE: August 13, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              110 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 15, 1991, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Douglas Kiker, TV Journalist, 61; Was Correspondent for NBC News

BYLINE: By JOSH KURTZ

SECTION: Section D; Page 22; Column 4; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 461 words


Douglas Kiker, an NBC News correspondent for 25 years, died yesterday at his
summer home in Chatham, Mass. He was 61 years old and lived in Washington.

He apparently died of a heart attack, the network said.

Through his career at NBC, most recently as national-affairs correspondent, Mr.
Kiker covered some of the most important issues of his era, including the war in
Vietnam, the civil-rights movement, the Watergate scandal and many political
conventions. For his coverage of the Black September revolution in Jordan in
1970, he won a Peabody Award, Columbia University's prize for broadcast
journalists.

Jim Wooten, a friend and a reporter for ABC News, said it was Mr. Kiker's
passion for good writing that distinguished him from other broadcast
journalists.

Wry and Sardonic

"He took a great pride in his scripts," he said. Recalling Mr. Kiker's
distinctive reports, delivered in a southern twang, Mr. Wooten said, "He was
wry, sometimes sardonic."

Before his career in television, Mr. Kiker was the White House correspondent for
The New York Herald Tribune from 1963 to 1966. Mr. Kiker confounded presidents
and other officials with probing questions that often led to front-page
articles. In 1963, he was one of the few reporters riding in the motorcade when
President John F. Kennedy was assassinated in Dallas.

Mr. Kiker was born in Griffin, Ga., and received a bachelor's degree from
Presbyterian College in Clinton, S.C. He was a naval officer during the Korean
War, then went to work for The Atlanta Journal, eventually becoming its
Washington correspondent. He served 15 months as director of information for the
Peace Corps before going to work for The Herald Tribune.

Although a journalist for his entire career, Mr. Kiker indulged a passion for
fiction writing in his spare time. He wrote two novels in the 1950's, and later
began a series of murder mysteries set on Cape Cod, with a journalist as the
protagonist. The first, "Murder on Clam Pond," was published in 1986. Two others
followed, and Mr. Kiker was close to finishing a fourth at his death, Mr. Wooten
said.

Mr. Kiker also contributed political articles to several magazines through the
years, including The Atlantic, Harper's and New York. A 1973 article for
Washingtonian magazine on a lighter subject, the 10 sexiest women in Washington,
soon enhanced Mr. Kiker's personal life. Less than a year later, he married one
of the women on the list, Diana Knight.

In addition to his wife, of Washington, he is survived by a daughter, Ann, of
Newport, R.I.; and four sons, James, of Newport, and Craig, Douglas and Patrick,
of Washington.

Funeral services will be held on Saturday in Chatham. A memorial service will be
held in Washington in September.

NAME: Douglas Kiker

LOAD-DATE: August 15, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Douglas Kiker (1974)

TYPE: Biography; Obituary (Obit)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              111 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 15, 1991, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Pentagon Rethinking Techniques To Prevent Attacks on Own Tanks

BYLINE: By PATRICK E. TYLER,  Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 10; Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 696 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 14


New Pentagon figues showing that most of the American tanks and other armored
vehicles destroyed during the Persian Gulf war fell victim to allied fire have
alarmed military experts, who say that the Army has neglected some aspects of
protecting these forces in an era of high-technology warfare.

In its accounting this week of casualties among United States forces from allied
fire, the Pentagon said 27 of the 35 tanks and armored vehicles damaged or
destroyed were the victims of American fire -- so-called "friendly fire."

These episodes contributed significantly to the overall casualty count,
officials said. The Pentagon has announced that of the 148 Americans killed in
action during the war, 35 died and 72 were wounded by missiles, tank rounds or
bullets fired in error by comrades.

United States officials are somewhat at a loss to explain why the proportion of
deaths from allied fire -- 23 percent -- was so much higher than in any previous
modern war fought by American troops. The figures for World War II, Korea and
Vietnam, though far less precise, are believed to be around 2 percent.

"I'm prepared to tell you that there were mistakes made," said Lieut. Gen.
Martin Brandtner of the Marine Corps, director of operations for the Joint
Chiefs of Staff. The general acknowledged that some safety tactics intended to
protect American armored vehicles from their own forces, like decals, tape
markings and infared beacons, did not always work.

"We are looking now very hard at the technological means to overcome that, and I
am confident that we will develop those and have the ability to do an I.F.F.
kind of thing," said the general, referring to the Identification Friend or Foe
systems that have been standard equipment in combat aircraft for decades.

A senior Army officer who spent 29 years as a tank expert said in an interview
that the issue of tanks' vulnerability to what experts call fratricide -- attack
from their own forces -- has never been a signficant part of the discussion on
how to build a better tank during his tenure as a staff officer.

His remarks, made the day after the Pentagon released the new figures, reflected
the amazement of many military officials about how quickly warfare is being
overtaken by technologies that compress time and therefore affect human
judgments.

A number of officials said the services will have to re-evaluate this critical
aspect of high-velocity war, especially as it relates to ground armored forces
and the tank-killing aircraft that work closely with them.

Well-known technologies, such as transponder systems now used on aircraft that
could tell one American tank commander whether he was bringing his weapons to
bear on an enemy tank or perhaps on a wayward American vehicle, have been in
hand for years. But they have been excluded from tank designs for a variety of
reasons, a longtime Army tank specialist said.

'War Has Changed'

"We've always taken the position up to now that with the proper tactics and
training that we could reduce and perhaps eliminate fratricide," he said. "But
war has changed on us, and we didn't realize that the way we were thinking about
fratricide applied to the war we left behind and not the one we were trying to
shape in the future."

A saving element in the Pentagon's final accounting was that the overall
casualties in this war were low. During 43 days of air and ground combat
operations, from Jan. 17 to Feb. 28, the total of 148 Americans killed was far
less than the "several thousand" that military leaders had feared. But the
casualty toll could also have been far higher, had Iraqi forces fought to their
full capability, experts note.

Pentagon military leaders argued in a briefing Tuesday that though there was a
high portion of allied-fire casualties, their battle doctrine was more than
vindicated by the fact that allied forces quickly overwhelmed the Iraqis with a
fast-paced battle plan, one that emphasized maneuverability.

"I would refer you back to the raw numbers of this equation," General Brandtner
said. "We had a problem, but you know we won this war; we did it very quickly
and we did it very well."

LOAD-DATE: August 15, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              112 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 15, 1991, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Will Diversity Subvert Vision In a New York City District?

BYLINE: By E. R. SHIPP

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1383 words


As much as any of New York City's 51 new Council seats, the five miles and many
neighborhoods of District 7 illustrate the difficulty of mandating diversity and
matching a seat to a particular racial or ethnic group.

The complexities come in the form of more than 66,000 registered voters of all
stripes -- poor blacks in the public housing projects of Manhattan Valley;
upper-middle-class blacks and whites who own homes in a historic section of
Harlem; Irish and Jewish New Yorkers who fled to Inwood when blacks began moving
into the area in the 1950's and 60's, and a relatively recent wave of
immigrants, primarily Hispanic, in Washington Heights.

New Yorkers of All Persuasions


When the New York City Districting Commission created District 7, its members
expected that it would be represented by a black who would replace the white
incumbent whose district was being folded into the new tuning-forked shape
creation.

But now that the campaign has begun, many are not so sure. The very diversity of
the neighborhoods the commission linked together may undermine its vision of a
Council on which New Yorkers of all persuasions -- but especially black,
Hispanic and Asian residents -- would be able to elect someone who looked like
them.

"You have a lot of Dominicans in the Seventh," said Selwyn Carter, a political
analyst for the Community Service Society, a nonprofit advocacy organization.
"They could be feeling that Seven is also theirs, just as the blacks in Harlem
feel that Seven is theirs and the whites in the northern part feel it's theirs.
And each of them, you could argue, has a legitimate claim."

In district after district, neighborhood after neighborhood, the way the
diversity translates into ballots cast is proving to be more complicated than
was foreseen even by the commission. How the varying groups within District 7
come together or compete in the new setting will make a major statement about
how politics is being practiced in the city.

District 7 is a particularly pointed example. Forty-two percent of its 151,428
inhabitants are black, 38 percent Hispanic, 17 percent white and 2 percent
Asian.

Eight men and women have announced their intentions to run, including Republican
and Conservative Party candidates who are unopposed. In the Democratic primary,
scheduled for Sept. 12, there could be one white man -- Stanley E. Michels; one
Hispanic man -- Jaime T. Garcia; two black men -- C. Vernon Mason and Keith S.
Mitchell; and two black women -- Peggy M. Shepard and Frankye Graves. It is a
situation that could so splinter the vote that many politicians and residents
see it leading to the election of Mr. Michels.

Mr. Michels represented much of the district for years in the old District 6,
and many white and Hispanic residents who are following the race say they are
happy with him.

But many blacks, previously part of the old District 8, have been represented by
blacks and would see it as a step backward if a white won the seat. Dominicans,
who are growing more politically astute, are demanding a voice. "We have nothing
in common, absolutely nothing -- except that we are human, of course," one
resident, Michael Adams, said of District 7.

Ask residents about what pulls their neighborhoods together. The first reaction
of a black man living in a residential hotel on 126th Street, a Dominican woman
living on 150th Street and a white man living in an Irish stronghold near 215th
Street is that not much does.

From Odors to Stolen Flowers

What is on their minds ranges from the stop sign that everyone ignores at 126th
and Broadway to the overcrowded schools in Inwood; from the unreliable A train
once celebrated by Duke Ellington to the store of empty apartments that some
landlords hold on to in hopes of converting their buildings to cooperatives or
condominiums. They are concerned about foul odors emanating from a
sewage-treatment plant on the Hudson River and a crematorium on Riverside Drive.
And, of course, the flowers being stolen from window boxes in Hamilton Heights.

Blacks, especially, complain that when the area changed, stores went from white
ownership to Dominican and Korean, bypassing them.

For all their differences, there is at least one common concern: drugs and crime
that drive many of the law-abiding citizens off the streets and behind locked
doors at sundown.

"I couldn't see any other issue that's bigger than that," said John Galvin, an
Irishman who has lived his entire life in Inwood. He was born on Post Avenue.

"At nighttime I wouldn't walk down Post Avenue now if you paid me," he said the
other day as he drank beer in a neighborhood bar. "It's a bad neighborhood. It's
drugs down there. Anytime there's drugs, there's crime. They go together hand
and foot. I'm afraid."

Until 30 years ago, this part of upper Manhattan was predominantly white --
Irish and Jewish, in the main. Blacks remember the pride they had in moving up
the hill from central Harlem into neighborhoods like Sugar Hill and Washington
Heights.

Calvin Copeland, who owns one of the area's most popular restaurants, on 145th
Street, remembers moving to 150th Street more than 35 years ago. His was the
second black family in a building of 64 apartments.

"I would say that after a matter of a year, there was only one white family
left," he said. "Everybody moved out like we had leprosy."

As newer waves of immigrants, most of them Dominican, move into the area, the
older residents feel squeezed. The streets teem with people all hours of the day
and night: some of them seeking a respite from apartments in which families live
doubled and tripled up, others involved in drugs.

Ybelice Simancas's family moved to Washington Heights from the Dominican
Republic 19 years ago. Now, Ms. Simancas, who works in a luncheonette in a bingo
parlor on 181st Street, said: "It's not a good neighborhood. I'm planning to
move soon."

Tom Mullany, who has lived in Inwood since 1963, is also thinking of leaving.

"That's the big question for the first time in my life," Mr. Mullany, a
telephone company executive, said. "I've lived in New York City since I was
born, never left, never lived any other place. And in the last year, year and a
half, I've never seen my city change as much. Just a general letting things get
out of control."

One Problem: Name Recognition

Though the campaign season has just begun, it is already evident that any
candidate will have an enormous task trying to appeal to everyone in the
district. Name recognition alone can be a problem.

Democrats outnumber Republicans 50 to 1, according to the Republican candidate
for the seat, Ronald Perry. But nearly half the voting-age population never even
bothers to vote -- people like Michael Layton, who lives in the Grant housing
project on Broadway at 125th Street.

"The system is not working as far as I'm concerned," said Mr. Layton, a Vietnam
veteran and unemployed construction worker, as he played cards with neighbors in
a city park. "People lose hope when they don't see nothing changing."

Up in Inwood, Mr. Mullany, a former candidate for public office himself, was
surprised to know that there were more than two candidates in the race: Mr.
Michels and Mr. Mason, a lawyer who often takes on controversial causes, from
the Tawana Brawley case to the defense of a City College professor under fire
for racially charged remarks he made in a recent speech.

"Who is Peggy Shepard?" Mr. Mullany asked.

On 145th Street, Crosby Barnes, a man who seems to be a walking encyclopedia on
the area, could barely place Mr. Michels. "His name, I've heard it once or
twice," he said.

But everyone, he and Mr. Mullany agreed, has heard of Mr. Mason, a man whose
very name frightens many whites. Ms. Shepard, a state housing official who has
been active in local community affairs for years and is a Democratic district
leader, said that Mr. Mason had become "the Willie Horton in the race" -- a
black figure viewed as menacing by whites who will vote for the candidate most
likely to keep him from obtaining office. Neither Mr. Mason nor Mr. Michels
responded to messages left with their offices.

Still, Mr. Barnes said, many blacks see Mr. Mason as a champion of blacks facing
all kinds of injustice.

LOAD-DATE: August 15, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

SERIES: Neighborhood Politics: Choosing the Council -- An occasional look at the
races for New York's new City Council.

GRAPHIC: Map of New York hilighting District 7. (pg. B6)

TYPE: Series

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              113 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 15, 1991, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

U.S. BACKING AWAY FROM SAYING DIOXIN IS A DEADLY PERIL

BYLINE: By KEITH SCHNEIDER,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 1883 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 14


In a rare official reassessment, several top Federal health authorities are
backing away from the position that the chemical compound dioxin is toxic enemy
No. 1. Exposure to the chemical, once thought to be much more hazardous than
chain smoking, is now considered by some experts to be no more risky than
spending a week sunbathing.

For years the Federal Government has required industrial companies to invest
billions of dollars to prevent dioxin's release into the environment and to
clean up what is already there.

In the most dramatic move to protect citizens, the Government in 1982 and early
1983 permanently evacuated all 2,240 residents of Times Beach, Mo., where the
dirt roads had become contaminated with dioxin.

Review Is Begun

But now some scientists believe that the Government's stringent health standards
for dioxin are not supported by the latest scientific evidence.

The Federal Environmental Protection Agency has opened a yearlong review to
develop a new formal opinion of the risks of dioxin.

"I don't want to prejudge the issue, but we are seeing new information on dioxin
that suggests a lower risk assessment for dioxin should be applied," said
William K. Reilly, the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency, who
asked for the review.

"I know the stakes and that I'm unraveling something here," Mr. Reilly said.
"There is not much precedence in the Federal establishment for pulling back from
a judgment of toxicity. But we need to be prepared to adjust, to raise or lower
standards, as new science becomes available."

Hindsight on Evacuation

The human dimension of this change in approach emerged most vividly several
months ago when the Federal scientist who made the original decision to evacuate
Times Beach said he believed he had erred. "We used the best scientific evidence
at the time to make the decision we did," said the scientist, Dr. Vernon N.
Houk.

"Given what we now know about this chemical's toxicity and its effects on human
health, it looks as though the evacuation was unnecessary," Dr. Houk, the
assistant Surgeon General and Director of the Center for Environmental Health
and Injury Control at the Centers for Disease Control in Atlanta, said in a
recent interview.

Environmental groups say the latest data confirm the original assessment of
dioxin's danger, and they assert that the Government's changing position is a
political move aimed at reducing pollution control and cleanup costs for
industry.

But Dr. Houk said, "If it's a carcinogen, it's a very weak carcinogen and
Federal policy needs to reflect that."

The revised view of the dangers of dioxin has raised serious concern in the
E.P.A., which used many of the same procedures to determine the hazards of
dioxin as it did to set air and water pollution limits for most of the other
chemicals that the agency regulates. If Dr. Houk is right and dioxin is much
less dangerous than had been determined, that could mean the Government's
regulations for other compounds will need to be adjusted.

Under the current Federal guidelines, the E.P.A. says that ingesting more than
.006 trillionths of a gram of dioxin for each kilogram (2.2 pounds) of body
weight daily over an average lifetime may cause one fatal cancer among each
million people. Thus a man weighing 80 kilograms, or 176 pounds, is urged by the
Government not to eat, drink, or breathe more than 0.5 trillionths of a gram of
dioxin every day. Such an amount would be roughly equivalent to slicing a grain
of sand a billion times.

Standard Used for Water

The same statistical method used to calculate the safe exposure to dioxin was
also used by the Environmental Protection Agency to set a safe level in water of
13 parts per quintillion and by the Centers for Disease Control at 1 part per
billion in soil.

The World Health Organization supports the revised view of dioxin's danger and
suggests that the United States exposure standards are wrong. Earlier this year
the group officially set a new limit for the daily intake of dioxin at 10
trillionths of a gram of dioxin per kilogram of body weight, a concentration
that is 1,600 times greater than the level set by the Environmental Protection
Agency and closer to the concentration considered scientifically accurate by Dr.
Houk and others.

Scientists at leading environmental groups say the Government's original
assessment of dioxin's dangers is supported by the new data. They also contend
that the researchers are narrowly interpreting the new data to reduce the
cleanup and disposal costs of industries whose manufacturing processes produce
dioxin as a byproduct, particularly paper pulp mills, hazardous waste
incinerators and municipal incinerators.

"Nothing that has been learned about dioxin since 1985 when E.P.A.  first
published its risk assessment finding on dioxin in the environment supports a
revision of science-based policy or action," said Dr. Ellen K. Silbergeld,
professor of pathology at the University of Maryland in Baltimore.

"We know more about the cellular events that appear to underlie dioxin's
multiple toxic effects, and what we know confirms that it is a remarkably potent
agent."

'Protected Industries'

Dr. Mary H. O'Brien, a botanist and a director of the Dioxin-Organochlorines
Center, a research group in Eugene, Ore., said: "What's being protected here is
not people or the environment but industries favored by the Government. The
Government begins with the assumption that these industrial activities have to
go on and they adjust the data to make the existing pollution practices
acceptable."

Soil at 28 sites in the St. Louis region, including Times Beach, was found to be
contaminated with dioxin at levels higher than 1,000 parts per billion. Because
the Centers for Disease Control thought the exposure to dioxin would be highest
at Times Beach, the state and Federal governments bought the property of
residents for $37 million.

Cost at $100 Million

Cleanup work at the other sites has been going on for a decade and has cost $100
million. About 100,000 cubic yards of soil contaminated with dioxin from the
sites is being stored, awaiting the construction of an incinerator at Times
Beach. It is expected to take 10 more years and cost $150 million more to tear
down the buildings at Times Beach, burn the contaminated soil, bury debris in
specially designed landfills and convert the land into a park.

The work is being paid for by the Syntex Corporation, under a court-sanctioned
agreement with the Enviornmental Protection Agency that will not be affected by
any reassessment of dioxin's danger, said Gary J. Pendergrass, who heads the
Syntex cleanup program.

Produced during chemical reactions that involve heat and chlorine compounds,
dioxins comes in 75 different varieties, with one form thought to be the most
dangerouus: 2,3,7,8 tetrachlorodibenzo dioxin or TCDD.

In the early 1980's, the compound's deadly reputation was based in large measure
on its ability to cause cancer in laboratory animals, even when the animals were
exposed to very small doses. Guinea pigs fed minute amounts died within weeks.
Subsequent studies have shown trout and salmon may be even more sensitive.

Studies of workers exposed to dioxin in chemical plants during routine
operations, and as a result of explosions, showed conclusively that exposure to
dioxin at levels of several hundred parts per billion could cause chloracne, a
potentially disfiguring skin disease.

Other effects were less certain, said scientists in and out of Government. For
every study that found dioxin could raise a person's chance of developing cancer
or some other disease, another study reported that there was no effect at all.

At the center of the debate is an inexact science known as risk assessment. It
uses animal studies and human health studies, when possible, combined with
statistics and formal scientific assumptions and a great deal of expert opinion
to develop an estimate of how much exposure to a chemical is likely to cause
cancer and birth defects in people.

The technique, which the experts agree is as much art as science, was widely
employed by the Government in the 1970's and 1980's because there was almost no
other scientifically acceptable means for determining a compound's hazards. But
because every step in the process is open to interpretation, two scientists
looking at the same data can come up with sharply differing conclusions.

Scientists say better techniques are now available to more accurately reflect
the toxic properties of chemicals, particularly those used by molecular
biologists. More is known about how chemicals react with biological organisms,
how they exert their toxic effects on cells and what the ultimate result is
likely to be.

Industrial groups argue that the Government's risk assessment work needs to be
modernized because the old methods have produced outdated environmental
standards that are costing them billions of dollars in unnecessary pollution
control equipment.

Vietnam veterans exposed to dioxin in the defoliant Agent Orange blame it for
cancer, nervous system disorders, a host of other injuries, and for producing
birth defects in their children. Legislation passed this year requires the
Department of Veterans Affairs to pay disability benefits to soldiers who can
prove they were exposed to Agent Orange and suffer from chloracne, non-Hodgkins
lymphoma, soft-tissue sarcoma and a liver disease called porphyria cutanea
tarda.

A Death and Dioxin

In lawsuit involving a death attributed to exposure to dioxin, a St. Louis jury
last month awarded $1.5 million to the family of a truck driver who died in 1984
of soft-tissue sarcoma. The loading area where he worked had been sprayed with
the same oil that contaminated Times Beach.

In the late 1970's, dioxin contamination lead to the ban of a weed killer,
2,4,5-T, a component of Agent Orange, once used widely in American farming and
forestry. The environmental agency said it caused miscarriages and birth
defects.

In the 1980's the paper industry came under criticism for producing dioxin when
bleaching pulp, polluting rivers and streams.

For the former residents of Times Beach, the new debate over dioxin has added to
the hurt, anger and exasperation that many feel every day.

"You just don't know what to think," said Marilyn Leistner, the former Mayor of
Times Beach who now works for the state at the site. "If dioxin is less
dangerous, that should be good news. The truth is, it's not. People have been
hurt, their lives ruined by what happened in this area. One minute it's bad. The
next it's good. It's a roller coaster that just won't stop."

For Mrs. Leistner and the other 2,239 former residents of Times Beach, the
introduction to dioxin came out of the blue in December 1982. Soil samples the
Environmental Protection Agency collected weeks earlier contained dioxin at
levels exceeding 100 parts for every billion parts of soil.

The agency's samples had been taken as part of an investigation of dioxin
contamination in the St. Louis region. The inquiry began after a hazardous waste
trucking company sprayed roads and parking lots for dust control with waste oil
containing dioxin in the early 1970's.

LOAD-DATE: August 15, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: After finding high levels of dioxin contamination, the Federal
Government in 1982 evacuated all 2,240 residents of Times Beach, Mo. They say
now that new data indicate the move may have been unnecessary. (pg. A1);
Scientists say some researchers are narrowly interpreting new data on dioxin
hazards to reduce the chemical industry's cleanup and disposal costs. Gravel
contaminated with oil containing dioxin being removed from a road in St. Louis
County, near Times Beach, Mo. (pg. D23) (Bill Stover for The New York Times)

Map of Missouri showing location of Times Beach. (pg. D23)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              114 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 15, 1991, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Times Beach Warning: Regrets a Decade Later

BYLINE: By KEITH SCHNEIDER,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section D; Page 23; Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 460 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 14


For Dr. Vernon N. Houk, the Federal official who urged the evacuation of Times
Beach, Mo., nearly a decade ago and now believes it may have been a mistake,
there is only one regret.

"The only thing I would have done differently," Dr. Houk said, "I would have
said we may be wrong. If we're going to be wrong, we'll be wrong on the side of
protecting human health.

"I don't think we ever said we may be wrong."

But Dr. Houk, a pulmonary disease specialist, has no doubts that his decision
earlier this year to second-guess himself was correct. "Times Beach was an
overreaction," he said. "It was based on the best scientific information we had
at the time. It turns out we were in error."

Now, Dr. Houk is at the center of a national dispute over the hazards of dioxin.
He is the director of the Center for Environmental Health and Injury Control at
the Centers for Disease Control in Atlanta; his is one of the Government's most
senior posts for deciding which environmental contaminants pose risks to health.


Career With Government

Born in the San Joaquin Valley of California, Dr. Houk has spent his entire
career with the Government, first as a physician in the Navy and since 1968 as a
researcher and administrator with the Centers for Disease Control. He has lived
in Atlanta for 23 years.

Researchers in Dr. Houk's 400-person office were among the first to discover
that lead in paint and gasoline posed a severe hazard to children. Dr. Houk's
center also helped to defend a study that found that World War II veterans who
participated in an atomic-weapon test in Nevada in the 1950's developed
higher-than-expected levels of cancer.

One twist in the ongoing debate over the dangers of dioxin is that Dr. Houk now
finds himself siding with some of his longtime adversaries. Industrial companies
that produce dioxin as a waste product now lionize him, saying he has put an end
to the "dioxin scare." Environmental organizations, labor groups and Vietnam
veterans, meanwhile, have called his recent reversal narrow-minded and
dangerous.

Dr. Houk maintains that the reversal was the logical outgrowth of the ongoing
examination of scientific data. "Beginning in about 1986, the information was
beginning to accumulate that dioxin's effect on human health was probably not as
bad as we had feared in the early 1980's," Dr. Houk said in an interview.  "We
now know a lot more about the mechanisms of how these chemicals act in
biological systems.

"We're public health officials.  When something is worse than we thought, we
seem to be able to move very rapidly at gathering the data and making the
decision to restrict its use. When something is not as bad as we thought it was,
I think it's fair to bring that issue forward, too."

LOAD-DATE: August 15, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Dr. Vernon N. Houk of the Centers for Disease Control said new
data indicated that the evacuation of Times Beach, Mo., might have been
unnecessary. (The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              115 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 15, 1991, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Clark Clifford: Dupe or Knave?

SECTION: Section A; Page 22; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 510 words


Of all the mysteries surrounding the Bank of Credit and Commerce International,
one of the most baffling concerns Clark Clifford. Was this venerated Washington
insider duped by crooks? Or did he know, or suspect, that B.C.C.I. secretly
owned the big Washington bank holding company he headed for the last decade?

Mr. Clifford's sterling service to Presidents Truman, Kennedy and Johnson as
counselor and confidant, and his influence in the Democratic Party, earned him a
towering reputation. His bravery as Secretary of Defense in standing up to
Lyndon Johnson on the conduct of the Vietnam War added to a lustrous career.

But his close ties to B.C.C.I. for the last 13 years -- not just lately -- don't
square with that Clark Clifford. He was the bank's chief Washington lawyer,
presumably alert, as well as chairman of First American Bankshares. How could
such a politically sophisticated man not see what was going on?

The unfolding B.C.C.I. record shows a rogue bank engaged in money laundering,
drug dealing, gun-running and global fraud. Did Mr. Clifford turn a blind eye
for easy millions of dollars? Or did he really not know?

Even his resignation announcement strains credulity. He implied that he and his
law partner Robert Altman were leaving voluntarily as First American's chairman
and president. In fact, their exit had been urged by directors of the holding
company, led by former Senator Charles Mathias, as well as the Federal Reserve
and the Sheik of Abu Dhabi, B.C.C.I.'s principal owner. Hanging on, they hurt
the name of their bank while shedding no light for investigators.

B.C.C.I. was founded by Pakistanis with Middle Eastern capital. Based in
Luxembourg and the Cayman Islands, which thrive on hiding financial secrets, the
bank spread far and wide. Its chicanery was long suspected, but regulators
failed to nail it down until this summer, when seven countries shut B.C.C.I.
offices and the Federal Reserve ordered it to sell First American.

The Fed and New York's District Attorney, Robert Morgenthau, have brought
charges against B.C.C.I. and several Pakistani and Middle Eastern officers and
go-betweens. Mr. Clifford and Mr. Altman are not charged, and insist they have
done nothing wrong, but the Fed's case against B.C.C.I. provides revealing
detail. B.C.C.I. recruited them to tell U.S. regulators that Middle Eastern
investors wanted to buy First American, whereas B.C.C.I. actually put up the
money in fictive loans to the nominal investors.

The two men gave assurances then, and still do, that B.C.C.I. had no control
over First American. Yet the Fed says that, on B.C.C.I.'s advice, First American
hired B.C.C.I. executives who stayed involved with B.C.C.I. In addition, the two
borrowed heavily from B.C.C.I. on generous terms to buy First American stock,
some of which they sold later at a profit of nearly $10 million.

The full story is still coming out. Mr. Clifford and Mr. Altman are booked to
present their perspective in Congressional testimony next month. They have a lot
to answer for.

LOAD-DATE: August 15, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              116 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 16, 1991, Friday, Late Edition - Final

At the Movies

BYLINE: By Lawrence Van Gelder

SECTION: Section C; Page 8; Column 5; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1452 words



Other End of the Knife

"I'm always drawn to stories about characters who are somewhat isolated inside
themselves by their inability to communicate in some way," said Randa Haines.
"That's what interested me about 'Children of a Lesser God.' That's what
interested me here, too."

"Here," in this instance, is Ms. Haines's latest film, "The Doctor," starring
William Hurt as a gifted San Francisco surgeon who lacks compassion for patients
until he joins their ranks.

Ms. Haines said she visualized Dr. Jack MacKee as "a man in the realm of the
gods: an incredibly gleaming world, prestigious job, literally touching life and
death every day, putting his hands on someone's heart." Yet, she continued: "He
himself is not touched by death. It seemed to me he saw himself as beyond the
touch of death. And then his world turns upside down when he's forced to
confront his own mortality. He literally goes down into the underworld, the
bowels of the hospital where all these strange things happen to him: radiation
therapy and almost medieval procedures."

"It's about a man who seems to have everything but is so distant from everything
in his life," Ms. Haines said. "He's most comfortable with patients when they're
unconscious. He doesn't have to communicate with them, and there's a distance
between him and everyone in his life -- his wife and child."

"The Doctor" is based on a Robert Caswell screenplay drawn from "A Taste of My
Own Medicine," a book by Dr. Edward E. Rosenbaum, who was found to have cancer
after practicing medicine for 50 years. Ms. Haines said she hoped "The Doctor"
would stimulate discussion of medical care in the United States, including the
doctor-patient relationship.

"A doctor is not a mechanic," she said. "A car doesn't react with a mechanic,
but a human being does. There does seem to be more to the healing process than
just the mechanics of it. But on the other hand, I do know that detachment is
important. A surgeon can't be weeping into the open wound. But somewhere there's
a middle ground."

Ms. Haines said the surgeons and other physicians who had worked with her to
make the film realistic had reacted favorably to both its authenticity and its
philosophy. She said Mr. Hurt and Mandy Patinkin, who plays one of the doctors,
spent a good deal of time watching surgeons work to prepare for their roles.

"The opening sequence is real emergency heart surgery," Ms. Haines noted, and in
"The Doctor" Mr. Hurt and Mr. Patinkin appear to be part of the surgical team.
"All the other people in that room are professional doctors and nurses," Ms.
Haines said, adding that the actors "learned a lot from other surgeons about
handling instruments and the suturing."

Ms. Haines described Mr. Hurt as an actor who loves a technical challenge. In
"Children of a Lesser God," in which he played a teacher in a school for the
deaf, "he had to speak in two languages at the same time," she said. "Here he
has to be a surgeon. There's a great physical challenge in that."

"I would almost trust Bill to operate on me at this point," she said.

What's Next for Slater?

Ms. Haines is not alone in her admiration for Mr. Hurt. Another of his fans is
Christian Slater, who has gone from movie to movie to movie in recent months.
Now, taking a bit of a break after "Robin Hood: Prince of Thieves," "Mobsters"
and the forthcoming "Kuffs," the 21-year-old actor has been thinking about his
future.

"I want to find strong, solid movies," he said. "I want to work with strong,
solid actors -- Bill Hurt, Harrison Ford, Al Pacino. These are dreams I've had
since I was a boy -- to work with these kinds of people."

Mr. Slater said the script for "Mobsters," about the early years of the
gangsters Lucky Luciano, Meyer Lansky, Bugsy Siegel and Frank Costello, came to
him last year while he was in England playing another outlaw, Will Scarlett in
"Robin Hood: Prince of Thieves."

"I didn't know much about the lives of these four guys until this project was
brought to me," Mr. Slater said. "I thought it was very interesting that they
weren't very old men when they were at the height of their power. They were
actually in their 20's. They were strong men. I think Luciano always saw himself
as a leader."

Late last year, no more than two weeks after his work in "Robin Hood" was
finished, Mr. Slater went to work in Los Angeles on "Mobsters." Patrick Dempsey,
who plays Lansky, had sent him some books on Luciano, but Mr. Slater said the
set designs by Richard Sylbert really helped to carry him into the role. "They
were extremely realistic," Mr. Slater said. "You'd walk on the set and literally
would be back in time."

With two films as an outlaw behind him, Mr. Slater next appeared in "Kuffs," as
a lawman out to avenge the killing of his brother. Universal plans to release
the film later this year, Mr. Slater said.

Now, "I'm reading scripts and having those meetings actors have to try and
figure out what the next deal is," he said. "I want to do all sorts of different
things."

Esther Williams Homage

"Esther Williams is going to swim."

The site is Deauville, France. The setting is the Deauville Film Festival, which
takes place this year from Aug. 30 to Sept. 9. And the speaker is Ruda Dauphin,
the festival's United States director.

The Deauville Festival, she said, "is an American festival," devoted solely to
American films and highlighted by tributes, including one this year to Miss
Williams, the champion swimmer whose 1944 appearance in M-G-M's "Bathing
Beauty," one of the films to be shown, catapulted her to stardom in a series of
musical comedies with opulent swimming scenes.

Other tributes, Mrs. Dauphin said, will be tendered to John Frankenheimer, who
will be showing his new film, "Year of the Gun"; Robert Mulligan, who will be
arriving with "Man in the Moon," and John Sayles, who will turn up with his new
"City of Hope.'

Van Damme, Twice

Don't be fooled by all those Jean-Claude Van Damme movies with titles like
"Bloodsport," "Cyborg," "Kickboxer" and "Lionheart."

"In real life I'm a very charming guy," he said. "I'm funny, and I love life.
But in all my movies I play a very quiet, strong, violent guy."

Now, fans of the martial-arts master can get twice as much for their money. In
his new film, "Double Impact," Mr. Van Damme plays twins who were separated
shortly after birth. At least one has managed to grow up in a way that enables
Mr. Van Damme to exhibit some of his off-screen personality.

The twins are the sons of a builder of the Hong Kong-Kowloon tunnel. When their
father is murdered by gangsters, an uncle spirits them to safety.

"One stays in Asia, and one comes to America." Mr. Van Damme said, "One guy is
like a Charles Bronson, very quiet and very strong mentally, and he keeps
everything inside. The other guy is like a Tony Curtis type of guy, more
charming, more happy, and they have different ways of doing things. One grew up
in Beverly Hills and drives sports cars. The other guy -- nobody was helping
him, and he became a tough son of a gun.

"One is a preppy from Malibu. The Asian guy smokes cigars and has his hair
slicked back. One knows about the triads, the streets. The other is a karate
master but never did a thing on the street."

When they reunite after 25 years to team up against the Hong Kong underworld,
the twins are at odds over a girlfriend for a while. "So Van Damme is fighting
Van Damme in the same movie," said the actor, who also pointed out that the
script's appeal was enhanced by a love scene, something his female fans had
requested in their letters.

The Brussels-born Mr. Van Damme, who seems to be bidding for equal status with
action-movie stars like Chuck Norris, Steven Seagal and Arnold Schwarzenegger,
has deals for new projects with Columbia Pictures and Carolco, which brought out
"Terminator 2: Judgment Day."

Right about now, Mr. Van Damme, accompanied by a couple of vans carrying
bicycles, running machines, weights and punching bags that he uses when training
two or three hours a day, is starting work on a Carolco project, "Universal
Soldier."

The plot sounds like a combination of "Terminator 2," "Robocop," "Jacob's
Ladder" and "Frankenstein."

Mr. Van Damme plays a creature whom he compares to "a handsome Frankenstein." He
was killed in Vietnam, was returned in a body bag and restored to life, half
human and half machine, with occasional memories of his past. Now, 25 years
later, in the company of a female reporter, he is pursued by similar creatures
led by Dolph Lundgren, who believed he was a traitor in Vietnam.

Mr. Van Damme is the smallest in the combative group.

"It will be a very appealing movie," he said.

LOAD-DATE: August 16, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Randa Haines (Touchstone/Richard Foreman)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              117 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 16, 1991, Friday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

Marietta Tree, Former U.N. Delegate, Dies at 74

BYLINE: By RICHARD SEVERO

SECTION: Section D; Page 16; Column 4; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 936 words


Marietta Tree, a daughter of privilege who won plaudits as a representative to
the United Nations in the 1960's and as a tireless worker for New York City
causes, died yesterday at New York Hospital. She was 74 years old.

She died of cancer, her son-in-law, James Sterba, said.

Mrs. Tree was appointed a representative to the United Nations Commission on
Human Rights in 1961 and served also as a special adviser to the United States
delegation. She remained at the United Nations until 1967, serving in several


posts, including delegate to the Trusteeship Council.

In the last decade, she was chairwoman of the Citizens Committee for New York
City, a group that tries to help neighborhood groups improve their communities.
She resigned her post because of illness nine months ago.

Mrs. Tree came from a distinguished family and privileged circumstances and
could have spent her life quite insulated from the tensions of international
diplomacy and the frustrations of a city that so frequently seemed to be in
crisis. But that is not what she wanted.

Tributes From Friends

Arthur Schlesinger Jr., the historian, a close friend of Mrs. Tree's for many
years, said: "Her ambition was to be a combination of Mrs. Roosevelt and Carole
Lombard. And that is what she was."

Another close friend agreed. "She was elegant, glorious and sparkling,"
saidOsborne Elliot, who was founding chairman of the Citizens Committee and who,
since her resignation, has returned as chairman. "She set many drawing rooms


afire. But more importantly, she cared deeply about the world, the nation, this
city and its people."

Mrs. Tree was born in Lawrence, Mass., the daughter of the Right Rev. Malcolm
Endicott Peabody, an Episcopal clergyman, who from 1940 to 1962 was Bishop for
Central New York State of the Episcopal Church. Her mother was the former Mary
Parkman, daughter of a prominent New England family.

The family believed that it was a responsibility to dedicate at least some of
one's life to public service, and the message was received by all five of their
children. One of Mrs. Tree's brothers, Endicott, became Governor of
Massachusetts.

The Peabodys moved around a bit before World War II. For a time they lived in
Philadelphia, where Mr. Peabody was minister of St. Paul's Church in Chestnut
Hill and young Marietta attended Springside Academy. She also attended St.
Timothy's School in Baltimore and the Petite Ecole Florentine in Florence,
Italy. From 1936 to 1939, she attended the University of Pennsylvania, where she
concentrated in political science.

In 1939, she married Desmond FitzGerald, a lawyer and conservative Republican.
The marriage ended in divorce in 1947. The couple had a daughter, Frances
FitzGerald, an author whose nonfiction best-seller "Fire in the Lake,"


about the Vietnam War, won a Pulitzer Prize in 1973.

Soon after the divorce, Marietta married Ronald Tree, a former Conservative
member of the British Parliament. He died in 1976. The two had a daughter,
Penelope Tree, who became a model.

During World War II Mrs. Tree worked as a researcher at Life magazine. After the
war she became active in liberal Democratic politics in New York. She was on the
New York State Democratic Committee from 1954 to 1960 and was one of Adlai E.
Stevenson's chief aides when he ran for President against Dwight D. Eisenhower
in 1952 and 1956.

After John F. Kennedy was elected President, he appointed Mrs. Tree to the
United Nations job, where she served when Mr. Stevenson was the top United
States representative there.

"I work in the political field because I believe that everyone in a community
has duties as well as rights," Mrs. Tree said in 1961. "I am impelled by a
feeling that I have so many blessings I must somehow try to pay for them in hard


work for the community and in gratitude for being an American. I have to try and
pay my debt to God."

After her diplomatic service ended, Mrs. Tree became increasingly interested in
urban problems. She was a partner in the city planning firm of Llewelyn-Davies
Associates, a British organization, and ran its New York office from 1968 to
1980. She was neither an architect nor a planner but rather, as her brother,
Malcolm, recalls it, "a rainmaker" who was able to motivate city officials. She
worked on a slum rehabilitation project in Manila and consulted on various
projects in Hong Kong, Borneo, Beirut and elsewhere.

Held New York City Post

Her interest in New York City was evident early on. In 1944 she was one of the
founders of Sydenham Hospital, then hailed as the first interracial voluntary
hospital in the United States. Mayor Robert F. Wagner appointed her to the
city's Commission on Intergroup Relations in 1959.

Among her other activites was service on the board of directors of the Franklin
D. Roosevelt Four Freedoms Foundation, the Marconi International Foundation and
the Winston Churchill Foundation. She also was on the boards of



CBS and Pan American World Airways.

Among the survivors are her daughters, Frances FitzGerald of Manhattan and
Penelope Tree of Sydney, Australia; four brothers, Endicott, of Hollis, N.H.;
George L., of Washington, an educational consultant; , Samuel P., of Manhattan,
a philanthropist, and Malcolm E., of Washington, a real-estate developer.

Funeral arrangements are incomplete. Mrs. Tree will be cremated and her remains
buried in Northeast Harbor, Me. There will be a memorial service in New York
City in September, but the date and location have not yet been selected, the
family said.


LOAD-DATE: October 23, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: August 17, 1991, Saturday

CORRECTION:
An obituary yesterday about Marietta Tree, a former United Nations
representative and campaigner for New York City causes, rendered the name of the
founding chairman of the Citizens Committee for New York City incorrectly. He is
Osborn Elliott.

GRAPHIC: Photo: Marietta Tree (Wendy Workman, 1991)

TYPE: Biography; Obituary (Obit)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              118 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 18, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Itchy Feet and Pencils: A Symposium

SECTION: Section 7; Page 1; Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 4055 words


Russell Banks thinks "travel writing is a search by the homeless for a route
home." He maintains that the reason writers travel, and write about their
travels, is invariably to make a point about what they've left behind. Jan
Morris doesn't believe it; she says that in her case the travel writer may be a
person in search of "the opposite of one's self." Mr. Banks (the author of
"Continental Drift") and Ms. Morris ("Venice," "Pax Britannica") were panelists
at a Key West Literary Seminar earlier this year devoted to the "Literature of
Travel: A Sense of Place." Other participants were Robert Stone ("A Flag for
Sunrise," "Dog Soldiers") and William Styron ("Sophie's Choice," "Darkness
Visible"). Excerpts from their panel discussion of "The Writer as Traveler"
follow.

RUSSELL BANKS: I think all good writing is travel writing. That is, it's an
account of a journey. Most conventionally the journey is out, and spatial, which
I think of as a kind of Melvillean journey -- the journey of "Omoo" and "Typee,"
even of "Moby-Dick." And the purpose of the journey and the writing is a test.
It's the test of the writer's connection to whatever has been left behind, which
in that kind of writing, that kind of journey, is normally hearth and home --
his social convention.

By the same token, I think that there's another journey, which is a journey
inward and across time, rather than across space. And if I can use the same
shorthand, I think of that as the Hawthornean journey. There's a kind of easy --
but I mean it in a fairly special and narrow sense -- dichotomy between the
Melvillean journey and the Hawthornean journey. But in that case, what's being
tested is the writer's, or the traveler's, connection to what's been left
behind. What's been left behind in the interior journey is the objective self,
and in the journey across time, it's the present that's been left behind.

And I have a related thesis, which concerns travel writing as such, rather than
writing as such. I think that all good travel writing is written to make a point
about home. I think that since Homer, all travel writing that's of lasting
interest -- writing that we continue to read, writing that is written by writers
as travelers, not travelers as writers -- is really written to make a point
about home. The essential purpose of diligent and brave observation of the Other
is to clarify the nature and limits of the self, which leads one to conclude
that the best travel writers are people who, needing that clarification, are at
bottom unsure of the nature and limits of home and their relation to it. They
move out of the house. So that like Hawthorne's Wakefield, they can look back
and see what's true there. I think of Bruce Chatwin or V. S. Naipaul or Paul
Theroux, or I think of Mark Twain or Herman Melville or Richard Burton, and on
back to the very beginning of travel writing, to the "Odyssey." From Homer to
Theroux, that sounds like a course, doesn't it? "Travel Writing. Homebodies Go
Abroad," or something. But, from Homer to Theroux, anyhow, we're talking
agitated homebodies here.

In the Western world, I think writers of far places and people, writers obsessed
with telling us wonders, oddly have been the most domestic, albeit
undomesticated, writers of all. I'm thinking of D. H. Lawrence or Henry Miller
or Lawrence Durrell or Peter Matthiessen or Ernest Hemingway or Conrad. I merely
note that so many of them, until the modern age, anyhow, are men, and men with
problematic yet passionate, almost desperate, handholds on conventional,
middle-class domestic life. The anxiety that generates interesting, dramatic
conflict in their travel writings -- which generates plot, I suppose -- and
which is, after all, why we continue to read them -- we certainly don't continue
to read them in order to hear again about the wonders -- is an anxiety generated
by a sense of being displaced, dislocated, alienated from the tribe, from the
neighborhood, from the family, from women and children. Or for the female
writers, from men and children.

Travel writing is a search, I think, by the homeless, for the route home. At its
best it's a kind of peripatetic novel.

JAN MORRIS: Well, I think it was a lot of nonsense. A lot of it I agree with,
but a lot of it I didn't. I always feel a bit of a fraud coming to these things,
because it's only at literary festivals that I myself ever try to think why it
is I write. I don't know about you -- if something comes out of my head and my
heart, I don't really start to analyze it. I'm an anti-Freudian, I don't really
think it's always advantageous to go to root causes. And I sometimes think for a
writer it's bad to examine just why you do write the way you write.

But one of the things I disagree with is that you say this is really about the
writer as traveler -- I have the feeling that I am more a traveler as a writer.
I became a traveler before I was a writer, really. His Majesty the King made me
a traveler, by sending me off to Italy and Egypt during the Second World War,
and then I was hooked on travel, long before, really, I was hooked on writing.

And after the war, I became a foreign correspondent, and therefore the very
nature of travel became something exciting, and all the more obsessive and
addictive. I remember in the Sudan once, I was there on assignment, and the
Minister of National Guidance, a rather severe man, told me how I ought to be
approaching the subject, which was some rebellion or other, and he said the duty
of the foreign correspondent is to present thrilling, attractive and good news
-- corresponding, where possible, with the truth. And he was my best mentor for
the kind of writing I did. I learned more from him than from anybody else.

So I became a traveler before I was a writer. And the reason that I've become, I
suppose, a travel writer is that the obvious material for me was the material I
picked up in the course of my professional life, which happened to be the
traveling life. And it's always seemed to me that if I'd led a much more
domestic life, I would probably have become a writer of fiction, of more normal
fiction, more obvious fiction, rather than a writer of the sort that I am.

And I just don't think I can agree with the thesis that most travel writers have
been domesticated persons looking for home, because they've mostly been men, but
there have been many remarkable women who have done it; I think, for a start, of
Freya Stark, Isabella Bird, [Marion] Doughty -- all of them distinctly
undomesticated people who made art out of their travels.

For my own part, travel not only offers excitement but it also offers a view of
history, which seems to me to be an essential part of good travel writing. And
it also presents you with ready-made characters. I remember Paul Theroux saying
that for him, writing a travel book was really writing a novel when the plot was
made up for you. And I do think that in many ways it does provide that -- it
provides you with ready-made characters, it provides you with kind of a plot, it
provides you with scenes and settings -- a city can become a character -- as
well as individual people. And it also offers contrast. It is quite true that in
my case, I've always been a country person, and perhaps in the search for the
opposite I have mostly written about cities. And so, in a way, it is true,
perhaps, that one is searching for, if not one's own self, the opposite of one's
self.

Everybody always thinks that my career has been one long search for self, but I
never found it so, and I've always thought that I stood in a tradition of
another kind of writer -- a very English writer, Welsh though I am -- and in
addition a very English writer who always stood outside the subject that they
were writing about. I think especially of my master, [Alexander] Kinglake [the
author of "Eothen"], the king of travel writers, who never pretended for a
moment that he was getting inside his subject. He was always the observer
looking from the outside. And I think, certainly among English travel writers,
more than American ones, that has been the case. Certainly in my case I have
been an observer above all.

I am at this moment editing the travel writings of Viginia Woolf. Hands up,
anybody who knew there were any travel writings by Virginia Woolf. Certainly I
didn't. But buried away, through all those novels, all those letters and
diaries, there's a whole series of writings about place. And the sort of writing
I feel I do is that. It's to take a place and to match one's own personal
sensibility against that place. Novelists do that sometimes with situations,
with characters. People like me -- perhaps without the gift of plot -- do it by
matching ourselves against a place. So I would prefer to call it place writing
or something like that.

ROBERT STONE: It occurs to me that probably all the fiction I've written,
without exception, has to do with travel, since I come from New York and I've
never written about New York. I've never written anything set in New York. My
family had lived and worked around New York Harbor for a couple of generations.
My grandfather was a Conradian figure -- he was a Scottish ship's engineer who
settled in the Port of New York and became captain of a tugboat. There was a lot
going on, in conventional terms of some interest, I guess, that I could then
have used. But I never did. I never wrote anything about my family. I never
wrote anything about New York -- never set a story, a novel, there, without
exception.

And I now realize that this is perhaps because I started with the conviction
that wherever I was located, whatever my home place was, must somehow be without
authenticity. I think many of us start life with this attitude. I certainly
believed that there could be nothing about New York that was innately
interesting or from which things could be learned. I felt that wherever
authenticity resided, it must be elsewhere. And, needless to say, I was in
search of authenticity. What else is there?

And like Jan Morris, I began my travels in the Government service -- in the
military. And my traveling began when I was 17, when I went in the Navy. It
coincided, more or less, with the American imperium, and I was going to find my
life, roughly, coinciding with that.

The first foreign liberty port that I had was Batista's Havana. And I was with
the Sixth Fleet in the Mediterranean, and Beirut was one of my ports of call --
we were showing the flag in 1956, when the first American active intervention in
Lebanon [occurred], I was a participant in that and that was the same thing that
was going on, in a way, as the destruction of the world of the traveler and the
introduction of the world of the tourist. Because that, of course, was another
feature of the American imperium. If it wasn't caused by it, it coincided with
it -- the disappearance of the literate, elite traveler and the appearance of
the mass tourist who, even if he was not American, might as well have been,
because he represented things American in the American age and the decline and
fall of the traveler. And of course I now realize that while I was in a very
romantic way imagining myself as a traveler, as a sailor, I was really,
essentially, from the point of view of any sensible traveler, a large part of
the problem. As my friends and I staggered drunkenly from cathedrals to mosques
to pyramids, generally polluting pensions and colorful saloons and good
restaurants -- I mean we were the Huns having arrived in late Western
civilization. I didn't understand that at the time. I understand it
retrospectively.

But it was impossible, finally, to travel as part of the American imperium
without subjecting yourself to a few moral reflections. I won't say moralize,
since moralize is something that we're not supposed to do. But since the Navy
took me, since I started my foreign travels in Havana, since I was, in a way,
from the beginning part of this American century, of which George Bush says we
are about to have another, which is an interesting idea, it was impossible for
me not to engage the historical and philosophical underpinnings of what I was
doing and what I was part of.

When I was a kid, when I was working for The Daily News, my girlfriend and I
decided we would leave New York. We were always leaving the place that we were
in in order to go somewhere else, and we ended up in New Orleans in the early
60's, in the time of the civil rights agitation. I got myself a job selling
encyclopedias. I was not part of the civil rights movement, but I was selling
encyclopedias in the rural Deep South, and I seemed to be working just behind
the civil rights people -- they would show up in town, organize the population,
and get out. At just about the time that the sheriff and his men discovered that
these people were active, I would show up in town with my cheap suit and Yankee
accent and ingratiating sales pitch. So I saw the inside of an amazing number of
Southern jails, in the most inglorious possible manner. But what I had thrust on
me in the course of that adventure was the civil rights movement of the 60's,
whether I wanted it or not. You had to come to some conclusion about civil
rights in Louisiana in the early 1960's, if only because someone would come and
shove it down your throat.

I went as a journalist to Vietnam, and obviously, as traveler and writer, I had
a subject with which it was necessary to deal. I later gave a reading at the
University of Alabama for which I got paid enough money to take myself to
Central America. I went down there in order to go diving. I always seem to be
going to these places without any higher purpose -- with a base purpose -- but
to have their significance thrust on me. And so, in the same gratuitous fashion,
I found myself in Central America.

So there has been this pattern, I think, of just being the right age or the
wrong age in the right place or the wrong place, and having the subject thrust
on me in this pursuit that began in my quest for authenticity, or whatever it
was that I was in quest of. I now realize, I guess, that growing up in New York
was not altogether without some use, and that I was in a way traveling even
then, because -- if you think about what cities are like, and what the novel is
like -- the rise of the novel, I suppose, and the rise of the modern city go
very closely together. You have that sense, in a city, of an infinite series of
circles that somehow connect. You have this sense of ongoing story. You have the
city as character. But you also have this sense of an infinity of personality,
an infinity of individuated lives -- tremendously fascinating. So there are
things that -- moving, looking at things from the outside, which is the
condition of the traveler -- there is a way in which that is a paradigm of the
writer's life, because the writer is always, in a certain way, an observer as
well as a participant. And even to the degree that the character and essence,
the role, of observer, can be cultivated beyond the role of participant, the
essential experience, I think, of writing and traveling both is a kind of
picture that can be made -- the sense of going through a town and looking at the
town from a train window, seeing a lighted house, imagining the life inside,
being glad you aren't part of it, at the same time envying it, coveting it,
rejecting it, looking out at the passing scene. That is traveling and writing
both.

WILLIAM STYRON: I'm not a traveler by choice. I hate traveling in general. I
really do. And yet I don't want to be totally frivolous about this, because I
have done a great deal of traveling over my years, and some of it has been
enormously rewarding, and some of it has found its way into my work. What Bob
Stone said about seeing a light in a dwelling somewhere, and wondering about
those lives, is, I think, a very compelling thought, because I do believe a
great deal of the writing of travel and traveling itself has to do with intense
romanticism. It has to do with an intense desire to entwine one's own
imagination with the lives of others. And I've experienced this.

It seems to me that there's an intense and romantic glamour about travel which
trails one throughout the rest of one's life, and I have been trying to deal
with this experience in fiction. I've accumulated many notes and written quite a
few pages on this experience. I think it will eventually become a novella. What
I'd like to do, too, is to mention an earlier romantic vision I had at the age
of 13. And it constitutes the first page of a novel I've been working on for
some time. And I thought I'd read it to you as another demonstration of the
romantic longing about travel.

"Elobey, Annobon and Corisco. These form a group of small islands off the west
coast of Africa in the Gulf of Guinea. And I thought about them over and over
again toward the end of World War II when I was waiting for battle on Saipan,
which is at the western edge of the Pacific Ocean, halfway around the world from
Elobey, Annobon and Corisco. During the philatelic period of my late childhood,
a period whose ardor succeeded my passion for raising carrier pigeons, I had
come upon a moderately rare stamp from Elobey, Annobon and Corisco. By
moderately rare, I mean that the Scott catalogue priced the one that I owned, a
used specimen, at $2.75, which in those Depression days was a large enough sum
to make a small boy's stomach squirm pleasurably, totally apart from the
esthetic pleasure of the stamp itself. A note in my stamp album revealed that
Elobey, Annobon and Corisco was under the governance of Spain, more
specifically, Spanish Guinea. The stamp portrayed a 'vignette,' as Scott always
described the world's scenic views of a mountain peak and palm trees and fishing
boats in a tropical harbor. The general coloration was green and blue, or,
according to Scott, with its painterly precision -- viridian and aquamarine --
and there was a title beneath -- Los Pescadores. Keen-eyed, I had no trouble
picking out the fishermen themselves, who were Negroes and wore white turbans
and were busy at work tending their nets against a backdrop of aquamarine harbor
and viridian mountains, behind which the sun was either rising or setting. There
were other stamps in my collection that I greatly admired -- a huge Greek
airmail with gorgeous pastel facets rather like stained glass, a gaudy number
from Guatemala featuring a quetzal bird with streaming tail feathers, a glossy
octagonal from Hejaz festooned with Arabic script, a Nyasaland triangle shaped
to accommodate spindly-legged giraffes. But none so arrested my imagination or
so whetted my longing for faraway places as the one from that archipelago whose
name itself was an incantation -- Elobey, Annobon and Corisco."

BANKS: I have a question to pose, Jan. Now that you are a writer who travels
rather than, as you began, a traveler who became a writer, presumably you travel
to discover. I find myself traveling for self-revelation; I reveal myself to
myself in transit. Stone seemed to be saying he travels to discover
authenticity. Bill Styron seemed to say he traveled, at least acquired in
traveling, wonderful visions, he discovered wonders. What would you say you
discover in travel?

MORRIS: I do more and more realize that all my travel has been rather
egotistically self-revelatory. And the more I read old pieces of mine, I see
that they are, of course, partly portraits of places, but very largely, I have
to say, a portrait of myself, for better or for worse. And I suppose that's true
of the novelist, too, but perhaps even more so of the more explicit travel
writer.

BANKS: Bob, I wondered if you could tell how the discipline of travel -- because
it is a particular way of being in the world that is not like how you are any
other time in your life -- informs the discipline of writing?

STONE: When one travels, I think one spends a lot of time imagining. I think you
think of yourself as observing, but what you're doing is not something
objective. The idea of observation suggests something distant or at least
something cold, something done in cold blood. But observation, in reality, is
not like that, observation is something warmblooded, something active and vital,
something you impose, in a way, you impose on a place.

To write fiction is to make moral observations, it's to judge. To travel is also
to judge. One is always applying a scale, one is always measuring up what one is
seeing. There's a constant act of discrimination and judgment going on. You're
trying to get on top of a place, you're trying to become part of it. You're also
trying to make it become part of you, you're trying to coexist with it. Writing
is a similar procedure inasmuch as this constant judgment and imagination are
taking place.

BANKS: I've found that travel is an enormously humbling experience. My own
writing life turned around radically when I went and lived in a foreign country
and lived in a black country. I found myself paying extraordinarily close
attention to people who -- because they were black, because they were foreign
and because they were culturally radically different from me in other ways -- I
would never pay attention to at home.

And at one point I realized, gee, these are carpenters and upholsterers and car
mechanics and plumbers, and if I paid half the attention to the plumbers and
upholsterers and carpenters that I grew up with in New Hampshire, I'd be a hell
of a writer.

MORRIS: Then I'm surprised you novelists bother to travel.

BANKS: Well, we need to be humbled, I think.

STONE: We need to be frightened.

STYRON: We need to be inconvenienced.

BANKS: How do we end up telling the difference between simply the telling of
wonders and literature? Is that possible?

STYRON: It has to do with imagination, doesn't it? It has to do with a man's
perception of some ineffable mystery involving himself, involving place,
involving the mystery of existence, perhaps. I think that's what differentiates
Joseph Conrad from the man or woman who writes for a travel magazine. It has to
do with poetry, it seems to me.

AUDIENCE MEMBER: This is specifically to Bob Stone. I was wondering what makes
one choose to give fictional names to real places in a work of fiction. I'm
thinking, obviously, of "A Flag for Sunrise." What made you choose not to name
the real country?

STONE: I think to write that book I needed a country that I knew intimately, in
fact, a country that I knew better than anyone else in the world, and in order
to be the world's foremost authority on this particular Central American
country, I had to invent it. It's also fun to make up a country.

MORRIS: I've always abided by E. M. Forster's advice, who said that the best way
to look at the city of Alexandria was to wander aimlessly around. But having
said that, having wandered aimlessly for a lifetime, I realized a few years ago
that I hadn't really, truly, understood any of the cities, in particular, that I
described. I'd wandered so aimlessly that I really had no idea of the underlying
forces -- economic or political or social or even kind of spiritual -- which ran
them. And so I wrote a novel myself about a city which I made up. I made up a
city in which a character not unlike myself breezed in, commissioned by some
lavish American magazine, to write a series of essays. And in the course of this
book the narrator, who is about as bumptious as I am, slowly realizes that she
doesn't know actually what is happening. And that the city, like life itself, is
far, far more labyrinthine than we realized at first.

In this book, which turned into a kind of allegory, the character gets herself
more and more involved in a weblike misunderstanding of things going on, and it
ends in a calamity. And I thought the allegory was perfectly simple, it was the
allegory of a maze, of life's difficulties and confusions, of how as you get old
you realize how complex it all is. And I wrote the book, and it was published as
"Last Letters From Hav." Ever since then, I've been having people writing to me
to say how do you get to Hav, do you need a visa, and believe it or not, I even
had a letter from the map room of the Royal Geographical Society. So much for
allegory.

LOAD-DATE: August 18, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Jan Morris (Jerry Bauer); Russell Banks (Jerry Bauer) (pg. 23);
William Styron (Eric Einblatt); Robet Stone (Susan Ferguson) (pg. 24)

TYPE: Interview

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              119 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 18, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

New & Noteworthy

BYLINE: By GEORGE JOHNSON

SECTION: Section 7; Page 28; Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 893 words


TWENTY-ONE SELECTED STORIES, by Ward Just. (Ivy, $5.95.) In one of these short
stories by the former reporter Ward Just, a Boston lawyer, nearing 50, looks
back at the summer of 1955, when he and a rebellious girl named Swan fell in
love with the Edward Hoppers at the Art Institute of Chicago. "Ward Just's
stories go beyond colorful journalism," Herbert Mitgang said in The Times last
year. "They have something vital to say about our striving, sometimes
disappointing style of life. He has emerged as one of the most astute writers of
American fiction."

WALTER WINCHELL: A Novel, by Michael Herr. (Vintage, $9.) In a novel written in
the form of a screenplay, Michael Herr tells the story of America's most
powerful gossip columnist. "What Mr. Herr must have realized was that the trite
devices, jazzy rhythms and copious dialogue of an old-fashioned film script were
perfect for Winchell's story," Judith Rascoe said here last year. The book
"evokes the same ghostly feelings we get while watching a 40's movie today -- of
actors vigorously alive in an immortal present tense, yet more inaccessible than
creatures in a fairy tale." Vintage has also reissued Mr. Herr's DISPATCHES
($10). In 1977 our reviewer, C. D. B. Bryan, called it "the best book to have
been written about the Vietnam War."

THE SECOND WAR, by G. C. Hendricks. (Penguin, $7.95.) Shot down over Laos, a
preacher's son comes face to face with a dark side he didn't know. This novel is
"both a very good and a very important book," Susan Fromberg Schaeffer said here
last year.

WHERE IS HOME? Living Through Foster Care, by E. P. Jones. (Four Walls Eight
Windows, $9.95.) Abandoned by an alcoholic mother, the author was raised in some
of the private homes and institutions that make up New York's foster care
system. "In finding the boldness of spirit not to reject herself she performs
the first act of artful self-creation," Kelly Cherry said here last year. "We
rejoice with her when she writes that she has a child who 'can claim something I
never had: a mother who is sober and stable.' "

KILLING MISTER WATSON, by Peter Matthiessen. (Vintage, $11.) Those who didn't
know him better thought Edgar J. Watson, an entrepreneur who lived in the
Everglades a century ago, was a model citizen, but when he was drunk he bragged
of having killed 57 men. Based on a true story, this is Peter Matthiessen's
"most impressive novel," Ron Hansen said here last year, "a fiction in the
tradition of Joseph Conrad, as fiercely incisive as the work of Sinclair Lewis,
a virtuoso performance that powerfully indicts the heedlessness and hidden
criminality that are part and parcel of America's devotion to the pursuit of
wealth, to its cult of financial success." Vintage has also reissued ON THE
RIVER STYX: And Other Stories ($9), many of which Mr. Matthiessen wrote at the
beginning of his career. In 1989 our reviewer, Thomas R. Edwards, said the
collection "fascinatingly suggests some of the history of a splendid writer's
imagination."

IN CONFIDENCE: Four Years of Therapy, by Roberta Israeloff. (Penguin, $8.95.)
After the birth of her first child, the author went to a therapist to try to
find out what was missing in her life. Last year our reviewer, Andrea Cooper,
called this account of the sessions "an exhilarating portrait of the therapeutic
process as a way to discover life's abundance."

A SENSIBLE LIFE, by Mary Wesley. (Penguin, $8.95.) At a resort in Brittany, a
10-year-old English girl named Flora becomes infatuated with three young men,
entangling herself in a web of relationships that will last throughout her life.
Last year our reviewer, Ellen Pall, said that although "the fun begins to wind
down" as Flora grows older, "young Flora is a delightful heroine -- observant,
honest, secretive, a bit awkward -- and Ms. Wesley's prose is spiced with cloves
of Noel Cowardish repartee."

THE FOUR WINDS: A Shaman's Odyssey Into the Amazon, by Alberto Villoldo and Erik
Jendresen. (HarperSanFrancisco, $9.95.) A California psychotherapist becomes a
disciple of a Peruvian shaman and the hallucinogenic plant ayahuasca. Last year
our reviewer, Bradd Shore, said "the narrative has the feel of an Indiana Jones
thriller. . . . Midway between science and literature, 'The Four Winds' is a
flight of serious fancy, confounding our categories of fiction and nonfiction."
In THE MYTHOLOGY OF SOUTH AMERICA (Quill/Morrow, $9), John Bierhorst examines
the stories used by the various tribes on the South American continent to make
sense of their demanding world. "This handsome book lends itself to browsing and
reference use," Carol F. Drisko said here in 1988, "but reading straight through
allows the great themes and patterns to emerge more clearly."

THE BOY WHO WOULD BE KING, by Earl Greenwood and Kathleen Tracy. (Signet,
$5.99.) The son of an alcoholic mother and a father who kept landing in jail,
Elvis Presley, according to the authors, was a profoundly insecure child
tormented by poverty and emotional abuse. Last year our reviewer, Andrea Cooper,
said: "With its thoughtful, honest commentary, this biography hits readers with
the force of truth -- at least as Earl Greenwood, Elvis's cousin, close friend
and press agent, sees it. . . . He and Ms. Tracy help readers care about a
fellow human being many other writers have reduced to a cartoon."

LOAD-DATE: August 18, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Michael Herr (Don McCullin)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              120 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 18, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

From Shakespeare to Hollywood

BYLINE: By BRUCE WEBER

SECTION: Section 2; Page 11; Column 1; Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1831 words


Kenneth Branagh doesn't look particularly like a leading man, but he is inclined
to cast himself as one both on- and off-stage, on- and off-screen. The
Belfast-born Mr. Branagh, a Shakespearean actor and director with a precociously
long resume, is small and pleasant-faced, without the implacable bearing of a
star. On the street you'd mistake him, just 30 years old and dressed in blue
jeans and an open-collared shirt, for an earnest, tidy-looking graduate student,
perhaps, or a young suburban husband just home from work and out of his office
clothes. In conversation he's friendly, quick-witted, good at banter. And yet
there's something going on behind his forehead, an idea of himself as a central
figure that pretty much bursts out all over the place with the slightest
encouragement. This is a man, after all, who wrote his autobiography at the age
of 28.

Mr. Branagh's instinctive gall was very much noted in critical reaction to his
1989 film adaptation of "Henry V" -- the first screen treatment of Shakespeare's
play since Laurence Olivier's classic in 1944. It was Mr. Branagh's first effort
as a film director, and that he played the title role also, as Olivier did,
struck many critics as wildly audacious. In the end, though, he won most of them
over -- and received Academy Award nominations for acting and directing as well.
As Vincent Canby wrote in The Times, he "transformed what initially seemed to be
a lunatic dare into a genuine triumph."

Mr. Branagh's second film, "Dead Again," his first Hollywood production, opens
on Friday, and there is once again, it seems, a measure of swashbuckling bravado
at work. Hardly of a hifalutin artsy stripe, the film is a loopy murder mystery
that takes place in Los Angeles, partly in the 1940's and partly today. It has a
plot unrestrained by plausibility, involving reincarnation and revenge, a woman
without a memory, a tormented opera composer, a jaded reporter, a foul-mouthed
grocer who was once a psychiatrist (played by an uncredited Robin Williams) and
a hypnotist with an almost lecherous fondness for antiques. Full of hyperbolized
American types, it is also very much about the hyperbolized world of movies,
with a grandiose musical score recalling the bold strokes of Max Steiner and
Bernard Herrmann and references, verbal and visual, to American films as diverse
as "Citizen Kane" and "Edward Scissorhands."

In addition to directing, Mr. Branagh plays two central roles, the opera
composer, who in the film's 1940's prologue is put to death for allegedly
murdering his wife in a jealous rage; and Mike Church, a modern-day private eye
specializing in missing persons. Church is a chip off the traditional block of
Hollywood dicks, a character Mr. Branagh describes as "this Marlowian" -- a
reference to Philip, not Christopher -- "wise-cracking, slightly hard-boiled,
charmingly sloppy detective, someone of sufficient
vulnerability-stroke-stupidity, actually, with whom the audience could identify,
human-sized and yet in this slightly larger-than-life world."

On the surface, it's an odd project, to say the least, an attention-grabbing
change of direction in a film career that is just getting under way. But Mr.
Branagh says he feels no strain in the stretch. He did not begin going to the
theater until he was in his mid-teens, instead growing up watching and adoring
American movies on television. So the fit, he says, is not as unnatural as it
appears.

He admits, eventually, to relishing the cultural clash, using it, manipulating
it, and though he gives ample credit to the screenwriter Scott Frank and the
producer Lindsay Doran, there's a bit of mischief in his voice when he speaks of
what he feels he has accomplished, as if bending the film to his directorial
will was a lot of wicked, intellectual fun. He made sure, for instance, that the
core of the cast -- including his wife, Emma Thompson, and Derek Jacobi -- plus
the score's composer, Patrick Doyle, and the costume designer, Phyllis Dalton,
were British.

"It has to do with bringing a European sensibility to an essentially American
genre," he says. "All the cliched areas in which the film would undoubtedly
tread had to be reinvested with the delight of being in an unfamiliar genre
while surrounded by people in the American crew who felt as though they'd done
this 1,000 times."

Mr. Branagh takes evident pleasure in using words and he's got a lot to say,
even when he seems to be discovering what it is as he goes along. His
explanation of how he came to direct "Dead Again," for example, begins slowly
and prosaically, gains a rather tortuous momentum and then gallops expansively
toward a conclusion.

What he had wanted to do after "Henry V" was a screen version of Thomas Hardy's
"Return of the Native." In early 1990, when his Academy Award nominations were
announced, Mr. Branagh happened to be in Los Angeles, performing "King Lear" and
"A Midsummer Night's Dream" with the Renaissance Theater Company, the troupe he
had founded in London in 1987.

"The studios were all keen to meet me," he says. "I was in town and, you know,
at my most flavorsome. But they really didn't know what to do with me. A lot of
them admired 'Henry V' but they didn't know where that left me in relation to
Hollywood. And here I was bringing a Thomas Hardy thing to them, which in their
minds was Shakespeare, anyway."

Instead of substantive offers, he began receiving scripts. "Lots of battle
pictures," he says. "All the Vietnam pictures that never got made. Anything with
rain and fighting. Next to those were all the worthy pictures that never got
made. The life of Tolstoy. The life of Chekhov. Three lives of William
Shakespeare. They didn't appeal to me.

"But this script arrived out of the blue, and I couldn't put it down.
Immediately I was thinking of 'Dial M for Murder,' all those Hitchcock movies.
The Welles stuff. Pictures I grew up watching on television.

"The script had all the classic ingredients of a mystery thriller on a noir-ish
level. It was a good yarn, underneath which it touched lightly on the sense of
'Are we meant to be with people in relationships that we resolve from lifetime
to lifetime?' It had a theatrical size. You couldn't make this a pedestrian
thriller, because if you tried to hedge your bets it would be something that
people could pick up plot implausibilities in and analyze in a way that the
script was not asking to be judged. The Grand Guignol element of it, the stuff
that old Shakespeare touches on in things like 'Titus Andronicus,' people baked
in pies, hands chopped off, tongues cut out, a size that, macabre though it is,
is within an almost absurd frame.

"So here, when I read this script, I was astonished how my disbelief was
completely suspended and I was reminded once again of the power of a good
narrative, which was Shakespeare's supreme strength. And in this very popular
genre. I thought, 'It's great. I want to do this.' "

If Mr. Branagh gives the impression occasionally that he's about to lift off
into some cerebral stratosphere, he has an earthbound influence near at hand. He
and Emma Thompson have been married for two years. They met as working
colleagues, in 1986, on the set of "Fortunes of War," a mini-series that
eventually appeared on Masterpiece Theater. Now 32, she began her career as a
comedian -- she had her own series on British television -- but for the last
several years has largely opted for more serious roles, many as part of Mr.
Branagh's Renaissance Theater Company. She played Katherine in "Henry V" and
will appear next in the Merchant-Ivory production of E. M. Forster's "Howard's
End." Like her husband, she has two roles in "Dead Again." One is the murder
victim, the opera composer's wife; the other is Grace, the woman with no memory
whose identity Mike Church is hired to uncover. Love, of course, is kindled.

It's actually easier, on first impression, to imagine Mike and Grace as a couple
than Ken and Emma (though imagining is all that is possible because they refuse
to be interviewed together: "We're not joined at the hip," says Mr. Branagh).
They describe a collection of opposing traits. Where he is rather compact and
squared off, she is tall with long, slender features. Where his face is
expressive, hers is a little austere.  Where he is vibrantly loquacious, she is
careful. And where he is effusive and grand, she tends toward introspection, and
even self-deprecation. Though she allows she'd like to direct a film one day,
she says she feels absolutely unprepared for it at the moment, and she prizes
good writing above all. "It's harder than acting, miles harder," she says. "A
lot of the acting is done for you with makeup and costumes. It's such a
practical matter, acting."

Indeed, speaking about the film, Ms. Thompson is more practical, and more
revealing, than her husband about the details of craft, describing not an
instinctive vision but a process of discovery. "It was a toughie," she says of
the role of Grace. "If you've lost your memory you've lost your power to relate
to anything at all. You can't sit on a sofa and think, 'This is a little like
the material from my wedding dress.' Memories are not available to you, and you
find you have very little to say apart from 'It's cold,' 'I am hungry.' The
principle thing you discover is it produces intense loneliness. That's the major
emotion. Absolute aloneness. So I thought, 'O.K., I'll play that.' "

And then there was the matter of the American accent. "I find that Americans
tend not to express themselves ironically," she says, "at least not to the
extent that British people do. My voice has a nasal drawl." (True.) "It's
expressive of irony almost all the time. Almost all the time I sound as if I
don't actually mean what I'm saying, which is weird, because I'm an extremely
earnest person. However, these things are sent to try us.

"Anyway, when I started talking in what is laughingly known as general American,
I realized this resource was no longer available to me. It was terribly,
terribly interesting, because that veneer, that carapace, was removed and
something else took its place, something younger, slightly more vulnerable,
naive, which are not words I would associate with myself."

"Emma has a reasoning mind. She reasons with a problem," says Mr. Branagh, and
that seems about right. "She doesn't get neurotic about her work, and we don't
take it home. The husband-wife thing rarely bleeds in."

Which perhaps is a good thing. "I wanted her in 'Dead Again,' selfishly and
ruthlessly," he says, and though that sounds sort of touching, it isn't. "I knew
she would do it with the kind of brio that I would do it, and that Derek Jacobi
would do it. That was paramount, important for me to know. I'm much too ruthless
in that regard, because I can't bear working with people who are not talented."

He pauses, briefly, and a realization alights. "It sounds very arrogant to say
that, actually."

NAME: Kenneth Branagh

LOAD-DATE: August 18, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Kenneth Branagh and Emma Thompson in "Dead Again"--a lot to say
(Peter Sorel/Paramount Pictures) (pg. 11); Kenneth Branagh and Emma Thompson, at
right, watching a video of a scene from ("Dead Again" Peter Sorel/Paramount
Pictures) (pg. 16)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              121 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 18, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

WAR MEMORIALS;
'This Is All It Will Come To'

SECTION: Section 2; Page 6; Column 3; Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 260 words


To the Editor:

Vincent Scully's interpretations of the Somme memorial at Thiepval and the
Vietnam Veterans Memorial were worthy of a poet ["The Terrible Art of Designing
a War Memorial," July 14].

Certainly the monuments are alike in that they commemorate soldiers "killed . .
. literally for nothing so far as military advantage was concerned." However,
his interpretation of the Vietnam Veterans Memorial is off target because he
ignores half the memorial.

"We, the living, commune with the dead" at the wall, writes Mr. Scully. This is
too benign a view of what makes Maya Lin's black wall so fitting. The wall lies
half-buried in the national Mall, just as Vietnam lies half-buried in the
national psyche like a piece of nonlethal shrapnel, too dangerous to disturb.

Some 300 feet southwest of the wall is the other half of the Vietnam Veterans
Memorial. Some people mocked the figure group for being corny: three grunts --
Caucasian, black and Hispanic -- rendered realistically, without the stylized or
abstract agony preferred by modern esthetics. But the three soldiers form a
whole with the wall. They stare unfocused toward it as though they had looked up
when the last medevac lifted from a landing zone and seen through the swirling
dust into the future. Their postures and faces show men caught in a moment of
disbelieving surprise, as the horrible realization dawns that this is all it
will come to.

The black wall is the American public's Vietnam Veterans Memorial. The statue is
mine.

SEAN FITZPATRICK
Johnson City, N.Y.

LOAD-DATE: August 18, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              122 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 18, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

WAR MEMORIALS;
A Woman's Vision of the War

SECTION: Section 2; Page 6; Column 4; Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 365 words


To the Editor:

The differences between Sir Edwin Lutyens's monument to the dead of the Somme
and Maya Lin's Vietnam Veterans Memorial far outweigh their similarities,
visually and conceptually. While Maya Lin drew on the Thiepval monument
(specifically the long lists of names carved on its face) to defend her
controversial work through art-historical context, her own work is, in light of
the tradition of war memorials, anticanonical -- that is, antiheroic and
antitriumphal. And, yes, the Lutyens work is heroic; it is triumphal. Lutyens's
work speaks of giving up our loved ones to a cause; Maya Lin's monument speaks
only of giving up our loved ones.

We are dwarfed by the Thiepval monument, as is the sarcophagus that sits
silhouetted beneath its towering arch. We pass through this gateway of sorts and
stand on a promontory looking down on the graves of these soldiers of the Great
War. But we are not one with them. We sympathize, but can we empathize? Nothing
can compare to the interactive nature of the Vietnam Veterans Memorial.

As we descend along the path that hugs the harsh black granite, we enter the
very earth that, in another place, has accepted bodies of our sons and
daughters. Each name is carved not only in stone but, by virtue of its highly
polished surface, in our reflection, in our physical substance. We are not
observers, we are participants. We touch, we write, we leave parts of ourselves
behind. This is a woman's vision -- to commune, to interact, to collaborate with
the piece to fulfill its expressive potential.

And all who walk there are moved beyond words. (It is ironic that the bronze
"buddy" figures, cast as a compromise for those who found Maya Lin's work
unapproachable, are themselves just that -- a prickly ground cover and silly
scalloped chain that keep us at bay.)

Maya Lin has forgone the triumph of the Caesars. She has forgone the specter of
death's "empty maw." She has given us Gaea, who, pierced by the ebony scar of
suffering and death, takes back her children, as she has done since the dawn of
humanity.

LOIS FICHNER-RATHUS
Associate Professor of Art History,
Trenton State College
Trenton

LOAD-DATE: August 18, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              123 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 18, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

CONNECTICUT GUIDE

BYLINE: By Eleanor Charles

SECTION: Section 12CN; Page 11; Column 1; Connecticut Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1042 words



CLOWNING AROUND

Clowns, people interested in becoming clowns and people who are just curious
about clowns are welcome to attend all or some of the 17th Annual Northeast
Clown Convention at the Trumbull Marriott Thursday through Sunday.

The skills to be explained and demonstrated in lectures and workshops led by
professionals, will be useful at the next office party or a child's birthday
bash. Among the topics are balloon sculpture, clown makeup, character
development, costume design, puppetry, magic, juggling, prop making, skits and
circus history. Other applications of clowning relate to hospital visits and
performances at centers for retarded and disabled people and church and
synagogue fairs.

Michael Christenson, a founding member of the Big Apple Circus and of the Clown
Care Unit at Babies Hospital in New York, will be the principal speaker at a
banquet on Saturday evening. Registration begins at noon on Thursday, followed
by workshops and an evening bus trip to the Barnum Museum in Bridgeport.

Friday workshops begin at 9 A.M., with makeup and balloon competitions in the
afternoon and a circus party from 7 to 11 P.M. Workshops and competitions
continue on Saturday from 9 A.M. to 6 P.M., and a clown ministry church service
will be held on Sunday at 9 A.M. followed by a closing brunch.

Registration for one day is $25, for the entire conference the cost is $60, $40
for children. For more information call 377-3582 or 877-3869. The Marriott is at
180 Hawley Lane in Trumbull, call 378-1400 for overnight accommodations.

THREE-RING CIRCUS

The Roberts Brothers old-fashioned three-ring family circus will make two stops
in Connecticut this week. The company will present two shows today at 3 and 5
P.M. and two more Monday at 5 and 7 P.M. on the Wilton High School grounds on
Route 7. Admission will be $5.50 to $8. Call 834-5888 for reservations or more
information.

The second location will be the Consolidated School grounds in New Fairfield on
Gillotti Road and Route 39, where performances are scheduled for Tuesday at 5:30
and 7:30 P.M. Tickets are $6, $4 for children up to 14 years old, in advance by
calling 746-9561. At the gate admission will be $8, $5 for children.

The circus has a petting zoo, and children can take pony rides and elephant
rides. Clowns, trapeze artists, jugglers, magicians, trained dogs, cotton candy
and hot dogs are among the other traditional elements under the Big Top.

EXPATRIATES IN PARIS

Unusual insight into the lives of "Americans in Paris" earlier in this century
can o be gained from an exhibition of that title at the Beinecke Library at
Yale.

The exhibit is based on the recently acquired papers of Eugene and Maria Jolas,
American expatriates who met and married in Paris in 1926. Their friendships
with James Joyce, Henri Matisse, Ernest Hemingway, Gertrude Stein, T. S. Eliot,
Alexander Calder and Hart Crane, among others, are documented in letters and
photographs, and their own contributions to the world of literature and the arts
are widely covered.

Eugene Jolas, who died in 1952 at the age of 58, wrote poetry in English, French
and German and was a prolific anthologist and translator. He served with the
United States Office of War Information in New York and London during World War
II and helped the occupation forces establish a free press in Germany.

His wife, Maria, was a musician and a translator of works by Kafka and Sartre as
well as by Andre Breton, Nathalie Sarraute and Paul Valery. She founded a
bilingual school in Neuilly-sur-Seine in 1932, and from 1940 to 1946 she worked
for the French Resistance in the United States. She was an editor of Transition
magazine, founded by her husband in Paris, which ran excerpts from Joyce's
"Finnegan's Wake" before it was published. Pieces by Hemingway, Stein and Crane
were included frequently in the experimental publication. Maria Jolas, an
outspoken critic of the Vietnam war, died in 1987 at the age of 94.

A second exhibition at the Beinecke contains 50 books from the 16th and 17th
centuries in France, copiously illustrated with woodcuts, etchings and
engravings. Early editions imitate medieval manuscripts, while others show the
influence of Hans Holbein the Younger's printing techniques. French editions of
Holbein's Bible illustrations are in the display.

The story of Jason and the Golden Fleece, illustrated by Rene Boyvin and Leonard
Thiry, dated 1563, is in the Fontainbleau or Italianate style, and engravings by
Jacques Callot and Madame de Scudery embellish a 10-volume romance titled
"Artamene ou le Grand Cyrus," printed in 1649 through 1653.

Fete books depicting royal weddings, coronations and triumphal processions were
the forerunners of our television news coverage and ticker-tape parades. They
are among the most lavish items in the exhibition. Architectural studies,
allegorical art and books of hours are some of the other classifications.

Both exhibitions will remain through Oct. 5. The library, at 121 Wall Street in
New Haven, is open without charge Monday through Friday from 8:30 A.M. to 5
P.M., and in September on Saturdays from 10 A.M. to 5 P.M. For more information
call 432-2977.

RIVERFRONT PARTY

Three classes of rowboats -- recreational, racing and anything that floats --
may be entered in the third annual Rowboat Regatta on the Connecticut River in
Hartford on Saturday. Fifty boats are expected to participate in the sprints.
They will go downriver and back to the starting point at Oak Landing near the
Charter Oak Bridge, a distance of less than one mile.

Registration fees, payable at 8 A.M. in Riverside Park, range from $15 to $35
for recreational and racing classes, depending on the size and type of boat. Any
number of rowers may work the boats, and starting time is 1:20 P.M.. Homemade
boats pay a $10 entry fee and start their 250-yard race at 3 P.M. Trophies and
medals will be awarded to all winners at 5 P.M.

The regatta is the featured event in a seven-year-old Riverfront Festival that
will be in progress along the banks from 11 A.M. to 6 P.M. Admission to the
festival is free and among the attractions are boat rides, clowns, mimes, face
painters, music and food. For more information call 293-0131.

LOAD-DATE: August 18, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              124 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 18, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

WESTCHESTER GUIDE

BYLINE: By Eleanor Charles

SECTION: Section 12WC; Page 14; Column 2; Westchester Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1070 words



WEST POINT CONCERT

The United States Military Academy Band at West Point will give a concert Friday
at 7:30 P.M. on the grounds of the John Jay Homestead, on Route 22 in Katonah.
The performance is an engagement that has been repeated annually for several
years and is free. Pre-concert picnicking is permitted. The rain location is the
John Jay High School auditorium on Route 121 in Cross River.

The band's origins date to the 55 fifers and drummers from Col. Samuel Webb's
Regiment of the First Connecticut Brigade in 1778, when they crossed the Hudson
River and established a military post on the site of West Point. The military
academy was founded in 1802, and the band responded to an increasing demand for
martial music. Within 10 years it had advanced from fifes and drums to oboes,
flutes, clarinets, French horns, bugles, trumpets and bassoons.

But it was not until 1866 that the aggregation received the title of United
States Military Academy Band and the designation of senior musical unit of the
United States Armed Forces.

Throughout the 20th century its prestige has expanded through appearances with
the New York Philharmonic Orchestra under the direction of Arturo Toscanini and
the American Symphony Orchestra under Leopold Stokowski. Its musicians play all
kinds of classical and popular and martial music at festivals and in concert
halls here and abroad, and they regularly give concerts at Lincoln Center and
Carnegie Hall in Manhattan and at Tanglewood in Lenox, Mass. Call 232-5651 for
more information.

LANFORD WILSON'S LATEST

Lanford Wilson's new play will be presented tonight in a staged reading at
Lucille Lortel's White Barn Theater in Westport. "Redwood Curtain" is the title,
referring to the stream of Vietnam veterans who have dropped out of society and
retreated into the California woods behind a so-called redwood curtain.

The single performance, directed by Marshall W. Mason, begins at 8 P.M. Tickets
are $30. The theater is on Newtown Turnpike, off Exit 41 of the Merritt Parkway,
or Exit 16 of the Connecticut Turnpike. The box office is (203) 227-3768.

Mr. Wilson's drama revolves around three characters: a concert pianist who is
the daughter of a Vietnamese mother and an American veteran of the Vietnam War,
a man in California whom she believes to be her father and the aunt with whom
she lives in a California redwood forest owned by the aunt's family.

The play is performed in one act of about 90 minutes. Produced by the Circle
Repertory Theater in Manhattan, it is scheduled for a run at the Seattle
Repertory Theater in January, the Annenberg Center in Philadelphia in early
spring and on Broadway in May.

POETS COMPARED

Gloria Donen Sosin, a specialist in Russian literature, will lecture on the
parallels between the lives and work of two major Russian poets, Boris Pasternak
and Joseph Brodsky, on Tuesday at 7:30 P.M. in the White Plains Public Library.

"I chose to talk about Brodsky because he was named United States Poet Laureate
this year, and Pasternak lived a similar life, although he was much older," she
said. "Both men won Nobel Prizes, both were reviled by the Soviets and both are
now celebrated in their homeland as they are elsewhere."

She noted that Mr. Brodsky, during his yearlong tenure as Poet Laureate, "would
like to bring poetry to the American masses -- at the checkout counters of
supermarkets if necessary." He won the Nobel Prize for poetry in 1987 when he
was 47 years old, the youngest recipient in the history of the literature award.

His exile from Russia was an alternative to returning to prison as a parasite --
a poet without a steady job, according to Ms. Sosin's account of his trial. He
came to the United States in 1972 and is now an American citizen living in
Greenwich Village.

Pasternak was not permitted to travel to Sweden when he won the 1958 Nobel Prize
for literature for his novel "Dr. Zhivago" and for his poetry. He died two years
later. His house in Peredelkino, a writer's colony outside Moscow, has been
restored as a museum, and his 100th anniversary was noted there last year.

Ms. Sosin holds a master's degree in Russian language and literature from
Columbia University, and she has taught Russian at Scarsdale High School,
Greenwich High School and Hunter College in Manhattan.

The library is at 100 Martine Avenue in downtown White Plains.

CIRCUS COMES TO WILTON

Roberts Brothers old-fashioned three-ring family circus will present two shows
today, at 3 and 5 P.M., and two more Monday, at 5 and 7 P.M., on the Wilton High
School grounds on Route 7 in Connecticut. Admission will be $5.50 to $8. Call
(203) 834-5888 for reservations or more information.

No wild caged animals are used by the Roberts Brothers. There is a petting zoo
and an opportunity for children to take pony rides and elephant rides. Clowns,
trapeze artists, jugglers, magicians, trained dogs, cotton candy and hot dogs
are among the other traditional elements under the big top.

FREE DAY AT BOSCOBEL

The usual admission fee at Boscobel in Garrison-on-Hudson is $5; $4 for the
elderly and $2.50 for children. But in observance of the 30th anniversary of its
rescue from a wrecker's ball, Boscobel has designated Saturday as a free day for
all who present proof of Westchester residency. From 9:30 A.M. to 5 P.M. guided
45-minute tours will be conducted, and the grounds will be open for strolling
and picnicking.

Boscobel was begun in 1804 and completed in 1808 by States Dyckman, a wealthy
landowner, in the town of Montrose. An outstanding example of Federal
architecture, the mansion was about to be demolished in the 1950's when a group
of Garrison citizens, led by Benjamin Frazer, joined with Lila A. Wallace,
co-founder of the Reader's Digest, to save it and move it to its present
location on 40 acres overlooking the Hudson River.

Its nine spacious rooms, large reception halls and small dressing rooms are
furnished with New York Federal antiques. Some of the silver and Wedgwood china
were imported by the Dyckmans from England, and the bills of sale have been
preserved. Chairs belonging to the family of Elizabeth Corne Dyckman, States's
wife, are among the furnishings.

Outdoors there are a series of formal gardens, an herb garden and an apple
orchard. Boscobel is on Route 9D, eight miles north of the Bear Mountain Bridge.
Call 265-3638 for more information.

LOAD-DATE: August 18, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              125 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 18, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Japan Deports Chinese but Others Are Hopeful

BYLINE: By STEVEN R. WEISMAN,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 7; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 632 words

DATELINE: TOKYO, Aug. 17


Japan has deported another group of Chinese seeking to stay here, including a
Chinese woman who sought political asylum. But lawyers for Chinese dissidents
here say they are still hopeful that students who may face political persecution
in China will be allowed to stay in Japan.

But the lawyers said they were somewhat shaken by Japan's abrupt decision on
Wednesday to deport the 62 Chinese, sending them from the southern city of
Nagasaki to Shanghai on a chartered Chinese plane. They called on the Government
to provide a fuller explanation of its actions.

Nearly 2,900 refugees from China and Vietnam have arrived in boats in Japan
since 1989, and the Government has insisted that they be sent back, saying they
are seeking jobs, not political freedom. Of these, 2,425 have been sent back,
including the 62 on Wednesday.

The latest deportations drew particular attention because they came after Prime
Minister Toshiki Kaifu had spent several days in China, toasting
Japanese-Chinese friendship as the first leader of a major industrial democracy
to visit China since the crackdown on the democracy movement at Tiananmen Square
in 1989.

Under Mr. Kaifu, Japan has resumed its aid to China and sought to plead
Beijing's case that it not be "isolated" because of its human rights violations.
Japanese business executives are also eager to see ties resume to protect and
increase trade and investments.

Japan has been severely criticized by human rights groups for its handling of
Chinese students. Asia Watch, based in the United States, said last year that
Japan had "forcibly repatriated" dissidents, impeded their access to lawyers and
shown hostility to their political concerns.

Among those deported on Wednesday was Lin Guizhen, 24 years old, who had fought
deportation because she said she had taken part in the pro-democracy protests in
1989 at Tiananmen Square in Beijing before the Chinese Government's crackdown.

But Japanese officials, explaining her expulsion, said today that she fell into
a different category from the Chinese students in Japan who engaged in
anti-Government protests at the time of the Tiananmen crackdown, in that she
arrived by boat with so-called "economic refugees" in December 1989.

"This lady is not a political refugee," a Japanese official said. "She was not a
student in Japan. She arrived with 230 other people on the same boat."

According to Asia Watch, 15,000 Chinese students were in Japan last year, and
48,000 more were in language schools, the largest number in any country outside
of China. But in recent months, news reports have focused on about 70 or 80
students who are seeking political asylum.

Status Is Precarious

Supporters of this group say that although Japan has promised to deal with them
case by case and has not forced them back, their status is very precarious and
they cannot find employment. Some supporters of the students said recently that
progress had been made on their status.

A Government official, asking not to be identified, said today that a first
group of 23 students would probably be given formal political asylum soon. And a
lawyer for the students said asylum might be granted to more than this first
group.

"We are convinced that we are making progress with other students," said
Katsutoshi Fujimori, a Tokyo lawyer supporting the Chinese students. "If we
don't make progress, we will have to raise our voices again." He said the case
of Ms. Lin did not discourage him, although he opposed her deporation.

Supporters of Ms. Lin said today that she was in danger of being persecuted when
she returned home to China, and that she and other refugees also had political
motives because they were seeking freedom. They said Japan was belittling their
cause unfairly.

LOAD-DATE: August 18, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              126 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 18, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

U.S. IS ENCOURAGED BY HANOI CABINET

BYLINE: By CLIFFORD KRAUSS,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 9; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 881 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 17


A major Cabinet reorganization in Vietnam has improved the prospects for
settling the Cambodian civil war and accelerating the thaw in relations with
Washington, senior Administration officials say.

American officials expressed hope that the changes in the Cabinet would reduce
tensions between Vietnam and China, particularly since the departing officials
include the Foreign Minister, Nguyen Co Thach, who has long been hostile to
Beijing.

They say a rapprochement between China and Vietnam should help the two rivals
reach a settlement in their proxy war in Cambodia, which in turn would meet the
most important condition set by the United States for opening full diplomatic
relations with Vietnam.

"The road to a comprehensive settlement in Cambodia and a normalization of
relations with Vietnam is open," said a senior Administration official who
monitors Asia. "This is the beginning of the coming to power of a new generation
in Hanoi. The question is, are we at the Andropov stage, the Chernenko stage or
the Gorbachev stage?"

4 Ministers From the South

Administration officials note that four of Vietnam's seven new ministers are
from the south and have been associated with efforts toward economic reform. The
officials say they believe the new Cabinet reflects a decision by the Communist
Party Politburo to emulate the Chinese model, in which steps to expand private
enterprise are accompanied by tight, centralized control over the nation's
politics.

Vo Van Kiet, the new Prime Minister, declared soon after his election by the
National Assembly that Hanoi and Washington must put the Vietnam War behind them
by quickly opening relations. As a token of his commitment, he promised to press
the search for American servicemen who are still unaccounted for.

The State Department publicly shrugged off Mr. Kiet's plea and demanded that
Vietnam withdraw its 5,000 remaining advisers from Cambodia as part of a peace
settlement there.

But senior Administration officials have privately praised Mr. Kiet as a
practical reformer who would work with the new Ministers of Trade and State
Planning to encourage private enterprise and open the way for loans from the
World Bank and International Monetary Fund.

New M.I.A. Office

Washington has blocked any agreements between Vietnam and the lending
institutions. But a change in that policy is now being weighed as a gesture of
appreciation for Hanoi's decision to let the Pentagon open an office in the
Vietnamese capital last month to search for American servicemen missing since
the Vietnam War.

John R. Bolton, Assistant Secretary of State for International Organization
Affairs, said he doubted that a removal of that embargo and full relations were
imminent. But he said the Cabinet changes "would seem to give more promise for
us to go forward."

Administration officials view the replacement of Mr. Thach, who is known in
diplomatic circles for his abrasiveness, as particularly significant. The
hostility that often characterized the Foreign Minister's exchanges with Beijing
officials was apparently rooted in China's invasion of Vietnam in 1979.

Mr. Thach has also bitterly criticized Beijing for supplying the Khmer Rouge
rebels fighting the Cambodian Government of Prime Minister Hun Sen, which was
installed by Vietnam.

Effect of Soviet Aid Cutoff

"A common theory in Hanoi is that the departure of Thach is a sop to the
Chinese," said Douglas Pike, director of Indochina studies at the University of
California at Berkeley, who recently visited Vietnam.

But an impression among senior Vietnamese officers that Mr. Thach was
ineffectual in securing military aid from Moscow contributed equally if not more
to his ouster, he said.

The new Foreign Minister, Nguyen Manh Cam, a former Ambassador to Moscow, is
thought to be convinced that President Mikhail S. Gorbachev will continue to cut
aid to Vietnam, and that Hanoi must therefore broaden its ties with other
countries.

There are signs that Vietnam's foreign policy is already shifting. Officials of
Thailand said Friday that Vietnam had agreed to send a delegate to Cambodian
peace talks on Aug. 26 at the Thai resort of Pattaya.

American officials hope that Vietnam will advise the Cambodian Government in
Phomn Penh to accept the installation by the end of this year of the Supreme
National Council, a reconciliation body led by Prince Norodom Sihanouk that
includes representatives of the Government, the Khmer Rouge and two other rebel
groups.

Obstacles to Peace Plan

Under a peace plan promoted by the five permanent members of the United Nations
Security Council, the Supreme National Council would help the United Nations
supervise a demobilization of the warring forces and prepare the country for
elections.

Vietnam has traditionally opposed the idea of letting Khmer Rouge
representatives re-enter Phnom Penh, a position that China contends precludes a
peaceful settlement. American officials said they hoped that China would in turn
stop sending military aid to the Khmer Rouge once it is assured that Vietnam no
longer intends to station troops in Cambodia.

American officials said they hoped Vietnam and China could agree to support the
peace plan without seeking unfair advantage for their clients.

LOAD-DATE: August 18, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              127 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 18, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 820 words



International 3-15

The lead in the hostage negotiations has been taken by the Iranian government,
which is using secret intermediaries and shuttle diplomacy to bargain for the
release of the 10 remaining Western hostages.  Page 1

A comprehensive prisoner exchange is possible because all sides want it,
Israel's chief representative to the Middle East hostage negotiations said. But
he cautioned that it would take time. 11

Freed Briton salutes hostages as he sets off 10

Lebanese amnesty clears way for Aoun to leave 13

A long, unescorted drive across Cuba produces the sense that support for Fidel
Castro remains strong in the countryside. After three decades under Castro, it
is clear that the lot of the campesino has improved. 1

Bootlegging has become big business at shops in Cairo and around the developing
world. They hawk cheap copies of the latest films, software and music to those
thirsty for Western culture and technology.

Japan deported a group of Chinese seeking to stay, including a woman who sought
political asylum. But lawyers for the dissidents say they still hope that
students who may face persecution in China can stay.  7

China attacks ex-U.S. envoy for stand on Taiwan 6

A major Cabinet shuffle in Vietnam has improved the prospects for settling the
Cambodian civil war and for accelerating the thaw in relations with Washington,
senior Administration officials say. 9

Italy broke a pledge on the Albanians and deported hundreds of refugees to their
crisis-ridden homeland across the Adriatic sea. Officials admitted that last
week's offer of sanctuary was a trick. 4

Pope tells Croats he supports them 3

Violence escalates in Northern Ireland 3

A masked gunman kills six at a mall in Australia 15

National 18-23

The huge demand for phone numbers is outpacing the supply of unassigned numbers
in urban areas. Only three new area codes remain -- and they may not be enough
for the next wave of faxes, pagers and modems.  1

Doctors infected with the AIDS virus face daily decisions about how to protect
their patients and their careers. Many say they will not follow the new
restrictive guidelines for health professionals infected with the virus. 1

The year-round schedule for schools is becoming more common, as are shorter
summer vactions. Some say the switch improves learning and can make American
education more competitive with other nations. 1

Blackhawk Journal: Museum has Berkeley's artifacts 18

News analysis: The resignations of the two top Salomon Brothers' executives has
focused new attention on the huge but little understood Treasury market and
brought new calls for its tighter regulation. 22

A Brooklyn-bred socialist in Vermont was the first genuinely indepenent
candidate to be elected to Congress since 1950. Bernie Sanders was used to being
an outsider. It is being an insider that gives him troubles. 18

Reporter's notebook: As golf duo, first family is average 18

In Tucson, it's not the heat. It's the thermometers 19

New Hampshire wants tax money again from its New England neighbors, this time
with a levy on the utilities that own the Seabrook nuclear plant. Other states
say they will go to the Supreme Court. 20

Writer trod in Faulkner's path, but tripped 21

Ruby's family finally gets gun used to kill Oswald 23

 Regional 24-32

Signs of life in New York's economy are beginning to show. Not dramatic signs,
but stirrings across a broad enough spectrum to indicate that the long free fall
in the city's economy may be finally ending. 1

Plans for a big Queens development in a city-owned parking lot were dropped.
City officials said the recession, not local opposition, killed Flushing Center,
a proposed apartment and commercial complex. 26

A kitchen worker at a Catskills hotel was charged with the murders last month of
an elderly Hasidic couple at a bungalow outside Middletown. The police said that
the "initial motive" in the attack was burglary. 24

It was his face in the newspapers, but he was not wanted in connection with
three rapes. James L. Hairston, a cabdriver, is considering whether to sue
because his picture was printed and identifed as the suspect. 24

Political talk: Civil rights balancing act 28

Local N.A.A.C.P. head calls Jeffries's speech "race baiting" 28

Five Soviet cadets attend U.S. Merchant Marine Academy 31

People who live near a crematorium at 153d Street and Riverside Drive have vowed
to shut the plant down. In an area with strong sewage odors, they say that the
fumes smell, irritate their eyes and make them cough. 32

Fresh Air Fund introduces Amish life to a Queens youth 24

Obituaries 30

Charles R. Garry, a lawyer

Arts/Reviews 47

A place for kitsch at the Smithsonian

Music: Bobby McFerrin with baton

Campus Life 35-37

Fashion 40-41

Life Style 38

Pastimes 48-52

Weddings 44-46

LOAD-DATE: August 18, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              128 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 18, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Beware the Inventive Lover

BYLINE: By Patrick McGrath;  Patrick McGrath is the author of the novel "Spider"
and co-editor, with Bradford Morrow, of a forthcoming anthology of short
fiction, "The New Gothic."

SECTION: Section 7; Page 6; Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1537 words



CLOSING ARGUMENTS
By Frederick Busch.
288 pp. New York:
Ticknor & Fields.
$19.95.

Frederick Busch's 15th book of fiction, "Closing Arguments," is a tight, dense,
dark, complicated novel about child abuse, sexual violence, war and law. It is
the story of an intense physical affair, between a lawyer named Marcus Brennan
and his client Estella Pritchett, that culminates in a superb piece of courtroom
drama. Spliced into this story, and counterpointing it to explosive effect, is
an account of Mark's capture, interrogation and torture by the Vietcong some 20
years earlier, during the war in Vietnam.

Mr. Busch weaves these threads into a complex pattern of parent-child
relationships in various states of succor and abuse. And from this pattern
issues a focused exploration of the generally inadequate means by which men and
women try to control and contain aggression. "Closing Arguments" is a
devastatingly good novel, its narrative taut, its characters etched sharp and
clear, its dialogue crisp and often very funny. The book's moral dimension is
genuinely disturbing, being in a sense the elaboration of Mark's epiphany in a
Vietnamese jungle: "All of a sudden I knew that there needn't ever be rules
anymore."

Mark, who narrates the novel, is a smart, wry, middle-aged lawyer who practices
in a small town in upstate New York. He is the husband of a woman who seems to
have gone her own way sexually, and the father of a 20-year-old daughter and a
troubled adolescent son with whom he has difficulty communicating. "I am not a
perfect father," Mark observes, "but you wouldn't call me out of touch. Hell, I
still haul half a war in here." It's because of that half a war he hauls around
inside his head that he finds himself, to his embarrassment, regarded by his
wife and neighbors as a hero.

Mark agrees to defend Estella Pritchett, a young woman accused of murdering her
lover during rough sex in a shabby motel. Estella is a tough, petite social
worker; almost immediately lawyer and client start having sex, and almost
immediately the sex involves pain: "She kissed me by biting at the corners of my
mouth, by pulling on my lower lip with her teeth. It hurt. I bit back and we
were on the bed."

The relationship shifts rapidly into that strange terrain where the edges
between pain and pleasure grow blurred and start to fuse. Simultaneously, the
emerging story of Marcus Brennan the Marine pilot, who is shot down and captured
by the Vietcong, begins to sound eerie echoes. Mark is interrogated by a small,
hard, terrifying figure called Phan Tuy. Forced to tell the story of his life
over and over again, he develops with Phan Tuy (or Phantom, as he comes to think
of him) the sort of complex relationship of dependence and attachment that can
often arise between victim and victimizer, abuser and abused. At the same time,
Mark is hinting with increasing urgency that his own childhood was disfigured by
the physical abuse of a drunken father and a miserably tormented mother.

It's not surprising, then, that Mark's relationship with a powerful, sexually
inventive woman like Estella should become quickly and strongly imbued with a
sadomasochistic flavor. Like Phan Tuy, Estella is small, hard and capable of
sudden, unexpected viciousness. A design begins to emerge from these interwoven
narratives, a three-tiered pattern of pain in sex play evoking associations with
an extended experience of torture in war, itself evocative of terrible abuse in
childhood -- power and hatred, parental and state-sanctioned, finally find
symbolic, almost ludic expression in the fiercely passionate and rapidly
intensifying sexual relationship.

And what stands against these destructive energies? What can contradict Mark's
insight that "there needn't ever be rules anymore"? Not much. The law, fallible
as it is; the common human decency that Mark aspires to in his dealings with his
wife and children; and, ironically, the efforts of dedicated social workers like
Estella Pritchett.

It is a mark of Mr. Busch's utter control of his material that these various
levels of narrative complexity serve so effectively to tighten the mesh of his
central story line, the prosecution of Estella Pritchett on a charge of murder.
There is little wasted here, little fat on the bones of what Mark calls "a very
cruel story." Nor does the author neglect to explore the bias and uncertainty
that accompany any interpretation of human activity, particularly a first-person
account. Early on, Mark tells Estella: "When we figure out what truth we're
telling, then we'll work on how to tell somebody that particular truth." This
idea resurfaces in Mark's account of Phan Tuy's relentless insistence on getting
his biography, "the new revision of the latest revision of the ongoing and never
correct life story." And it recurs after Mark's escape, during his debriefing in
Saigon, when he's told to tell the truth. "I said, 'Which truth?' 'Our truth,'
he said."

Perhaps this is one reason why the forensic novel is enjoying such a vogue these
days, because legal argumentation takes as axiomatic that "truth" is dependent
upon context and perspective, and is thus riven with ambiguity; it's a form of
relativism that's emerging in various disciplines -- journalism and narrative
history, for instance -- though it's long been a staple in fiction. In this
regard, "Closing Arguments" has much in common with John Banville's "Book of
Evidence": the novel as deposition of the self-accused.

The various narrative threads are pulled tight as "Closing Arguments" moves to
its climax in a sustained passage in the courtroom that reads wonderfully well,
in large part as a function of the brilliantly realized character of the
presiding judge. It is as Mark questions Estella, under the cranky, acerbic eye
of Judge Backus, that the final pieces of this intricate psychological
construction are slotted into place, and the story takes a terrible but perfect
-- and deeply satisfying -- twist.

There is something in this book, in its formal organization of the human
relationships and the glimpse of a terrible truth in a jungle, that suggests the
work of Joseph Conrad. A more powerful comparison, in terms of the plumbing of
the depths of familial transgression and the appalling revisiting of the past
upon the present, might be with William Faulkner. Here, for example, is Mark's
description of the weary American sergeant whose patrol finds him in the jungle:
"His eyes weren't as deadened as he might want them to be. His head was clearly
filled with too much swamp and night and killing, but he was a whole person
inside, under it. He'd just shrunk a little to make room for everything."

But, in the end, Mr. Busch's novel is derivative of nobody else's. While the
sheer pleasure it offers as well-wrought story is immense, "Closing Arguments"
draws its strength as much from its difficult, idiosyncratic moral vision, a
thing of knots and complications that traffics with despair without somehow ever
becoming truly hopeless.

'THE BEST DEFENSE IS A GOOD STORY'

While he was writing "Closing Arguments," Frederick Busch was aloofness
incarnate. He and his wife refused dinner invitations and asked friends not to
visit. The reason? Mr. Busch's desire to have the book over and done with: "I
disliked putting on this man's character."

The man in question is Marcus Brennan, the troubled lawyer-narrator of Mr.
Busch's new novel. "I wrote it in one long, sustained effort because I knew that
if I tried to write in stretches, I might put it down and never pick it up
again," Mr. Busch explained during a recent telephone call from Ireland, where
he is researching his next novel. His wife "said she was afraid to read it,
because during the writing I came home looking so demented."

Mr. Busch's brother is a lawyer, as was his father. Although Mr. Busch is a
writer and teacher (he is the Fairchild Professor of Literature at Colgate
University), he said he learned from them that "how you tell your story
determines whether you are good or bad in the eyes of the law." As Marcus
Brennan declares, "The best defense is a good story." Hence "Closing Arguments"
was informed by Mr. Busch's view of the elasticity of courtroom truth.
"Lawyers," he observed, "call that advo cacy."

Some might think writing a safer activity than practicing law, but Mr. Busch
isn't necessarily one of them. "I think it's dangerous to be a serious writer,"
he said. "Not in the sense that you are tempted to take chemicals or cut off
your ears, but that as a serious writer, you drive yourself. You go to dark
places so that you can get there, steal the trophy and get out. That is more
important than to be psychologically safe." Nevertheless, he added, "I don't
fear for my sanity. I fear for the intrusion my unsettledness may inflict on my
family."

After reading a book so concerned with lies and lying, an obvious question
looms: what was the biggest lie Mr. Busch ever told? Only the static of the
international telephone line was heard as he paused to reflect. "I'm afraid
there's nothing really significant," he answered finally. "Of course, if there
were, I wouldn't tell you." -- JOSEPH A. CINCOTTI

LOAD-DATE: August 18, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Frederick Busch (Jerry Bauer)

Drawing

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              129 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 18, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

FILM;
When Sound Is a Character

BYLINE: By JUDITH SHULEVITZ;  Judith Shulevitz writes about film for Mirabella
and The Village Voice.

SECTION: Section 2; Page 11; Column 1; Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 2091 words


A mosquito whines. WALLpaper peels off in strips with sudden, Velcro rasps. From
overhead comes a thud like an ax hitting something distressingly soft; from next
door, a laugh, a sob, the rhythmic creak of people making love. And in the
corridor outside, wind moans down the hall like devils on a high-speed chase.

This is clearly the hotel room from hell, this once-elegant dive in Los Angeles
where, in 1941, would-be screenwriter Barton Fink -- eponymous antihero of the
latest film by Joel and Ethan Coen -- holes up to fight off writer's block.
Dingy and claustrophobic, the hotel ought to be, by any conventional dramatic
standard, a very boring place. Instead, it teems with little events that
transpire inches from Barton Fink's ears or yards away, and guides viewers
either deep inside the screen image or far beyond its borders.

The vehicle for this mental transport is sound; its engineer is a
special-effects expert called, alternately, a supervising sound editor or, when
producers are doling out credits with a free hand, a sound designer. For "Barton
Fink," which stars John Turturro and John Goodman and opens Wednesday, it was
Skip Lievsay, a 38-year-old New Yorker trained as an architect, who has produced
soundtracks for the Coens ever since their first feature, "Blood Simple," in
1983. (Mr. Lievsay was also responsible for the soundtracks of such recent films
as Martin Scorsese's "Good fellas," Jonathan Demme's "Silence of the Lambs" and
Spike Lee's "Jungle Fever.")

Wielding everything from the most common to the most bizarre of noises -- Mr.
Lievsay's notes for "Barton Fink" call for "high liquid bursts," "giant weird
thunder," "distant debris hit" and "long, descending metal screech" -- sound
designers are the true abstractionists of the movies. They suffuse scenes with
sound images that sometimes bear only the most tangential relationship to the
things they bring to life -- and often, not even that. The simple clank of an
old-fashioned elevator door being pulled shut might be a synthesis of five
different elevator noises, plus the crash of a train leaving the station, as it
is in "Barton Fink."

A trip to a basement can become an experience of unbridled horror, as it did for
the F.B.I. agent Clarice Starling in "The Silence of the Lambs." To accompany
her descent into the killer's lair, Mr. Lievsay used the sound of rain falling
in an Amazonian forest, slowed to an eerie occasional plink and then distorted
electronically. He capped the journey with the shriek of an oil rig crane, the
barking of seals and the howling of wolves. "A wolf pack was the signature
atmosphere of the killer's apartment," Mr. Lievsay explained.

Actual or distorted bangs, burps, ricochets, yelps and roars are, moreover, only
the base coat of a sound designer's sonic paint job. Musical score and dialogue
aside, the noises an audience is most likely to notice are perfectly mundane --
ambient sounds taped on the set or location, and "Foleys" added after the
picture has been edited. The latter, named after Ed Foley, a sound technician at
Universal Studios, re-create the humdrum babble of everyday life -- the slaps,
the footsteps, the jangle of keys, the chewing of food. Foleys are produced by
Foley artists, people trained to wring sound from the surfaces and props in a
specially stocked studio. (Foley stage floors lift up to reveal patches of
marble, cement, sand and piles of crumpled quarter-inch tape that, when stepped
on, sound like fallen leaves.)

The art of the sound designer or supervising sound editor lies in fusing all
three elements -- the sounds made during production (like dialogue), Foleys and
sound effects -- into what may seem like a single integrated aural experience
but in fact contains many shades. On "Blue Velvet," for example, the sound
designer Alan Splet divided the movie into two worlds of sound: the bright,
chipper workaday world inhabited by Jeffrey, the character played by Kyle Mac
Lachlan, and the dark underworld inhabited by Frank (Dennis Hoppper). The
latter, Mr. Splet filled with ominous industrial noises that lacked any apparent
source.

Isn't all this, a skeptic might ask, subliminal manipulation? Of course it is;
in American film, at least, that's almost always been the point. "Sound," as one
designer, Walter Murch, put it, "crosses the Berlin wall of consciousness
without alerting the border guards." Characters in movies by film makers like
Jean-Luc Godard may stop a scene to demand, quizzically, "Where is that music
coming from?" But Mr. Murch believes that the less the sound is noticed, the
more powerful it becomes.  It should facilitate "a simultaneous leap of the
audience through the membrane of the screen, sort of like Alice through the
looking glass, and of the film into the audience, like a dream the audience is
having."

That ideal -- what film theorists call "transparency" -- may account for the
absence of sound designers at the larger banquet table of film glory. (There
isn't an Academy Award for sound design; the Oscar goes to editors.) Directors
of photography and production designers have long had the pleasure of seeing
their names in the "head credits," the titles that roll before the movie begins.
Sound specialists, on the other hand, rarely enjoy similar treatment.

Ever since Thomas Alva Edison first tried and failed, in the 1890's, to market
the combined Kinetoscope and Gramophone he called a Kinetophonograph (it took
some 20 years to get it outside of peep-show parlors), cinematic sound has
suffered from bad public relations. The public image of sound didn't catch up
with the public image of pictures until 1927, when Al Jolson in "The Jazz
Singer" pronounced one of the first lines in a talkie feature -- "Wait a minute,
wait a minute, you ain't heard nothing yet!" -- and audiences stood up and
cheered.

Critics would nonetheless spend the next half century mourning the lost
magnificence of the visual image. The soundtrack, meanwhile, didn't come into
its own until the 1970's. It took the mavericks of the New Hollywood Cinema,
Robert Altman and the first class of film school graduates (Martin Scorsese,
George Lucas and Francis Coppola) to grasp movies' aural potential and cultivate
a generation of sound auteurs.

Mr. Murch, who gained renown working on films by Mr. Coppola, is generally
considered to be the first sound designer. The title did not appear next to his
name until the Vietnam epic "Apocalypse Now" (1979). That film is known for the
spectacular sound effects -- dreamlike helicopter blade whooshes, the alarmingly
realistic rat-a-tat-tat of AK-47's and M-16's -- that Mr. Murch wove in and out
of five speakers, as well as for the sound cocoons with which Mr. Murch
re-created the hero's state of mind, as he fades from, and returns to, the here
and now. But Mr. Murch actually began designing soundtracks 10 years before, on
an earlier film by Mr. Coppola, "The Rain People" (1969), a road movie about a
depressed housewife and a mentally disabled hitchhiker.

"Until that point in Hollywood, film sound production had been divided up into
different blocks," said Mr. Murch. Given the division of labor between the
various sound technicians -- the person who records the sound during filming,
the editor who cuts the picture, the Foley artist, the sound-effects person and
the final mixer -- when problems arose, said Mr. Murch, everybody tended to
point a finger at everybody else. For "The Rain People," Mr. Coppola put Mr.
Murch in charge of the entire crew, with final say over what went where. "The
idea was to have the overall sound be the responsibility of one person, in the
same sense that the look of the film is the responsibility of the director of
photography," said Mr. Murch.

It was not Mr. Murch but Ben Burtt, a recent film school graduate, who in 1977
was the first to actually receive screen credit as a sound designer. Mr. Lucas
hired him to spend an entire year collecting "wild" or original sound for a
science-fiction extravaganza that was in the works. The movie was "Star Wars"
(1977). Mr. Lucas also allowed Mr. Burtt an additional year to supervise the
integration of those zooms, squawks, thumps and synthesized languages into the
soundtrack. "Science fiction films had generally been associated with electronic
noises," Mr. Burtt said. "We wanted real motor sounds, rusty clanky things, to
create the sense of a used world."

Nowadays, however, two years is an unheard of length of time for sound designers
to spend fashioning a soundtrack. Most soundtracks are mixed late in a film's
post-production cycle, after the picture has been cut. And if the producers have
fallen behind schedule, the sound editing process is often viewed as an
opportunity to cut corners. "What they'll do is have several crews working
simultaneously instead of one crew imposing one vision on the film," said Mr.
Burtt. Added Gary Rydstrom, the sound designer for "Backdraft" and "Terminator
2," "Films in which we would have spread the job out over six or seven months,
we're now doing in three."

Mr. Lievsay had only about five months to produce the soundtrack for "Barton
Fink," which he did in his New York studio. But his longstanding relationship
with the Coen brothers meant that he knew what they would and would not be
willing to hear. He also benefited from the Coen brothers' heightened awareness
of film form. "For them, sound is an untapped, fertile canvas," he said. "I
think they really have fun with it."

According to Joel Coen, "We had this idea that the hotel should be like an
abandoned ghost ship," with sound used to advance the narrative. "The ambition
of the story is to try to center the audience in Barton's point of view, inside
that room, and one of the ways of doing that is putting it in his aural point of
view," Mr. Coen said.

In Hollywood, on the other hand, the assembly line approach to sound can yield
what many designers view as the fiasco of the soundtrack for "Days of Thunder."
In that film, they say, the revving of racing car engines drowns out everything
else. Mr. Burtt calls it "the trend toward overload."

"Terminator 2" is perceived by the sound design community as an exception to
this rule; the soundtrack is clear, distinct, at times even funny. How did Mr.
Rydstrom manage it? According to him, the director James Cameron "really wanted
to focus in on certain things. Normally we would have given him layers of sound.
He really wanted us to pick and choose our sounds." Among those sounds was the
noise made when the more advanced terminator, an android fashioned of liquid
metal, changed shapes.

"That's a prime example of how low-tech methods are used to produce high-tech
sounds," said Mr. Rydstrom. "That's the sucking sound you get when you turn a
can of dog food over and let the food come out."


SOUNDS LIKE . . .

The sounds a movie audience hears are often produced in unusual ways. Here are
some of the acoustic elements used in "Barton Fink" by Skip Lievsay, the
supervising sound editor.

SINK DRAIN: The seashell-like noise as the camera goes down the bathroom drain
was called, in Mr. Lievsay's notes, the " 'Blue Velvet' sounds." He was
referring to a moment in the David Lynch film in which the camera descends into
an ear. The sound effects in "Barton Fink," starring John Turturro (in
photograph), were a combination of traffic noises and the groans of plumbing.

MOSQUITO HUM: Mr. Lievsay used a real mosquito sound, but was unable to
re-create its perspective -- what physicists call the Doppler effect -- as it
circled Barton Fink. So he played the mosquito's buzz on two tiny speakers
mounted on a stick and waved the stick in front of a microphone. "We called it
the bug stick," he said.

CORRIDOR WHOOSH: To create the sound of rushing wind as Barton Fink opened his
hotel room door, Mr. Lievsay jimmied the air lock to his sound studio and
recorded the sound it made when he tried to close the door. He then added a tape
he happened to have of the wind whining under a door at a Holiday Inn motel.

WRESTLERS HITTING MAT: The whomps were actually "a big cement mixer filled with
stones," and, "for when the wrestlers were slammed to the mat," pieces of metal
crashed together.

FIRE: Joel and Ethan Coen, the directors, hit upon the idea of distancing the
fire by making Barton Fink's room sound as if it were underwater. Mr. Lievsay
called Blake Leyh, who did the sound effects for "The Abyss," to borrow the
pings that Mr. Lievsay called "underwater ricochets."

LOAD-DATE: August 18, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: The once-grand lobby in "Barton Fink"--The film makers wanted
the hotel to have the sights and sounds of an abandoned ghost ship. (Melinda Sue
Gordon/20th Century Fox) (pg. 1)
The Vietnam epic "Apocalypse Now" featured helicopter blade whooshes and the
rat-a-tat of AK-47's. (United Artists); Skip Lievsay, "Barton Fink" sound
editor, at his New York studio (Don Hogan Charles/The New York Times) (pg. 14)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              130 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 18, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

He Knew How to Blow Things Up

BYLINE: By Edward Hower;  Edward Hower is the author of two novels and, most
recently, "The Pomegranate Princess," a book of folk tales he collected in
India.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 9; Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1044 words



THE NIGHT TRAVELLERS
By Elizabeth Spencer.
366 pp. New York: Viking. $21.95.

Another wave of nostalgia for the 1960's seems inevitable. As the recession of
the 90's deepens, as the post-Iraq "new world order" becomes increasingly
difficult to maintain, we may be tempted to escape into reveries about an era
when life seemed simpler and more prosperous. The nostalgia will be marketed in
psychedelic colors to blur the political issues over which we agonized 25 years
ago. We'll be urged to believe that the antiwar protesters were romantic, though
misguided, figures from the past whose slogans were indistinguishable from the
lyrics of Beatles songs. To resist the hype, we're going to need reports from
people who clearly remember the Vietnam War era, and who know that swallowing
myths about our military history can lead to our having to repeat its disasters.

Many good novelists have written about the war in Vietnam itself, but Elizabeth
Spencer, in "The Night Travellers," is one of the few who have dealt with the
lives of the civilians who resisted the conflict. It's always hard to write
about political idealists -- especially those on the left -- without sounding
condescending or preachy, but Ms. Spencer succeeds in making her antiwar
protesters plausible. Both their courage and their flaws make them sympathetic
characters.

Jeff, a graduate student from the Louisiana backwoods, learned about the seamier
aspects of capitalism when, as an oil rig worker, he was duped by his boss into
blowing up his company's property for the insurance money. Years later, he uses
his demolition skills to damage a California munitions factory in an attempt to
cripple the war effort. In between these experiences, he marries Mary, an
apolitical dance student from a "good" North Carolina family, and fathers a
child. He also makes a name for himself as a guerrilla journalist and a
dissident. He and Mary become "pilgrim wanderers . . . homeless, trusting, lost
and innocent."

Ms. Spencer's accounts of the militants' rap sessions and correspondence capture
the charged atmosphere that hangs over their lives as oppressively as the clouds
of tear gas and the roar of police helicopters hovering above their protest
rallies. As the war grinds on, political commitment loses its romance.
Protesters go underground, sacrificing their careers and sometimes their
families as well.

Becoming a fugitive, Jeff finds that he no longer has a choice about which is
more important to him, his cause or his family. His ability to continue working
for the movement while on the run and also to maintain his ties to his wife is a
kind of triumph for him. But Mary and their daughter, Kathy, pay a high price
for his idealism. Stranded in Canada when Jeff goes underground, Mary must
depend on the support of a succession of well-meaning friends to survive.

Mary's mother, Kate, has never approved of her daughter's marriage and keeps
trying to control Mary, to lure her back to the United States, in Jeff's
absence. Kate is a scientist with no qualms about killing lab animals in her
war-related research. She cannot forgive Jeff when his organization destroys her
laboratory and, indirectly, her career.

Mary's only desires are to be true to her husband and to continue her career as
a dancer. But neutrality in these times is impossible. She becomes the pawn of
both the left and the right, her husband and her mother. Whenever Jeff, a
traveler by night, always on the run, manages to get in touch with her, she
drops everything to follow his instructions, but their meetings don't always
come off.

Mary loves, fears and resents her mother, rarely breaking free enough to live
without Kate's financial support. Her mother reaches out for her, trying to make
contact; then, when Mary gets too close, she rejects her, fleeing from intimacy.
Their mutual dependence does as much to destroy them as to sustain them. Kate
begins to withdraw into alcoholism while Mary slowly gains some maturity,
creating a life for herself and her daughter in Montreal.

A central character too often controlled by forces stronger than she is can be a
liability in any novel. That the author writes beautifully about Mary and her
predicament helps a great deal to keep our interest in her alive. Ms. Spencer,
the author of "The Light in the Piazza" and "The Salt Line," among other books,
has gained a well-deserved reputation as an accomplished stylist. Her portraits
of everyone in "The Night Travellers" are moving and insightful.

Still, I couldn't help getting exasperated with her heroine. Mary is plausible
enough -- we've all seen long-haired waifs like her wandering through fringe
neighborhoods -- but she can't carry the novel by herself, as she's often called
upon to do. I sometimes wanted to kick her, just to get her to make a decision
on her own and follow it through. Eloquent writing and interesting secondary
characters compensate for Mary's passivity, but the softness at the book's
center weakens the narrative.

In addition, telling the story from multiple points of view -- those of the
author, the main characters and several secondary characters -- sometimes causes
confusion. The book is divided into very brief chapters, which heighten the
sense of the characters' fragmented lives but also frustrate our efforts to
follow the plot. There's too much aimless movement of people from place to
place; the book could have been shorter.

When a writer as good as Elizabeth Spencer, however, tries unconventional
techniques in the service of her ambitious vision, we're compelled to read on,
hoping that she will succeed. "The Night Travellers" mixes political issues with
several complex and interesting love stories -- no easy task, but Ms. Spencer
carries it off, despite some problems. The book is finally more a novel about
relationships than about historical events, and this is one of its greatest
strengths.

By shedding light on the people whose lives were disrupted by the strife of the
1960's, and those who fought, in Jeff's words, "to restore some sense of . . .
purpose and pride" to their country, she helps us to see the period more
clearly, and to recognize in it both the political and the human conflicts still
facing us today.

LOAD-DATE: August 18, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              131 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 19, 1991, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Muscovites Glimpse Afghan War's Brutality

BYLINE: By STEPHEN KINZER,  Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 5; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 667 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW, Aug. 14


Two years after the last Soviet soldiers left Afghanistan, the Afghan war has
finally come home to Moscow.

In a hall near the Kremlin, war veterans and their supporters have mounted an
exhibition that, for the first time, shows ordinary citizens the savagery of the
10-year conflict. Most visitors are stunned into silence as soon as they arrive,
and some weep openly as they gape at the stark displays.

"What you see here is the way it really was," said Nikolai Kastyuk, a veteran
who helped organize the exhibition. "People come here still believing the old
cliches -- that we went into Afghanistan to fulfill an internationalist duty,
that the soldiers were not there to kill but to build churches and plant crops.
By the time they leave, they're in a state of shock."

Part of the exhibition is a replica of a Soviet field hospital, complete with a
mobile operating room and cases of surgical instruments. Grotesque photos of
wounded soldiers, photos that could not be published while the war was under
way, hang nearby.

Display cases tell the individual life stories of some of the 13,833 young
Soviet men who lost their lives in Afghanistan. A typical one contains baby
pictures, a high school diploma, a formal wedding photo, a draft notice,
snapshots from Afghanistan, a couple of medals, and finally a photo of parents
laying flowers before a grave.

Copies of letters and poems written by soldiers and their loved ones add to the
exhibition's emotional impact.

Some visitors to the exhibition leave offerings of their own. Near one photo, a
mother and father have left a handwritten note.

"With incredible grief and pain, you will always be in our hearts," the note
said. "Sleep peacefully forever, our darling son Seryozha." The exhibition has
attracted many people who mourn for war victims, partly because there is as yet
no other focus for their pain. The authorities in Moscow, however, have
announced plans to build a permanent memorial to those who fought and died in
Afghanistan.

Monument Like Washington's

Plans show a monument roughly comparable to the one in Washington that honors
Vietnam veterans. It consists of 10 wide steps, one for each year of the war,
leading down to angled granite walls designed to evoke solemnity. Above stands a
statue of a soldier carrying a blinded comrade.

Although the Soviet military authorities were at first reluctant to contribute
to the exhibition, they were advised to do so by senior civilian leaders. With
their help, organizers obtained tanks, trucks, armored personnel carriers and
other machines of war that were used in Afghanistan. They form a central part of
the display.

That Soviets may now confront their country's role in Afghanistan so directly
reflects how far this country has evolved in recent years. But beyond its
historical significance, the exhibition serves the poliical goals of President
Mikhail S. Gorbachev.

"The point is to make people think about what kind of government they want,"
said Aleksandr Gafin, one of the organizers. "We must never again have the kind
of regime that sends troops to places like Afghanistan, never again a regime
where a small group of people can make a decision that results in suffering for
the whole country." A few leading critics of the Afghan war say the exhibition
does not go far enough. Among them is Artyom Borovik, who was one of the first
Soviet correspondents to report critically from Afghanistan in the late 1980's.

"One thing missing is any reference to what we did to the country of
Afghanistan," Mr. Borovik said. "Two and a half million Afghans died in the war,
and many villages were destroyed, but you don't see anything about that."

Some older people, especially those with military backgrounds, complain that the
exhibition is one-sided and even unpatriotic.

"What you see here is a distorted view," said one retired military officer. "War
is war. It isn't fair to say that what we did in Afghanistan was totally dirty."

LOAD-DATE: August 19, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              132 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 19, 1991, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Katherine Dunham's Mission: Giving Children a Gift of Dance

BYLINE: By JENNIFER DUNNING,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section C; Page 11; Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1362 words

DATELINE: EAST ST. LOUIS, Ill.


The summer heat bears down on a scrubby lawn in East St. Louis, a small
desolated city on the banks of the Mississippi River that has become a national
symbol of poverty and despair.

But the air also throbs with excitement and pride as the young dancers of the
Katherine Dunham Children's Workshop here expertly move through pieces in a wide
variety of styles. Well-schooled, they dance with a rare expansiveness and joy.
All are black and what the world calls disadvantaged. But each is a member of an
elect group. Each is a dancer, moving across the makeshift stage of the workshop
with an easy, gracious consciousness of self.

That has been the mission of Miss Dunham, whose vibrantly theatrical productions
of traditional Caribbean, African and American choreography for the dance stage,
Broadway and films turned her and her company into stars throughout the United
States and Europe in the 1940's and 50's. It is a mission that has faltered in
recent hard economic times. But now that mission has been embraced by a group of
cultural, social and business leaders in bustling St. Louis, just across the
river.

Of Plans and Money

Under the leadership of Elizabeth Sayad, a public relations consultant, musician
and writer, the group is working as a newly constituted board of directors to
raise money to meet Miss Dunham's personal and professional needs and to support
and strengthen her training programs. There are also plans to extend the
programs to centers to be built in urban areas throughout the country.There are
plans to raise money to preserve her influential technique and dances along with
her collection of art and artifacts, housed in her handsome little Dynamic
Museum, a few blocks from her home in East St. Louis.

"You can stick your head in the sand," said Kenneth H. Bitting Jr., a former
Anheuser-Busch executive, who is the vice president of the Dunham board and a
self-described cynic, as he spoke of the problems of that city. "And why not?
It's a different state. Then you meet someone like Katherine Dunham."

Miss Dunham, who worked her way out of an impoverished, tumultuous childhood in
the Midwest to become not only an internationally recognized dancer and
choreographer but also an anthropolgist, writer and teacher, settled in East St.
Louis in 1967, dividing her time between her small, neat house, school and
museum and a home in Haiti. Her mission, urged on her by officials of the
University of Illinois, was to imbue the angry, forsaken youngsters of East St.
Louis with a sense of a larger, better world to which they could also have
access.

'Culturally Heroic Society'

"I was trying to steer them into something more constructive than genocide," the
82-year-old Miss Dunham said in a recent interview in St. Louis. "Everyone
needs, if not a culture hero, a culturally heroic society. There is nothing
stronger in a man than the need to grow."

She and an international staff taught languages and photography, anatomy and
woodcarving, music, many forms of dance and even karate, which troubled some
institutional sponsors of the school. "We told them we were only teaching the
theory of martial arts," Miss Dunham said with her low, earthy laugh. "A very
small lie. The martial arts were it for the young men. They loved that."

Faced with an influx of violent, confused young veterans of the Vietnam War, she
took some to New York City to talk about violence with the psychologist Erich
Fromm, a friend of hers. She watched as some of the children she worked with
grew up to be public figures, including Reginald and Warrington Hudlin, the film
makers, and Jackie Joyner-Kersee, the Olympic long jumper, and university
graduates, doctors, teachers and performers.

But Miss Dunham's financial resources have dwindled drastically over the last
decade. Most of the programs, which serve about 40 children, ages 4 to 16, have
been cut and it has become hard to properly maintain the museum's holdings,
which include artifacts, art and musical instruments of African, Caribbean and
North American black traditional and modern society, paintings by Miss Dunham
and exquisite costumes designed by John Pratt, her late husband, for the Dunham
company.

Leading to a Board

Admirers of Miss Dunham grew concerned. In 1989, after the success of a "Magic
of Katherine Dunham" gala that opened the Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater's
spring season in St. Louis, the dance presenter Adam Pinsker commissioned a
study, paid with a Ford Foundation grant, that led to the formation of a board
incorporated in St. Louis and East St. Louis in the spring of 1990.

A few friends and colleagues, chief among them Jeanelle Stover, Miss Dunham's
longtime personal assistant and now a member of the board's executive committee,
had struggled to help Miss Dunham continue her work.

Ms. Sayad, who studied dance with Miss Dunham in the early 1970's, said,
"Katherine is beginning to understand that in order to accomplish her mission
she has got to have a larger frame of reference." The 18 members of the new
board represent "resources she just wouldn't have access to in East St. Louis,"
Ms. Sayad added.

The eighth annual Dunham Technique Seminar, which ended on Sunday at the Center
of Contemporary Arts in University City in St. Louis, was preceded by a gala
dinner and performance in early August that raised close to $35,000 to meet a
matching grant from the National Endowment for the Arts.

At the gala, in one corner of the poolside party Miss Dunham greeted the guests
who came over to her, often a little timidly, to shake her hand. Dark eyes
glowing, she was both matter of fact and regal, submitting graciously to the
cosseting of early Dunham dancers who had come to St. Louis to teach in the
seminar.

There was an extra gentleness in Miss Dunham's voice as she gravely spoke of her
conversations with her young goddaughter, Tikati, about the future of the earth.
And she watched with affection as Vanoye Aikens, who had partnered her, charmed
the crowd with his extravagant repartee as the master of ceremonies. "He lifted
me, heavy or light, for about 30 years," she murmured.

The next morning, Mr. Aikens, Talley Beatty, Lucille Ellis and Tommy Gomez were
teaching dancers, teachers and agile dance lovers from across the nation and
abroad the fine points of the sensuous Dunham technique. In one studio, Mr.
Aikens coaxed a jazz step he called the chocolate shake out of his students. In
another, Mr. Gomez quietly analyzed the correct body placement of a Dunham
dancer and spoke of a head movement associated with Uday Shankar, the Indian
dancer.

Mr. Beatty's instructions were interspersed with anecdotes about Miss Madam
Dunham, as he called her, delivered with wry detachment. And Miss Ellis drove
her students to dance with space-gobbling abandon. Together again, the four
spoke of their days with Miss Dunham with laughter and admiration.

"Dancers came into the company like mice and walked out as straight as
cornstalks," said Miss Ellis, who teaches at her own studio in Chicago. "Miss D.
taught people to be proud of themselves."

The company, which disbanded in 1962 after two decades of performing, wove its
way through the United States refusing to perform for segregated audiences.

"We were with her when she broke the nightclub barriers in Chicago," Miss Ellis
said. "That's all we did. We broke barriers all along. We didn't know that. We
just wanted to work. We loved what we were doing. We survived because of love
and pride."

Those days may be long gone, and the notion of a new Dunham company merely a
cherished dream, but Miss Dunham is still surrounded by loyal colleagues. At the
gala, a son of the Senegalese drummer Mor Thiam performed beside his genial
father, whom Miss Dunham described as the Pied Piper who helped to draw children
to the school over the years.  Three of the four elegant, glowing dancers had
been reared in East St. Louis and trained at the Dunham school. Miss Dunham
watched them intently, drumming a soft rhythmic counterpoint on the table edge
as they danced.

"It can be done," she said. "Don't tell me no."

NAME: Katherine Dunham

LOAD-DATE: August 19, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Katherine Dunham; Young dancers at the children's workshop in
East St. Louis, Ill. (Photographs by Bill Stover for The New York Times)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              133 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 19, 1991, Monday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

Katherine Dunham's Mission: Giving Children a Gift of Dance

BYLINE: By JENNIFER DUNNING,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section C; Page 11; Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1360 words

DATELINE: EAST ST. LOUIS, Ill.


The summer heat bears down on a scrubby lawn in East St. Louis, a small
desolated city on the banks of the Mississippi River that has become a national
symbol of poverty and despair.

But the air also throbs with excitement and pride as the young dancers of the
Katherine Dunham Children's Workshop here expertly move through pieces in a wide
variety of styles. Well-schooled, they dance with a rare expansiveness and joy.
All are black and what the world calls disadvantaged. But each is a member of an
elect group. Each is a dancer, moving across the makeshift stage of the workshop
with an easy, gracious consciousness of self.

That has been the mission of Miss Dunham, whose vibrantly theatrical productions
of traditional Caribbean, African and American choreography for the dance stage,
Broadway and films turned her and her company into stars throughout the United
States and Europe in the 1940's and 50's. It is a mission that has faltered in
recent hard economic times. But now that mission has been embraced by a group of
cultural, social and business leaders in bustling St. Louis, just across the
river.

Of Plans and Money

Under the leadership of Elizabeth Sayad, a public relations consultant, musician
and writer, the group is working as a newly constituted board of directors to
raise money to meet Miss Dunham's personal and professional needs and to support
and strengthen her training programs. There are also plans to extend the
programs to centers to be built in urban areas throughout the country.There are
plans to raise money to preserve her influential technique and dances along with
her collection of art and artifacts, housed in her handsome little Dynamic
Museum, a few blocks from her home in East St. Louis.

"You can stick your head in the sand," said Kenneth H. Bitting Jr., a former
Anheuser-Busch executive, who is the vice president of the Dunham board and a
self-described cynic, as he spoke of the problems of that city. "And why not?
It's a different state. Then you meet someone like Katherine Dunham."

Miss Dunham, who worked her way out of an impoverished, tumultuous childhood in
the Midwest to become not only an internationally recognized dancer and
choreographer but also an anthropolgist, writer and teacher, settled in East St.
Louis in 1967, dividing her time between her small, neat house, school and
museum and a home in Haiti. Her mission, urged on her by officials of the
University of Illinois, was to imbue the angry, forsaken youngsters of East St.
Louis with a sense of a larger, better world to which they could also have
access.

'Culturally Heroic Society'

"I was trying to steer them into something more constructive than genocide," the
82-year-old Miss Dunham said in a recent interview in St. Louis. "Everyone
needs, if not a culture hero, a culturally heroic society. There is nothing
stronger in a man than the need to grow."

She and an international staff taught languages and photography, anatomy and
woodcarving, music, many forms of dance and even karate, which troubled some
institutional sponsors of the school. "We told them we were only teaching the
theory of martial arts," Miss Dunham said with her low, earthy laugh. "A very
small lie. The martial arts were it for the young men. They loved that."

Faced with an influx of violent, confused young veterans of the Vietnam War, she
took some to New York City to talk about violence with the psychologist Erich
Fromm, a friend of hers. She watched as some of the children she worked with
grew up to be public figures, including Reginald and Warrington Hudlin, the film
makers, and Jackie Joyner-Kersee, the Olympic long jumper, and university
graduates, doctors, teachers and performers.

But Miss Dunham's financial resources have dwindled drastically over the last
decade. Most of the programs, which serve about 40 children, ages 4 to 16, have
been cut and it has become hard to properly maintain the museum's holdings,
which include artifacts, art and musical instruments of African, Caribbean and
North American black traditional and modern society, paintings by Miss Dunham
and exquisite costumes designed by John Pratt, her late husband, for the Dunham
company.

Leading to a Board

Admirers of Miss Dunham grew concerned. In 1989, after the success of a "Magic
of Katherine Dunham" gala that opened the Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater's
spring season in St. Louis, the dance presenter Adam Pinsker commissioned a
study, paid with a Ford Foundation grant, that led to the formation of a board
incorporated in St. Louis and East St. Louis in the spring of 1990.

A few friends and colleagues, chief among them Jeanelle Stover, Miss Dunham's
longtime personal assistant and now a member of the board's executive committee,
had struggled to help Miss Dunham continue her work.

Ms. Sayad, who studied dance with Miss Dunham in the early 1970's, said,
"Katherine is beginning to understand that in order to accomplish her mission
she has got to have a larger frame of reference." The 18 members of the new
board represent "resources she just wouldn't have access to in East St. Louis,"
Ms. Sayad added.

The eighth annual Dunham Technique Seminar, which ended on Sunday at the Center
of Contemporary Arts in University City in St. Louis, was preceded by a gala
dinner and performance in early August that raised close to $35,000 to meet a
matching grant from the National Endowment for the Arts.

At the gala, in one corner of the poolside party Miss Dunham greeted the guests
who came over to her, often a little timidly, to shake her hand. Dark eyes
glowing, she was both matter of fact and regal, submitting graciously to the
cosseting of early Dunham dancers who had come to St. Louis to teach in the
seminar.

There was an extra gentleness in Miss Dunham's voice as she gravely spoke of her
conversations with her young goddaughter, Tikati, about the future of the earth.
And she watched with affection as Vanoye Aikens, who had partnered her, charmed
the crowd with his extravagant repartee as the master of ceremonies. "He lifted
me, heavy or light, for about 30 years," she murmured.

The next morning, Mr. Aikens, Talley Beatty, Lucille Ellis and Tommy Gomez were
teaching dancers, teachers and agile dance lovers from across the nation and
abroad the fine points of the sensuous Dunham technique. In one studio, Mr.
Aikens coaxed a jazz step he called the chocolate shake out of his students. In
another, Mr. Gomez quietly analyzed the correct body placement of a Dunham
dancer and spoke of a head movement associated with Uday Shankar, the Indian
dancer.

Mr. Beatty's instructions were interspersed with anecdotes about Miss Madam
Dunham, as he called her, delivered with wry detachment. And Miss Ellis drove
her students to dance with space-gobbling abandon. Together again, the four
spoke of their days with Miss Dunham with laughter and admiration.

"Dancers came into the company like mice and walked out as straight as
cornstalks," said Miss Ellis, who teaches at her own studio in Chicago. "Miss D.
taught people to be proud of themselves."

The company, which disbanded in 1962 after two decades of performing, wove its
way through the United States refusing to perform for segregated audiences.

"We were with her when she broke the nightclub barriers in Chicago," Miss Ellis
said. "That's all we did. We broke barriers all along. We didn't know that. We
just wanted to work. We loved what we were doing. We survived because of love
and pride."

Those days may be long gone, and the notion of a new Dunham company merely a
cherished dream, but Miss Dunham is still surrounded by loyal colleagues. At the
gala, a son of the Senegalese drummer Mor Thiam performed beside his genial
father, whom Miss Dunham described as the Pied Piper who helped to draw children
to the school over the years.  Three of the four elegant, glowing dancers had
been reared in East St. Louis and trained at the Dunham school. Miss Dunham
watched them intently, drumming a soft rhythmic counterpoint on the table edge
as they danced.

"It can be done," she said. "Don't tell me no."

NAME: Katherine Dunham

LOAD-DATE: August 19, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: August 20, 1991, Tuesday

CORRECTION:

A picture yesterday with an article about dance at the Katherine Dunham
Children's Workshop was published in error. It showed Lucille Ellis, an
instructor, and not Miss Dunham.


GRAPHIC: Photos: Katherine Dunham; Young dancers at the children's workshop in
East St. Louis, Ill. (Photographs by Bill Stover for The New York Times)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              134 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 20, 1991, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

THE SOVIET CRISIS;
Defense Chief Saw Gorbachev Hours Before Coup

BYLINE: By PATRICK E. TYLER,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 16; Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 898 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 19


The Soviet Defense Minister, Gen. Dmitri T. Yazov, flew to the Crimea on Sunday
and met with President Mikhail S. Gorbachev hours before Mr. Yazov and other
senior officials staged a coup and removed Mr. Gorbachev from power, according
to Bush Administration officials.

The nature of the conversations between the two men is not known, according to
these officials, and General Yazov's flight has become a critical indicator only
in hindsight as the Administration sought today to reconstruct the events of the
weekend to understand the coup, which caught the world by surprise.

Administration analysts today put two likely interpretations on General Yazov's
mission. The first is that he flew to the Crimea simply to inform Mr. Gorbachev
that he was being removed from power and placed under house arrest.

If this was the case, an official said, the general may also have wanted to
attend to security arrangements personally to insure the loyalty of forces that
were to detain Mr. Gorbachev.

An Alternative Hypothesis

The second interpretation, Administration officials said, was that General Yazov
was engaged in last-minute negotiations to bring Mr. Gorbachev into the
conservative camp and thus prevent the scheduled signing this week of a new
union treaty that would have significantly diminished Moscow's power over the
Soviet republics.

"There are a number of things that indicate he was approached," a State
Department official said, referring to Mr. Gorbachev. "But there's no evidence
so far that rules out either hypothesis."

"The other thing is that if they are going to go down and arrest him," the
official continued, "Yazov would want to go down and make sure it happens."

This official also said that today's statement by Acting President Gennadi I.
Yanayev expressing the "hope that Mikhail Gorbachev, as soon as he feels better,
will take up his office" was another indication that the conservatives may still
be engaged in discussions with him.

Precipitous Action Seen

Adding to the sense that the coup plotters acted precipitously, President Bush's
national security adviser, Brent Scowcroft, said Moscow's belated deployment of
military forces to control the capital suggested that the coup plotters "had not
completed their preparations before they did it."

"It's interesting to note that in ordinary coups the tanks move about the time
an announcement is made," Mr. Scowcroft said to reporters aboard Air Force One,
adding that there was no military activity in Moscow early today when Tass, the
Soviet press agency, announced that a State Committee for the State of Emergency
had taken power. "The tanks didn't move for number of hours afterward," Mr.
Scowcroft added.

United States intelligence agencies were not able to give the Administration any
specific advance warning about the coup, according to officials in a number of
agencies that receive intelligence reporting.

The coup caught both the Central Intelligence Agency and the Defense
Intelligence Agency off guard, according to Administration officials, though
both agencies have been warning for months that Mr. Gorbachev faced formidable
conservatives forces opposed to his reform campaign.

"Although the intelligence community did not know the date and the time of the
coup, there has been reporting on the possibility of a hard-liner crackdown for
more than a year," an official said.

"It was known that the military and security forces were unhappy with their
diminishing role under a relatively weak center," the official said, adding that
the hard-liners had also sought to help create a crisis atmosphere to justify
their actions.

Some officials inside and outside the Administration said warnings from
prominent Soviet figures, such as former Foreign Minister Eduard A. Shevardnadze
and Aleksandr N. Yakovlev, who resigned his Kremlin post last week, should have
been taken more seriously. Both men in recent weeks have been forecasting a
hard-line crackdown.

In Washington today, a former National Security Council staff member, Vincent
Cannistraro, also asserted that raw intelligence available to Administration
analysts would have sounded alarm bells earlier.

Speaking to reporters before he left Kennebunkport, Me., to return to
Washington, President Bush said there had "always been a concern" that Mr.
Gorbachev would be overthrown.

Military Crisis Avoided

Administration officials sought to play down any prospect that the Soviet
Union's internal crisis could become a military crisis affecting its external
relations, especially with the United States.

Although the Soviet Union and its former allies in Eastern Europe have
dismantled the Warsaw Pact military alliance, an estimated 250,000 Soviet troops
remain in eastern Germany and 50,000 are in Poland.

Pentagon officials said they had received no formal or informal warning from
Soviet military leaders that a coup was under way. There has been no alert or
unusual activity among the Soviet Union's strategic nuclear forces, which are
the focus of the most intense intelligence monitoring.

Mr. Bush said United States forces had not gone to any high state of alert, but
officials said intelligence monitoring had increased sharply. After Mr. Bush's
remarks, Mr. Scowcroft emphasized to reporters that "this is not a military
crisis."

LOAD-DATE: April 13, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Viktor Komplektov, Soviet Ambassador, leaving the State
Department after meeting Deputy Secretary of State Lawrence S. Eagleburger.
(Paul Hosefros/The New York Times)

Chart: "Accords Threatened by Soviet Discord"

MAJOR PENDING AGREEMENTS AND ARRANGEMENTS

Treaty on Conventional Forces in Europe

Conventional arms reduction treaty, with heaviest cuts in Soviet forces,
especially tanks, has already been submitted to Senate. Action was likely this
fall, but now is likely to be put off.

Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty

First pact to lower the numbers of nuclear warheads, especially those carried by
intercontinental ballistic missiles. Signed at the Moscow summit meeting between
Mr. Bush and Mr. Gorbachev, the act is being refined to correct textual
problems. Was likely to be considered by the Senate early next year; may be
delayed further.

Trade

A three-year trade agreement granting most-favored-nation status to the Soviet
Union, and establishing various other conditions, such as copyright protection
for literary and other cultural works and computer software, to promote trade
and U.S. investment. Approval was considered almost certain after the Soviet
Union passed a law formalizing free movement into and out of the country. The
measure was considered likely to have been approved before Congress adjourned
this fall; now it seems sure to be put off.

Joint Venture

In the largest Soviet-American business venture ever, the Chevron Corporation
planned to develop huge oilfields in Kazakhstan. It was unclear what effect the
ouster of President Gorbachev would have on the deal.

Grain Sales

President Bush has authorized $600 million in loan guarantees for selling grain
to the SovietUnion and planned to authorize another $500 million in October and
$400 million next February. Delays possible to put pressure on the Soviet Union,
although grain-state lawmakers are considered likely to resist.

Lesser Agreements Signed at Summit

Airplane Hijacking

Promises each country will use force and assist the other in criminal
proceedings if a plane from one country is hijacked to the other.

Disaster Assistance

Establishes exchanges of information and assistance.

Economic Assistance

Approves U.S. technical assistance to the Soviet Union and its 15 constituent
republics.

Medical Supplies

Allows U.S. to fill critical shortages.

AREAS OF COOPERATION AND POTENTIAL AGREEMENT

Regional Conflicts

Both superpowers have been trying to resolve conflicts in the Middle East by
working together to encourage a peace conference that would bring Israel and
Arab nations face to face, and have been urging Vietnam and other parties to the
civil war in Cambodia to make peace.

Poison Gas

The two countries have been negotiating bilateral and multilateral agreements to
eliminate most chemical weapons.

AREAS OF POTENTIAL COOPERATION

 Discussions are in the early stages on whether the two nations can work
together to limit the spread of nuclear weapons or missile technology, whether
they can strengthen international institutions or develop new ones, and whether
the can develop other areas of cooperation.

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              135 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 20, 1991, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Under the Heel -- for Now

BYLINE: By Richard Pipes;  Richard Pipes, professor of history at Harvard and
author of "The Russian Revolution," was director of Soviet affairs in the
National Security Council in the Reagan Administration.

SECTION: Section A; Page 27; Column 2; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 995 words

DATELINE: MARLBOROUGH, N.H.


Today, Mikhail Gorbachev was to sign a new union treaty with the presidents of
major republics. Its text has not been released yet but it was known to transfer
much authority from the central organs of the Communist Party and Soviet state
to institutions in those republics.

But the most reactionary elements in the Communist leadership -- die-hards of
the party nomenklatura, army and K.G.B. -- pre-empted the event with a coup.

These elements had at first approved of Mr. Gorbachev's reforms because they
promised to revitalize the country's economy and, by so doing, renovate the
armed forces, the mainstay of the regime. But perestroika turned out to be more
than they had bargained for. To energize the economy Mr. Gorbachev had to
restore freedom of speech; freedom of speech led to the emergence of public
opinion and the formation of political parties.

In the end, perestroika cost the party its monopoly on political life. At the
same time, securing financial and technical aid from the industrial democracies
required a less aggressive foreign policy, cutbacks in military spending and, in
the end, the restoration of freedom in Eastern Europe.

The conservatives watched these developments with disbelief, then with dismay
and finally with uncontrollable fury. For them, Mr. Gorbachev's support of the
U.S.-led coalition in the gulf war seemed to have been the last straw: the
allied victory, won with Moscow's diplomatic help, drove the final nail in the
Soviet claim to superpower status. To exact punishment, they made the life of
Foreign Minister Eduard Shevardnadze intolerable, forcing his resignation in
December 1990. More than anyone, he had been responsible for ending the cold
war.

Preparations for a coup were already under way last fall. The signal was to be a
crackdown on Lithuania, following which fraudulent "committees of national
salvation" were to assume power throughout the U.S.S.R. In mid-January the
plotters stood in readiness. Special forces massacred unarmed Lithuanian youths.
But after an outcry, Mr. Gorbachev lost his nerve and called off the operation.
Col. Viktor Alksnis, the reactionaries' spokesman, accused him of betrayal.

Two factors assured the inevitability of a military coup. One was the
unprecedented degree to which Soviet generals presumed to criticize the
Gorbachev Government openly for its laxness at home and concessions abroad. Such
criticism ran contrary to the Russian Army's tradition and indicated that the
disaffected armed forces had slipped from party control. The other was the
conservatives' hostility to plans to decentralize the Soviet Union. Transferring
authority to the republics threatened to emasculate the power of the party, army
and K.G.B.

It was on such grounds that in November 1990 I thought it warranted on these
pages to call attention to the possibility of a military coup.

The putsch this week is still too veiled to permit authoritative analyses. Some
things, though, seem reasonably clear. One should not assume that the coup will
succeed: most military bids for power fail, and this one may be no exception.
Whether the generals establish effective authority or turn out to be paper
rulers depends on several unpredictable factors: the resistance of the crowds,
especially in Moscow and Leningrad; loyalty of the military and its willingness
to fire on civilians; readiness of the bureaucracy, notably in the Russian
republic, to take orders from the usurpers.

And perhaps, most important, it hinges on the courage and skill with which the
president of the Russian republic, Boris Yeltsin, the generals' only credible
rival, takes charge of the scattered democratic forces.

If the coup does succeed, its prospects for instituting a viable regime appear
slim. The State Committee for the State of Emergency is made up of primitive
personalities. One member, Vladimir Kryuchkov, the K.G.B. head, not long ago
accused the West of using economic aid to subvert the Soviet Union. These people
evidently have learned nothing from the crisis that has afflicted their country
in the past decade. Notwithstanding Gennadi Yanayev's claims yesterday that he
supports perestroika, he and the others believe in the golden age of Stalinism.

They want the union -- that is, the empire -- to be reconstituted in all its
glory. This objective is certain to clash with the wishes of the non-Russian
citizenry and virtually to eliminate the possibility of the Soviet Union being
preserved. They have no idea of the complexities of modern industry, of the need
for incentives and international collaboration. They are anti-Semitic and
anti-Western. It is unlikely that such people, or those who stand behind them,
will be capable of running the country for any length of time.

Nevertheless, the coup most likely has ended Mr. Gorbachev's political career.
The Soviet leader managed to stay afloat by skillfully maneuvering between left
and right. In following such a course, he left himself without a loyal
constituency.

The new leaders, if they hang on to power, will likely make friendly overtures
to the West. They know that to qualify for foreign assistance, they have to calm
the anxieties of Europe and the U.S. But in the long run their presence in the
Kremlin threatens world stability. The hard-liners are likely to rely on force
to maintain power at home and to reclaim their status as a superpower abroad. We
may assume that they will further delay the withdrawal of Soviet troops from
Poland and Germany, resume large-scale aid to Cuba, Vietnam and other client
states and sabotage the promised reductions in weaponry.

Unhappy Russians! The British writer Maurice Baring described them 85 years ago
as a "people who have been longing for the dawn and condemned to the twilight."
If any hope exists that this time, perhaps, the darkness will lift, it is that
the past 70 years may have cured them of utopian fantasies and the past five
years have rid them of fear.

LOAD-DATE: August 20, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              136 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 21, 1991, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Cuba Seeks U.N. Debate on U.S. Trade Embargo

SECTION: Section A; Page 15; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 411 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, Aug. 20


Calling the nearly 30-year-old United States economic embargo against Cuba
illegal, unjust and a violation of the United Nations Charter, Cuba's mission to
the United Nations said today that it had asked for a General Assembly debate on
the issue.

Taking the matter before the General Assembly is seen as an attempt by Havana to
help kill legislation pending in the United States Congress that would close one
of the last and most lucrative loopholes allowing trade with Cuba.

"The issue is not if the U.S. will trade with a particular country," said the
head of Cuba's United Nations delegation, Ricardo Alarcon de Quesada. "but the
U.S. has no right whatsoever to attempt to impose its own legislation over other
sovereign states, as they are doing throughout the world."

A senior member of the United States mission said today that Washington was
likely to oppose such a debate. "There is nothing in international law or
politics that says all countries have to trade with other countries," said the
American diplomat, who spoke on condition that he not be identified by name.

Before the embargo, the United States was Cuba's largest trading partner.

Mr. Alarcon de Quesada said at a news conference today that Cuba did not expect
Washington to relent on direct trade with Cuba but that it hoped to put pressure
on other countries that were host to foreign subsidiaries of United States
companies to demand that those companies be allowed to do business with Cuba.

Originally, the embargo applied to United States citizens, companies and their
foreign subsidiaries. But under pressure from allies, Washington in the
mid-1970's eased some restrictions.

The relaxed guidelines applied the ban only on those foreign subsidiaries of
United States companies headed by United States citizens and allowed trade with
Cuba so long as United States currency or manufactured goods were not involved.

Last year, United States foreign subsidiary trade with Cuba amounted to $700
million and involved hundreds of companies, most of them in Switzerland, Canada
and Britain, a Treasury Department official said.

An amendment sponsored by Senator Connie Mack, Republican of Florida, would
close that loophole and increase the embargo against Cuba to the level now
imposed against North Korea, Vietnam and Cambodia. The Bush Administration,
while eager to keep the economic pressure on Cuba, is opposed to the legislation
because of pressure from allies.

LOAD-DATE: August 21, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              137 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 21, 1991, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Strangers' Generosity Steers Young to College

BYLINE: By MICHAEL deCOURCY HINDS,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 7; Column 1; National Desk; Education Page

LENGTH: 810 words

DATELINE: PHILADELPHIA, Aug. 20


In the midst of starting a computer consulting business, renovating a kitchen
and planning a spring wedding, Stuart Bogom and Dorel Shannon made a five-year
commitment this year to act as mentors to an unknown teen-ager and to help pay
his college tuition.

"Ever since I heard about Eugene Lang adopting a class of kids in New York and
promising to send them to college, I've always wanted to do something like
that," said Mr. Bogom, who is 36 years old and taught sociology in college
before turning to computers several years ago.

Mr. Bogom and his wife, Ms. Shannon, a 31-year-old social worker with Planned
Parenthood, have joined a new program here that matches busy, middle-class
sponsors with students in an effort to help more inner-city teen-agers go to
college.

The Commonwealth Fund, a New York philanthropy, originated the idea as a way to
expand Mr. Lang's 10-year-old "I Have a Dream" program, in which very wealthy
individuals adopt an entire class of students and shepherd them through high
school to college, with the help of hired social workers.

The fund gave a $100,000 grant to Philadelphia Futures, a three-year-old
nonprofit educational organization here, to start the new program. The group,
which was also inspired by Mr. Lang's program, has been recruiting and
coordinating about 1,000 volunteer tutors, mentors and speakers in public
schools in addition to running the new sponsorship program.

"There are relatively few millionaires around who want to sponsor classes," said
Thomas W. Maloney, senior vice president of the Commonwealth Fund, who dreamed
up the program. "But there are probably hundreds of thousands of families who
can afford to sponsor a single student."

Mr. Maloney said that if the Philadelphia program significantly affected
students' grades and attitudes, the fund hoped to help start similar efforts in
the nation's 10 largest cities within a year or two. .

Mr. Bogom and Ms. Shannon are among the first group of 77 professional people to
participate in the new program, which pairs a single sponsor or sponsoring
couple with an individual ninth-grade student, in this case Ollie Tansimore 3d.

"I'm feeling pretty lucky," said the ninth grader as he sat with Mr. Bogom and
Ms. Shannon in Veterans Stadium the other night, taking in a Phillies game.
"Most kids like me don't have no scholarships and mentors to back you up."

Ollie, who gives his age as "15 going on 16," says he wants to become an
architect. But with an older sister in college and a younger brother coming up
through the school system, his family would need financial help: his father is a
disabled Vietnam veteran, and his mother assists patients in their homes.

The program has some corporate donors, which provide both money and volunteer
mentors from their staffs. There are also a few wealthy donors, including Sam
Katz, a financial consultant who recently ran unsuccessfully for mayor.

"We have four kids, so having one more isn't so much you notice," Mr. Katz, who
was also at the ball game, said with a smile. He shares the responsibility of
being a mentor with his wife, Connie.

The program, Sponsor-a-Scholar, has no data on sponsors' incomes, and those
interviewed declined to say how much they earned. But they did acknowledge that
participating was a significant expense. "It still hurts me," Mr. Bogom said,
referring to the first $1,500 check for college tuition, the first of four
installments to students.

For now, Philadelphia Futures is limiting recruiting to students like Ollie
Tansimore, who have good attendance records, passing grades and an interest in
attending college. "As we get more experience, we can take kids with more
difficulties," said Marciene S. Mattleman, the organization's executive
director.

Sponsors must provide up to $6,000 to cover college costs, the so-called
last-dollar costs that are likely to remain after considering any other
financial aid the student may receive.

The program's guidelines suggest that sponsors meet with their students once
each month and telephone or write once a month. Philadelphia Futures supports
the sponsors by providing practical information on higher education and guidance
on dealing with students. It also plans to hold workshops for sponsors, scholars
and their families on everything from study skills to filling out financial aid
forms.

The program is specifically arranged for busy people, like Ms. Shannon, who
already had her hands full at Planned Parenthood, counseling teen-agers and
younger girls about pregnancy and sexually transmitted diseases. "For me, the
decision to become a sponsor was motivated by my own experience," she said. "I
was the first person in my immediate family to complete college, largely because
of an English teacher, Barbara Pollard, who had a real personal interest in my
future."

LOAD-DATE: August 21, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Sponsor-a-Scholar, a Philadelphia program that pairs a single
sponsor or sponsoring couple with an individual ninth-grade student, has united
Ollie Tansimore 3d, foreground, with Stuart Bogom and Dorel Shannon. The couple
will serve as a mentor for Ollie, 15, and will help pay his college tuition.
(Bill Cramer for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              138 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 22, 1991, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Vietnam, the Way It Might Have Been

BYLINE: By SETH MYDANS,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 20; Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 1286 words

DATELINE: WESTMINSTER, Calif.


Before the start of a recent concert of Vietnamese pop music here in the
community known as Little Saigon, schoolchildren in smart blue uniforms marched
onto the stage of a school auditorium carrying the yellow and red flag of South
Vietnam, a country that ceased to exist 16 years ago. The audience, like a
roomful of ghosts, rose and joined the singing of that country's national
anthem.

Then the performers in their extravagant outfits, mostly aging refugees
themselves, sang the familiar ballads of two decades past, of love and
loneliness and of weariness with a war that is long since over.

Here in Little Saigon, as in other Vietnamese refugee communities throughout the
country, people are still struggling to come to terms with history. Many are
adapting only halfway to their new country, taking on the ways and pace of
American life but with their hearts still in Vietnam.

On weekdays, those who have jobs work in the weapons and computer industries
that are prime employers here in Orange County, an hour's drive south of Los
Angeles. On weekends they hold anti-Communist political meetings, sit through
long afternoons of traditional Vietnamese opera, or stroll through the
air-conditioned malls of Little Saigon.

These shopping centers, like the two-story Asian Garden Mall, are what much of
Saigon might look like today if the North Vietnamese had not won the war in 1975
and imposed on it the stagnation of their economic system.

California Version of Saigon

Up and down Bolsa Avenue, and for several blocks around, clusters of shops,
offices, restaurants and cafes with their Vietnamese signs glitter in chrome and
neon, a Southern California dream of Saigon. The centerpiece of this cluster is
a pair of bustling indoor shopping malls where the usual staples of shops
selling hamburgers and athletic shoes have been supplanted by Amerasia My-A
Import Wholesale Retail, Van Hoi Xuan Chinese Herbs and Sai-Gon Color Lab.

While much of Southeast Asia has enjoyed some of the world's most rapid economic
growth since the end of the Vietnam war, the Communist nations of Indochina have
stagnated, and Saigon, renamed Ho Chi Minh City, has been left behind.

"If America had won the war over there, it would look like Singapore today,"
said Yen Nguyen, 34 years old, who fled Vietnam by boat after the fall of Saigon
in 1975.

"Maybe the style would be a little bit different from here in the mall," he
said. "Maybe over there they would put a little pond inside. Maybe it would be a
little more romantic than here."

Economic Slump Hurts Buying

Mr. Nguyen owns Kim Son Fabrics, where a refugee can buy a bolt of silk for
direct delivery to relatives in Vietnam. But now, he said, along with the rest
of the American economy, the Vietnamese community here is in a slump. Many of
the weekend strollers in the mall buy little more than a plastic cup of French
coffee sweetened with condensed milk.

Since the end of the war, half a million Vietnamese refugees have come to the
United States. Those here inspire others; new arrivals soon send for family
members, who either make a dangerous escape from Vietnam by boat or join the
long list of people petitioning the State Department to come this country.

Mai Cong, a community leader who was one of the first Vietnamese refugees to
settle here, in 1975, said: "When I first came here there were very few
Vietnamese, and very few Asians. Many of us had to go to Los Angeles Chinatown
for our groceries."

Now, Ms. Cong said, more than 20,000 Vietnamese live in Westminster, primarily
in an area that has acquired its own freeway exit, "Little Saigon." The
Vietnamese now make up a quarter of the residents of Westminster, and the
Vietnamese population in surrounding Orange County could be as high as 150,000,
she said.

Many Vietnamese here describe Little Saigon as a cauldron of political intrigue,
much like the Saigon of the past, with as many as 30 daily and weekly newspapers
and an array of political antagonisms that sometime flare into violence. The
major issue among Vietnamese in the United States is whether Washington should
open diplomatic relations with Hanoi in the hope that the Communist government
there will become more liberal or whether to continue to work for its collapse.

Some Vietnamese here called the town "the scam capital of the world," where
lawyers fake traffic accidents to collect damages or charge refugees high fees
for unnecessary official documents. He said some veterans' groups prey on
arrivals, charging large sums for needless dealings with government agencies.

Crime Troubles Community

The community is also the scene of a crime wave in which Vietnamese gangs extort
payoffs from local businesses or terrorize refugees in their homes and steal
their valuables.

As the years have passed, generational divisions have changed the character of
Little Saigon, and a place like the Asian Garden Mall has become the scene of a
culture clash that is purely Vietnamese.

Le Thi Thach, who is 81 and lives in San Diego, wore a silk blouse and a formal
black hair band for a recent visit to the mall, where she was shopping for a
gold wedding ring for a niece. "I come here to remember Saigon," she said.
"Everything is Vietnamese here and everyone speaks Vietnamese."

But for 15-year-old Thai Pham, stylish in a black Oakland Raiders jacket who
arrived in the United States as an infant, impressions of Vietnam come from
photographs and from the mall itself. "No, it's too dirty over there," he said,
when asked if he wanted to visit the land of his birth. "I've seen pictures.
This is Vietnam for me here. Every Vietnamese comes here."

And for Sean To, just 18 months old, the perspective on the past will be still
more distant, helped by the Irish name his father said he gave him to speed his
Americanization. "To me, all this looks pretty much like Vietnam," said the
father, Ken To. "But for Sean, Saigon will look pretty much like Westminster."

The shifting perspective of the generations is painful for Tran Van Ngoc, 45, a
former helicopter pilot who now heads a Vietnamese veterans association and
works as a computer technician.

"It hurts my feelings when my daughter asks me about my country," he said,
explaining that her questions reflected the ignorance and the biases of her
American schoolmates. "It's very hard to explain to the American generation."

Now 15, his daughter has begun to ask him about his role in the war and about
the disdain that many Americans feel for the South Vietnamese soldiers who were
their allies.

With the defensive tone that some American veterans also found themselves
adopting over the years, he said. "I tell her I am proud that I fought that
war," he said. "I fought with my heart and I did what I could."

Realization of Change

Most difficult to accept, said Mr. Ngoc, is the realization that he himself has
changed over the past 16 years and that the Vietnam of the past cannot be
reclaimed.

"When people come here to find Vietnam like Saigon before 1975 they are making a
mistake, because we are not the same," he said. "We are Vietnamese but we are
not Vietnamese.

"Living in a new country, we change and we don't even know it. Our thoughts are
different and we don't even know it. Sometimes I try to deny that I am
Americanized, but I have changed."

All around him, people were speaking Vietnamese, eating Vietnamese food,
listening to the Vietnamese music that filled the mall. Some shops displayed the
yellow South Vietnamese flag with its three red stripes.

"The people walking around here," Mr. Ngoc said, "sometimes they don't realize
that this is Little Saigon, but it is not Saigon."

LOAD-DATE: August 22, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: The Asian Garden Mall in the area of Westminister, Calif., known
as "Little Saigon," has become the scene of a culture clash that is purely
Vietnamese. Some shops display the South Vietnamese flag. (Bart Bartholomew for
The New York Times)

Map of California highlighting Westminster

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              139 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 22, 1991, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1133 words



AFTER THE COUP A10-18

The Soviet coup abruptly collapsed, and President Gorbachev returned to Moscow
to reassert control. The coup seemed simply to fizzle under the disdain of the
masses who rallied to the summons of Boris Yeltsin, and the irresolution of the
plotters, who failed to garner support. Page A1

Boris Yeltsin was hailed with a standing ovation in the Russian Parliament.
During the crisis, he was able to swing together the elements that helped
reverse the coup without large-scale bloodshed. A1

News analysis: The bungled takeover left the incumbents of the Soviet past
discredited. It also legitimized the claim of post-Communist reformers that they
are the rightful heirs to power, and invigorated them for the mammoth task of
civilizing their country. A1

The Kremlin junta fled from Moscow, and people there were free once more to
wonder about their longer-running crises and not have to suffer the
inconvenience of snaking their food-store lines around tanks and boyish-looking
riot troops.A1

Lithuanians clash with Soviet force A14

General's activities during the coup still a mystery A13

U.S. officials weren't convinced coup would fail A16

President Bush began looking ahead to a changed Soviet Union in which he expects
democratic reform to leap forward and Boris Yeltsin to enjoy an "enormous" new
stature in his own country and around the world. A15

News analysis: United States policy toward Moscow will require a comprehensive
recalibration after the coup's collapse, even as President Bush savors a
personal triumph and a triumph for democracy. A1

Two Russians reach new heights in U.S. poll A18

World financial markets rallied as word spread from the Soviet Union that
Monday's coup had collapsed and that President Gorbachev would be restored to
power. D1

Eastern Europe: Former satellites taste vulnerability A17

Soviet emigres in Brooklyn express surprise and relief A18

TV critic's notebook: The images of heroism A18

INTERNATIONAL A3-9, A19

Economic sanctions against Iraq should be lifted for the good of the Iraqi
people, said President Mubarak, who had been chief among Arab leaders aligned
against Saddam Hussein in the Persian Gulf crisis. A3

Prime Minister Shamir's plans to attend a Middle East peace conference sponsored
by the United States and the Soviet Union have not changed, he said, though he
indicated that the failed coup may delay the gathering.  A3 Gaza Journal: The
veiled looked is enforced with a vengeance A4

President Salinas of Mexico challenged opposition leaders to prove their claims
of voter fraud, calling his party's big victory an endorsement of changes he has
carried out. A7

Rivals to allow Yugoslav Government to function A5

Churches to mediate in Madagascar A8

For China, a summer of diplomatic triumphs A19

NATIONAL A20-24, B10-12

Senator Al Gore will not run in the 1992 Democratic primary for President, he
announced, adding his name to a growing list of Democrats who have elected not
to challenge President Bush next year. A20

The impact on Salomon Brothers of the growing Treasury markets scandal spread,
as more clients suspended doing business with the firm, and a state treasury
announced it would stop purchasing the short-term debt the firm issues to
finance itself. D1

The F.D.A. has begun a crackdown on the use by pharmaceutical companies of video
news releases and says it plans to tighten its scrutiny of written news releases
as well. D1

Washington at Work: A crusader driven by outrage D1

Lung cancer passes heart ills as smokers' main killer B10

Cuban inmates seized control of a medium-security section of a Federal prison in
Alabama and took 11 hostages, a day before some of the Cubans were to be
deported. A23

Vietnamese refugee communities throughout the United States are still struggling
to balance the ways and pace of life here with their longings for the life of
pre-war Vietnam. A20

Oregon's first woman governor, Barbara Roberts, won the seat as an underdog, and
faces the challenge of carrying out the state's highly praised education and
health care programs on a tight budget.  B11

Judge is held biased and barred from trial of officers in beating A20

Three anti-abortion protest leaders are jailed A22

Serial killer may have slain 16 in California B12

Nurse in Georgia is called a killer B12

REGIONAL B1-9

Black youths scuffled with the police in the Crown Heights section of Brooklyn,
even as Mayor Dinkins tried to personally calm the racially troubled
neighborhood after two nights of violence. B1

Dinkins, seeking peace, finds menacing crowd B2

Charges in accident are studied B3

Reporter's notebook: Fear, anger and loss in Crown Heights B3

Public campaign funds were disbursed by the City Campaign Finance Board to 68
candidates for City Council. The move is expected to have a profound effect on
several races. B1

The nominee for health chief of New York State, Dr. Mark Chassin, is emerging as
the David Souter of gubernatorial appointees, a man with little public record on
major health issues and little freedom to stake out his positions. B1

The Connecticut budget quagmire persisted, as lawmakers found themselves in a
thicket of details and fine print that seemed almost as perilous as previous
budget battles.  B1

On Long Island, many regain electric service B9

U.S. inquiry in St. John's case said to be rejected B5

Queens man held in rape of Brooklyn prosecutor B4

Aid in Happy Land case is eluding victims' kin B9

Inwood Journal: Of changing enclaves and changing ways B8

Is a Fifth Avenue rose wilting?  D1

BUSINESS DIGEST D1

The Home Section

Failed dreams that paved the way in home design C1

Elegant new life for the "gaudy" canna C1

Couples who tread a 225-mile tightrope C1

Parent & Child C2

Beene opens a showroom for his designs C5

Lobbyist by day, hobbyist in wood by night C12

Arts/Entertainment

Sculptor's ordeal with steel C13

Brandon Tartikoff on Paramount C13

Dance: Martine van Hamel C13

Word and Image: "African Silences" by Peter Matthiessen C18

Obituaries D22

Wolfgang Hildesheimer, novelist, playwright and painter

Sydney Gittler, coat retailer

James MacLachlan, professor

Sports B14-20

Baseball: Strawberry goes on a tear B16

Why boo Harrelson?  B17

Basketball: Suns' owner explores Ewing deal B15

Column: Berkow on umpires and lawsuits B15

Football: Hostetler picked over Simms B15

New Giant coach makes mark B19

Tennis: Road to the U.S. Open: A qualifier's life B20

Editorials/Letters/Op-Ed

Editorials A26

Now, finish the revolution

Cleaning up Salomon's mess

A life in the theater

LOAD-DATE: August 22, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              140 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 22, 1991, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Women Have the Right Stuff to Fly

SECTION: Section A; Page 26; Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 263 words


To the Editor:

In "Women in the Wild Blue Yonder" (Op-Ed, Aug. 7), Elaine Tyler May shows a
fundamental misunderstanding of the importance of the physiological factor in
flying high-performance aircraft.

An aircraft maneuvering at high speed generates tremendous physical stress on
the pilot, referred to as "G" forces. The latest-generation fighters, like the
F-16, are much more demanding in this regard than Vietnam-era aircraft like the
F-4, both because G forces are greater in the more agile F-16 and because the
rate at which these forces manifest themselves is significantly higher.

A way to protect oneself in a high-G environment is to develop upper-body
strength, which is why one finds weight-training facilities in fighter squadrons
these days. The ultimate consequence of being inadequately prepared for high-G
flight is loss of consciousness while maneuvering, which is likely to be fatal
in the low-altitude regime where much of today's flying takes place.

The degree to which the strength requirement becomes a gender issue depends on
the extent to which individuals of either sex are capable of developing the
physiological capacity required for sustained high-G flight. It is probably true
many men and most women would find this requirement difficult. Those women who
meet the physiological standard for flying fighter aircraft should be afforded
the chance to enter the demanding and lengthy training program subject to the
same criteria as men.

RALPH S. CLEM
Miami, Aug. 7, 1991

The writer is a colonel in the Air Force Reserves.

LOAD-DATE: August 22, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              141 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 23, 1991, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Books of The Times;
A Lawyer Amid Old and New Torments

BYLINE: By MICHIKO KAKUTANI

SECTION: Section C; Page 25; Column 1; Weekend Desk; Word and Image Page

LENGTH: 589 words



Closing Arguments
By Frederick Busch
288 pages. Ticknor & Fields. $19.95.

Love and estrangement between fathers and sons, husbands and wives and lovers:
this has been a theme that Frederick Busch has returned to again and again in a
dozen novels and short-story collections. His latest novel, "Closing Arguments,"
is no exception.

As he tells us himself in short, staccato reminiscences, Mr. Busch's narrator,
Mark Brennan, has been having rather a bad time of it. He's worried that his
pretty wife, Rochelle, has been having an affair. He suspects that his sullen
teen-age son, Jack, is doing drugs. And he learns that his daughter, Mickey, is
in love with a homosexual who has tested positive for the AIDS virus. All of
them, in turn, are worried that something is wrong with him; they are constantly
asking Mark if he's O.K.

Mark, we learn, works as a lawyer in a small upstate New York town. He does a
lot of routine legal work -- helping people close on real-estate deals, that
kind of thing -- but he occasionally accepts a pro bono case as well. Recently,
he tells us, he has been having a hard time keeping his mind on his work: his
mind keeps wandering back to his tour in Vietnam. Apparently Mark was a fighter
pilot known as Goblin, who was shot down and held prisoner by the Vietcong.
After much torture and humiliation (events that brought back painful memories of
his abused childhood), he says he managed to escape his captors and return home.
He later married Rochelle, an antiwar protester, who is now campaigning to get a
Vietnam War memorial erected in town. Mark sees her effort as a symbolic
gesture, meant to signify the healing of the country's -- and their marriage's
-- psychic wounds.

"I was Schelle's reconciliation project," he tells us. "This isn't fair to her.
But I was. By 'fair,' I mean just. Even accurate. She must have had so much in
mind about us once, and maybe now, even. But I was the way she healed the United
States of America."

Mark, himself, is anything but healed, and he soon finds that his latest pro
bono case has set off a full-scale re-evaluation of his life and sense of self.
The case involves an attractive social worker named Estella Pritchett, who is
accused of murdering her lover during a bout of rough sex reminiscent of the
famous "preppy case" (County of New York v. Chambers). It's not long before Mark
has become involved in a dangerous sexual alliance with Estella, while at the
same time arguing on her behalf in court. As her lawyer, he draws on his own
emotional history to build a case for her defense. He argues that Estella is the
survivor of childhood abuse, and that she suffers, like many Vietnam veterans,
from "post-traumatic stress" disorder: some sort of flashback apparently
occurred during sex, he contends, resulting in the inadvertent death of her
lover.

In letting Mark relate these lurid events to the reader, Mr. Busch displays an
authoritative feel for courtroom maneuvering. And his descriptions of Mark's
remembered experiences in Vietnam possess a similar air of verisimilitude. For
all its careful craft, however, "Closing Arguments" never really takes off as a
compelling or credible story. Everything about the book feels a little forced,
from the sensationalistic murder trial and Mark's sexual involvement with the
defendant, to the revelations about Mark's true character, which are withheld
until the novel's final pages. Indeed, the reader finishes the volume feeling
manipulated, rather than satisfied or engaged.

LOAD-DATE: August 23, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Frederick Busch (Jerry Bauer)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              142 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 23, 1991, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Pierre Vo Thanh Trinh, Hanoi-Backed Priest

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section D; Page 17; Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 142 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Aug. 22


The Rev. Pierre Vo Thanh Trinh, head of Vietnam's Government-sponsored group for
Roman Catholics, has died at the age of 75, the official Vietnam News Agency
said today.

Father Trinh died on Wednesday at Thong Nhat Hospital in Ho Chi Minh City, said
the report, monitored in Bangkok. It did not give the cause of death.

The report said he was deputy chairman of the National Assembly and chairman of
the Committee for Solidarity of Vietnamese Catholics. The state-sponsored
organization deals with Vietnam's Catholic minority of 4 million to 5 million,
in a total population of about 67 million.

Father Trinh's committee has been criticized as an attempt by the ruling
Communist Party to control the activities of Catholics. But the authorities have
relaxed restrictions on the church since reformers took charge of the party in
late 1986.

LOAD-DATE: August 23, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary (Obit)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              143 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 24, 1991, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Kerry Sees Help on Americans Missing in Asia

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Page 2; Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 431 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Aug. 23


The leaders of Vietnam and Cambodia have renewed pledges of an "open inquiry" to
resolve rapidly the fates of Americans listed as missing in action in those
Southeast Asian nations, Senator John Kerry said today.

After a weeklong visit to Vietnam and Cambodia, Mr. Kerry, a Massachusetts
Democrat, said the two Communist countries had promised to allow United States
helicopters to take part in the search. They also pledged to welcome Americans
making their own inquiries and to give unprecedented access to a newly formed
Senate committee investigating the possibility that some of the missing
Americans are still alive, he said.

"I think it is very significant that they are willing to have that kind of
intrusion, that kind of open inquiry," Mr. Kerry told a news conference. "It
seems to me at first blush that they are extraordinarily committed to make that
happen."

Met With Many Officials

During his trip to Hanoi and Ho Chi Minh City in Vietnam and Phnom Penh in
Cambodia, Mr. Kerry met with Do Muoi, head of Vietnam's Communist Party, Prime
Minister Hun Sen of Cambodia and a number of other officials in both countries.

Mr. Kerry's comments echoed those of United States officials who say that
Vietnam, Cambodia and Laos have significantly stepped up cooperation on the
issue of 2,273 Americans listed as missing in Southeast Asia.

Vietnam is eager for diplomatic relations with Washington and the lifting of a
United States trade embargo hampering recovery of that country's ruinous
economy.

Mr. Kerry, a highly decorated Vietnam War veteran, said he made the trip to lay
the groundwork for an effort by the 12-member Senate committee he heads. Mr.
Kerry said he also planned to visit Laos.

Did Some Stay Behind?

Mr. Kerry indicated that he thought a small number of Americans may have stayed
behind in Vietnam of their own free will, but he declined to give details.

"It is very difficult to comprehend the rationale for a government to formally
be holding somebody, and I saw nothing while I was there to change my mind about
creating a rationale," he said when asked about possible American prisoners of
war in Indochina.

Mr. Kerry said Vietnamese leaders agreed to allow a small United States team,
based in Hanoi, which is searching for missing Americans to have more logistical
support, including helicopters. He said three to four American helicopters may
be sent to Vietnam to assist the search, with the Vietnamese doing the flying.

He said this would allow quicker movement to areas where "live sightings" of
Americans are reported.

LOAD-DATE: August 24, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              144 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 24, 1991, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

About New York

BYLINE: By Douglas Martin

SECTION: Section 1; Page 28; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 769 words


The homeless, the panhandlers, the ill, the forever lost -- all God's most
precious children -- were gathered at the Bowery Mission to attend a church
service in return for a free meal afterward. They reeked of too few baths, too
much whisky, too many years on the pavement.

Without being told, they matter-of-factly dropped their bags -- some paper, some
plastic, some little more than rags -- behind the last pew. They stumbled to sit
down, then began waiting -- whether for Jesus or dinner or eternity wasn't
apparent. They had been here before.

If one had thought to go outside and look uptown along the Bowery, he would have
seen the Empire State Building aglow in a peach blossom sunset. To the properly
disposed, miracles might have seemed possible.

But the miracle Wednesday night was indisputably inside. Elizabeth Tufts and
Adalberto Agosto -- lovers for five years, lost to each other for the next five
-- had found each other and were getting married.

At last sighting, he had been a drug addict and she a self-described lush and
wild woman. Their lives had further unraveled after they split up in 1986 and
lost touch. Separately and unbeknownst to one another, they found solace in
fundamentalist Christianity.

God, they are certain, personally reunited them three weeks ago by placing Miss
Tufts in a seat on the uptown No. 1 train next to a sister-in-law of Mr. Agosto.
Within hours, Miss Tufts was on the phone to her former lover in Puerto Rico
where he was working as a farmhand.

Within four days, the two 40-year-olds were hugging and crying and exchanging
Bible verses at Kennedy International Airport. Less than a week later, they were
tying the knot at the mission where the bride -- once head nurse in Bellevue
Hospital's emergency room and now dedicated to helping the homeless -- works as
chief cook.

"Ever been to a wedding like this before?" the Rev. John J. Willock beamed after
pronouncing them husband and wife.

Nope. It was strange and beautiful and, tragically, perhaps just in time. Miss
Tufts last year had a mastectomy to treat a cancer that has likely spread to her
lungs and pelvis. "I never asked for a prognosis," she said. "It's probably not
so great."

She has prayed neither for healing nor for the human love she so desired.
Sometimes she prayed to die. She is glad for little things, like God not
allowing the chemotherapy to cause her hair to fall out before the wedding.

The ceremony was tacked onto the regular evening service. There was the nightly
piano-thumping, hallelujah-shouting music and the saving of a half-dozen souls
in front of the altar. The matrimonial business began with the unfurling of a
red-ribboned scroll.

"The King is having a wedding feast," it proclaimed. "All who will shall come."

There was a rousing musical salute by the mission's kitchen crew, the singing of
"Blessed Quietness" by one and all and a serious dose of down-home preaching. By
the time vows were said, rings exchanged and kisses planted, the congregation
was hooting and clapping as if at a sporting event.

The bride tossed her bouquet, then assumed a position by the front door to pass
out cake to her treasured guests as they tottered back to the street. "Hey, you
give me a kiss, honey," she chirped to a man not exactly used to being asked for
such.

It was the high drama in Moscow and the low one in Brooklyn that defined the
past week. But beneath the din, tens of thousands of little stories like this
one happened, silent and necessary proof that life goes on and on.

It began long ago at St. Luke's Hospital where Miss Tufts once worked as a nurse
and Mr. Agosto as a nurse's attendant. They fell so passionately in love that he
abandoned his wife and two young daughters.

Life spun blearily fast, with every night finding them in bars. But even Miss
Tufts' tolerance was eventually broken by Mr. Agosto's drug use. She fled,
leaving no phone number or forwarding address.

For him, there followed years of struggling to shake the drugs he first
encountered in Vietnam. He lost his job as a mailman. For her, there was a bad
marriage and oceans of booze. Just when they thought they might fall forever,
each separately landed in the safety net of religion.

He says he often thought of her, but knew that anybody with her un-Christian
habits was no longer for him. She had wandered his Bronx neighborhood in the
hope of saving his soul.

After a couple of days' honeymoon at a friend's apartment in Rockaway, Queens,
the couple will return to the mission. Mrs. Agosto will resume cooking. Mr.
Agosto will wash dishes.

LOAD-DATE: August 24, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              145 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 24, 1991, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

News Summary

SECTION: Section 1; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1200 words


After the Coup 4-9

The aftermath of the attempted coup unleashed a shock wave that left the
Communist Party reeling in retreat and President Mikhail Gorbachev yielding to
the ascendancy of the Russian president, Boris Yeltsin. Page 1

Estonians stood at an empty pedestal at Communist Party headquarters in Tallinn
and did something they said they had never done. With a larger-than-life statue
of Lenin carted away, they stood there and laughed. 1

Provinces rumble with coup echoes 8

News analysis: Boris Yeltsin and his minions were riding high, although it was
far from clear that their ascendance would translate into the radical
transformation of Soviet society that has been their goal. 1

Yeltsin suspends Pravda and five other papers 8

Three reformers in charge of K.G.B. and interior ministries 5

A huge rout of the Communist Party, for decades the bulwark of the Soviet state,
forced bosses around the country to defect or kept them out of their offices in
a mass retribution for the party's complicity in the coup. 1

Whose finger was on Soviet nuclear trigger in coup?  9

President Bush praised the Soviets for the Government shakeup and said that the
nation was moving rapidly toward "the objectives we want." He said: "Clearly we
are in extraordinary times." 9

With crisis eased, Strauss is leaving 8

Kennan says failed coup eclipses '17 revolution 9

Prime Minister John Major of Britain will convene senior officials of seven
leading industrial nations next week to discuss what might be done to further
economic aid and political reform in the Soviet Union. 9

International 2-3

The warring factions in Yugoslavia prepared for an escalation in the fighting as
the federal presidency's commission for monitoring the cease-fire between the
Serbs and Croats neared breakdown. 3

The head of Poland's Catholic Church expressed regret for suggesting that Jewish
demonstrators scaled the walls of an Auschwitz convent to harm the nuns. He is
preparing a trip to the United States. 3

The fates of missing servicemen in Southeast Asia will be the subject of an
"open inquiry" pledged by the leaders of Vietnam and Cambodia, Senator John
Kerry said. 2

Beijing Journal: For jailed scholar, wife's daring voice 2

Madagascar head loosens grip in attempt to defuse opposition 3

To save its economy, Brazil plans to amend constitution 42

National 10-14

Jim Bakker's sentence was reduced to 18 years, less than the 45-year term thrown
out by an appeals court but more than the fallen evangelist and his followers
had hoped for.  10

The recent rise of Charlotte, N.C., to become the nation's third largest banking
center was long in coming, residents say. But the city's success is very much
the story of the rebirth of the South. 10

Moderate drinking can cut the risk of heart disease, scientists said in one of
the most extensive reports on the issue. The study said that one or two drinks
daily decreases the risk of heart disease substantially. 10

A plan to combat lead poisoning among children is urgent, the Bush
Administration said, but the Federal Government will not be the leaders of the
program, either financially or legislatively. 14

Eight F.B.I. workers were punished for their role in the harassment of a black
agent in a case that has come to symbolize the racial bitterness within the law
enforcement agency. 11

The hostage standoff at a prison in Alabama entered its third day. Officials
would not disclose what was happening inside except to say that contact was made
with some hostages of the Cuban detainees. 11

The anti-abortion protests in Wichita are wearying the sturdy Kansas city of
300,000. Residents, who cannot remember such a time of turmoil, want to begin a
time of healing.  12

Convicted killers are put to death in Virginia and Missouri 12

U.S. returns two fraternity houses seized in drug raid 14

New orders for durable goods leaped 10.7 percent in July, the biggest increase
in nearly 21 years, the Commerce Department said. Economists said the news may
indicate that the recession will not reappear. 39

Regional 27-30

The violence in Crown Heights abated somewhat as a massive police presence
locked itself into the racially torn section of Brooklyn. But city officials
were bracing for a march planned by the Rev. Al Sharpton. 27

The police did not respond quickly enough to the violence in Crown Heights this
week, a top police official said. He said there was no coherent plan and not
enough manpower. 29

Crown Heights was a battleground and meeting ground for troublemakers, activists
and concerned neighbors. As the violence appears to die down, residents continue
to talk about the trouble and what caused it. 29

The rough world of garbage hauling in New York City has its share of muscling in
on the competition. But one man gave it a new meaning by trying to steal
customers from the U.S. Government, officials say.  27

A faculty committee at City College will recommend that no action be taken
against Prof. Leonard Jeffries Jr. for a racially charged speech he made last
month, the head of the committee said. 27

Graduate student killed in fight at Yale campus 30

An apartment tower on the West Side that is now state-subsidized may be
converted into a private cooperative, and New York City may not block the
conversion, a state appeals court has ruled. 28

Sale of midtown office tower may be bad sign for market 28

Threats of revenge on Election Day were about the only sounds to be heard in
Connecticut's Capitol, which was finally quiet after its 53-day budget siege. 27

Now new voters may register at the D.M.V.  30

Rapist free in New Jersey slip found and held in Las Vegas 30

Business Digest 39

Sports 31-35

Baseball: Viola loses again 31

Michael reveals visit to Taylor 33

Yankees lose to Blue Jays 31

Piniella takes steps on umps' suit 33

Little League coach shares secrets 35

Column: Chass on teasing Boston 31

Football: Chance for fine-tuning for Giants 35

Jets' puzzle taking shape 35

Sports People 35

Tennis: Shaky step forward for would-be qualifier 31

Connors falls short 33

Track and Field: Bubka soars up, up, away 33

Arts/Entertainment

To sell or not to sell art?  15

Film: "Harley Davidson and the Marlboro Man" 16

Music: Fu Hsing Chinese Opera Troupe 15

Ziggy Marley 15

Eric Gales, guitarist 19

Music in Review 19

Obituaries

Colleen Dewhurst, the actress, died of cancer at her home in South Salem, N.Y.
She was 67 years old. Ms. Dewhurst's career on stage, screen and television
spanned 40 years and earned her Tony and Emmy Awards. 36

Consumer's World 52

Devices that try to outwit shoplifters

Asthma drug gets a second look

Editorials/Letters/Op-Ed

Editorials 24

Smashed icons

Chassin -- promising, untested

Letters 24

Russell Baker: Saving the world 25

Anna Quindlen: Three-letter word 25

William Taubman: Yesterday's hero 25

Stephen P. Pizzo: Protest, in peace 25

Joan Finney: Pro-life, pro-law 25

Herbert J. Gans: Shared work can help New York 25

LOAD-DATE: August 24, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              146 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 24, 1991, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Observer;
Saving the World

BYLINE: By RUSSELL BAKER

SECTION: Section 1; Page 25; Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 695 words


My Committee on the Pace of Life sends these statistics on time consumed by
humanity's most vital activities in the 1990's:

 War, 100 hours;
 Coup, 60 hours;
 Baseball, 3 hours.

It is instantly obvious that while wars are getting shorter, baseball is getting
longer. Whether coups are also getting longer is hard to say since our sample
coup was a failed model. It also occurred in the mild Soviet climate and not in
the torrid coup belt, the so-called "home office of coups," where unbearable
heat may speed things up since participants are naturally in a hurry to take
over nice air-conditioned palaces.

The advent of three-hour baseball games alarms the committee minority. Not long
ago, their report notes, two and a half hours was plenty of time to play a
baseball game while some teams could do it in a mere two hours. The report
continues:

"Raw numbers obscure the shocking truth about the baseball bloat. Some people
will say, 'But the average game consumes only a silly 3 percent of the time
needed for a war, so why get excited?'

"Here's why: World War II lasted nearly six years. That's about 2,190 days, or
52,560 hours, 3 percent of which is about 1,577 hours. Imagine World War II
Americans sitting through a single baseball game 1,577 hours long. That's 65
days if nobody ever pauses to sleep. It would take an entire season to play
three games! America wouldn't have had time left over to whip Germany and Japan
into shape to run the world economy."

The majority report rejects "this alarmist suggestion that baseball is hogging
all the time" and ascribes "this unduly bleak assessment" to the fact that the
minority report's author, Prof. J. Yardley, is "notoriously baseballocentric."

Parenthetically, let me say that I have warned all my committees that severe
punishment will be administered to anyone caught writing multisyllabic words
ending in -ocentric; and that, true to my word, the author of the majority
report is at this very moment serving two weeks on bread and water after having
been stripped of his new sneakers.

Despite his offense, the majority report's author, Dr. P. Bengloss, is trenchant
when warning that our statistics point to "something far more amusing than just
another case of professional sport running amok."

History, he believes, is now controlled by the attention span of the television
audience. What is strange is not that baseball has become interminable, compared
with war, but that wars and coups must now get on and off faster than a
mini-series.

Dr. Bengloss: "We are convinced that television will no longer permit wars and
coups to run endlessly on in competition with soaps. Our statistics show we are
in an era when world leaders can be canceled by the TV audience just as
ruthlessly as sitcoms are canceled when that audience tunes them out.

"The figures mean that trying to keep a war running longer than five days or a
coup longer than three invites the ultimate political disaster: TV floperoo,
audiences on all continents yawning through Pentagon press briefings, big-shot
news conferences, terrific bombing footage, breathless anchors."

The reports states that the whole world will switch from "All My Children" to
CNN and stay there about as long as everybody can survive on carry-out pizza
without weeping. After that it's so long, Bobby Battista and Bernard Shaw. Get
off our soaps Dan, Peter and Tom.

The happy conclusion to which all this leads is that there can never be another
World War II, another Vietnam or a successful power grab by political hacks so
lacking in the tiniest jot, tittle or iota of charisma that they sit for what
feels like a years-long press conference on the global screen oozing tedium into
the planet's parlors.

Television simply won't let it happen. In short, that accursed box may save the
world.

Such at least is my committee's majority opinion, which I enjoy believing as I
enjoy believing all things I passionately want to believe. If the majority
proves wrong, I shall make them attend an entire season of baseball games to
watch players, managers, coaches, umpires, salesmen and millions of fans preen
interminably for cameras.

LOAD-DATE: August 24, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              147 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 25, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

BEST SELLERS: August 25, 1991

SECTION: Section 7; Page 20; Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1357 words



          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Fiction

 1          1   THE SUM OF ALL FEARS, by Tom Clancy. (Putnam, $24.95.) Middle
                Eastern terrorists edge the world to the brink of nuclear war,
                and a floundering President may not be able to cope.

 2      2  24   THE FIRM, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $19.95.) A young lawyer
                learns that his firm is engaged in secret, possibly illegal
                activities.

 3      1   9   THE KITCHEN GOD'S WIFE, by Amy Tan. (Putnam, $22.95.) A
                Chinese-American matriarch tells the harrowing story of her
                life.

 4      3   4   MAXIMUM BOB, by Elmore Leonard. (Delacorte, $20.) A woman
                probation officer pursues the people trying to kill a redneck
                Florida judge. (LP)

 5      6   5   OUTER BANKS, by Anne Rivers Siddons. (HarperCollins, $19.95.)
                An interior decorator comes to terms with herself at a college
                reunion.

 6      5  14   HEIR TO THE EMPIRE, by Timothy Zahn. (Spectra/Bantam, $15.) The
                survival of the "Star Wars" galaxy is menaced by new forces.

 7      8  16   LOVES MUSIC, LOVES TO DANCE, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Simon &
                Schuster, $21.95.) Two Manhattan women, doing research into
                personal ads, get caught in the snare of a serial killer.

 8      4   5   PASTIME, by Robert B. Parker. (Putnam, $19.95.) The private eye
                Spenser learns much about his own past while helping a young
                man track down his mother, who has disappeared.

 9      9   9   PARADISE, by Judith McNaught. (Pocket, $19.95.) The heirs of
                two family dynasties find true love when one of their
                businesses is threatened.

10 *    7   9   BEAST, by Peter Benchley. (Random House, $21.) The
                disappearance of a couple off Bermuda raises a question: is a
                creature from the deep responsible?

11     14  74   OH, THE PLACES YOU'LL GO! by Dr. Seuss. (Random House, $12.95.)
                The problems of finding your way through life; in verse and
                pictures.

12     10   5   SKY MASTERS, by Dale Brown. (Fine/Putnam, $21.95.) The United
                States Air Force comes to the aid of the Philippines in a war
                with China in 1994.

13 *   11  16   AS THE CROW FLIES, by Jeffrey Archer. (HarperCollins, $22.95.)
                Inspired by his grandfather, a London vendor, a man strives to
                create the biggest store in the world. (LP)

14     12   3   TEXAS! SAGE, by Sandra Brown. (Doubleday, $18.) A young woman
                who has always been able to wrap men around her finger meets
                her match on a visit to her hometown.

15         14   "H" IS FOR HOMICIDE, by Sue Grafton. (Holt, $17.95.) The
                private eye Kinsey Millhone on the trail of two perpetrators of
                an insurance scam.

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Nonfiction

 1      2  10   PARLIAMENT OF WHORES, by P. J. O'Rourke. (Entrekin/Atlantic
                Monthly, $19.95.) A humorist's attempt to explain the Federal
                Government.

 2      3   5   WHEN YOU LOOK LIKE YOUR PASSPORT PHOTO, IT'S TIME TO GO HOME,
                by Erma Bombeck. (HarperCollins, $19.95.) The tribulations of
                travel suffered in all parts of the world.

 3      1  10   CHUTZPAH, by Alan M. Dershowitz. (Little, Brown, $22.95.) A
                prominent law professor's reflections on the lot of Jews in
                America, past, present and future.

 4      4  40   IRON JOHN, by Robert Bly. (Addison-Wesley, $19.95.) The passage
                of the male from boyhood into manhood, as practiced in various
                cultures.

 5      5   8   TOUJOURS PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Knopf, $20.) The charms of
                rustic Provence, as savored by a London advertising man who
                moved there.

 6      6  15   FIRE IN THE BELLY, by Sam Keen. (Bantam, $19.95.) A philosopher
                explores the changing role of the male in today's society.

 7      7   7   BOSS OF BOSSES, by Joseph F. O'Brien and Andris Kurins. (Simon
                & Schuster, $22.95.) The downfall of the mobster Paul
                Castellano.

 8      8   8   A QUESTION OF CHARACTER, by Thomas C. Reeves. (Free Press,
                $24.95.) A biography of John F. Kennedy.

 9      9  15   THE COMMANDERS, by Bob Woodward. (Simon & Schuster, $24.95.)
                How the President and his high military commanders made their
                decisions during the first two years of the Bush
                Administration.

10     11   8   DAVE BARRY TALKS BACK, by Dave Barry. (Crown, $18.) A
                collection of columns by the syndicated humorist.

11         13   ILLIBERAL EDUCATION, by Dinesh D'Souza. (Free Press, $19.95.) A
                critical account of the way matters of race and sex are treated
                on campus.

12 *   10   2   AND THE BEAT GOES ON, by Sonny Bono. (Pocket, $19.95.) The
                veteran pop star and current Mayor of Palm Springs, Calif.,
                recalls his roller-coaster career with and without Cher.

13          2   THE BEAUTY MYTH, by Naomi Wolf. (Morrow, $21.95.) An argument
                against our society's emphasis on the importance of women's
                physical appearance.

14 *   14   7   UNDER THE INFLUENCE, by Peter Hernon and Terry Ganey. (Simon &
                Schuster, $24.95.) An unauthorized account of the
                Anheuser-Busch beer dynasty.

15     13  12   WOODY ALLEN, by Eric Lax. (Knopf, $24.) The life of the film
                director, writer and actor.

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous

 1      1   2   FINAL EXIT, by Derek Humphry. (Hemlock Society/Carol, $16.95.)
                The case for euthanasia in instances of terminal illness and
                ways to accomplish it.

 2          7   DO IT! LET'S GET OFF OUR BUTS, by John-Roger and Peter
                McWilliams. (Prelude/Bantam, $20.) How to cope with the human
                condition.

 3      5  42   WHERE'S WALDO? by Martin Handford. (Little, Brown, $12.95.) An
                illustrated book in which the game is to find a hitchhiker
                named Waldo.

 4      4  29   FIND WALDO NOW, by Martin Handford. (Little, Brown, $12.95.) A
                book in which the game is to find the ubiquitous chap as he
                travels from ancient Egypt to the present.

 5 *    2  85   THE GREAT WALDO SEARCH, by Martin Handford. (Little, Brown,
                $12.95.) A book of illustrated games.


These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,000
bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 28,000 other
retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets. The figures are
statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United
States.

*An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect
the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of
the book above.

LP indicates that a book is available in large print.



AND BEAR IN MIND



(Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)

ANNE SEXTON: A Biography, by Diane Wood Middlebrook. (Peter Davison/Houghton
Mifflin, $24.95.) Ms. Middlebrook, a professor of English at Stanford, gives a
balanced, insightful, intelligent account of how a poorly educated, mentally ill
woman became a poet of distinctive and original gifts.

ENTRANCES & EXITS: A Life in and Out of the Theatre, by Norris Houghton.
(Limelight, $29.95.) A consistently amusing, pertinent and touching book of
memoirs at 81 by the illustrious producer, director, artistic director and
conscience of Off Broadway.

AFRICAN SILENCES, by Peter Matthiessen. (Random House, $21.) Three extended
essays on Africa by a distinguished nature writer whose environmental warnings
and descriptions of destructive social forces are as urgent and relevant as
ever.

CLOSING ARGUMENTS, by Frederick Busch. (Ticknor & Fields, $19.95.) Mr. Busch's
15th book of fiction is a tight, dense, dark, complicated novel about child
abuse, sex, violence, war and law.

WAITING FOR THE WEEKEND, by Witold Rybczynski. (Viking, $18.95.) A slim, relaxed
and graceful excursion, by the author of "Home," into the social history of how
we live and why we do it differently on some days than on others.

RIVETHEAD: Tales From the Assembly Line, by Ben Hamper. (Warner, $19.95.) A
roughshod, vehement autobiographical essay that conveys the atmosphere and the
malaise of a generation that cannot find satisfaction or self-esteem in factory
work.

THE NIGHT TRAVELLERS, by Elizabeth Spencer. (Viking, $21.95.) Personal
relationships, not historical events, hold together this strong novel that deals
with civilians who felt obliged to resist the Vietnam War, even unto violence.


LOAD-DATE: August 25, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              148 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 25, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Learning to Meet That Deadline

BYLINE: By ALBERT J. PARISI

SECTION: Section 12NJ; Page 15; Column 1; New Jersey Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 834 words

DATELINE: BLAIRSTOWN


IT was any journalist's nightmare. With deadline fast approaching, Jeffrey
McMurray needed to talk to the county prosecutor's office about the latest
developments of the capital murder case.

But would the prosecutor be available for comment? Would he have anything new to
say? Mr. McMurray knew that his article hinged on a good quotation.

Had he called the prosecutor's office or the courthouse? asked Molly J. Clemons,
an editor pondering Mr. McMurray's situation. He had, and was advised to
personally make contact with the prosecutor's secretary and establish rapport. A
good secretary always knows where the boss is and can get a message out in a
pinch, it was explained.

For Mr. McMurray, 17 years old and a junior at Truman High School in
Independence, Mo., it was a lesson learned the hard way. But that was the point
of the Blair Summer School for Journalism, he said to a recent visitor.

"I'm learning how to tackle a brick wall between what I'm trying to do and what
I have to get accomplished," he said.

He was one of 23 high school students from across the country as well as Italy,
Korea and Japan participating in a recent five-week seminar at the Blair
Academy, a 148-year-old boarding school on 300 acres of rolling countryside in
Warren County.

Program in Its 28th Year

The program, in its 28th year, has helped to inspire a number of youths who have
gone on to major news organization, said Ron Clemons, the summer program's
director and a journalism instructor at Truman High School. His wife, Molly, is
the school's vice principal.

"Here, these kids get a taste of what it's all about," Mr. Clemons said, "and
they learn lessons about life and writing that they will carry with them always,
whether they choose to go into journalism or not."

At the program, quality, not quantity, is stressed. Students learn that "every
topic under the sun" has been written about, but that distinguished reporting is
exemplified by topical writing and having something new to say by bringing a
special insight home to both readers and viewers.

As an example, the students, who produce their own campus newspaper during the
seminar's five weeks, were assigned to cover the Fourth of July festivities in
the village.

"One student came back with a piece on people who weren't able to enjoy the
celebration because they had to work on the holiday," said Mrs. Clemons, who
teaches advanced reporting. "It was a good job and raised a point that wouldn't
normally have been explored."

Adventure and Learning

For many students it is as much an adventure as a learning experience. Jennifer
Knoeber, a 16-year-old junior from Spearville, Kan., said the program, while
tough at times, gave her the chance to travel, with visits to NBC's news studios
in New York and to The Washington Post.

"It was the first time that I was in New York, and all I did was stare and
gawk," she said. "I come from a little town with 800 people, and there's not
much to write about. After this is over, I think that I'll see lots of things in
a different, appreciative light."

Mr. Clemons said that for many students, "this is their first taste of what
college will be like" in terms of stress, hard work and deadlines.

Demanding classes that emphasize communications skills have also given students
a sense of camaraderie as well as a chance to work as an effective team, he
said.

While some students attend the program on scholarship -- the session costs
$2,400 a student, not including travel expenses or spending money -- many take
part-time jobs to earn the tuition. This year, The Philadelphia Inquirer and the
Society of Professional Journalists have each sponsored one student.

A Way to Practice English

While not all students will go on to journalism careers, the experience, Mr.
Clemons said, will give them a chance to view their surroundings and understand
that news events are many sided and not just "black and white."

Anton Seeber, 18, of Vipiteno, Italy, a small town near the Austrian border,
said the program was an outstanding way to practice and improve his English as
well as a chance to delve inside himself in understanding the plight of others.

"This program, it frazzles me, but I like the pressure," he said, explaining
that he was writing an article comparing the hardships of Persian Gulf war
veterans to those of troops who served in Vietnam and World War II.

"Many suffer, but the face of war, it stays the same," he said.

For Bryce Lambert of Brunswick, Me., teaching his 26th summer at the program,
news writing here is a give-and-take experience with young people who want to
learn.

"What amazes me to no end is that when they leave here, they have a sense of
self-confidence that is so essential to being a journalist," said Mr. Lambert, a
retired Deerfield Academy English teacher. "And what I give out in terms of
teaching, I get back much more through their enthusiasm. Maybe that's why I keep
coming back each summer."

LOAD-DATE: August 25, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              149 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 25, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Cambodia Says It Gave G.I.'s Remains to U.S.

BYLINE: By AP

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 6; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 421 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Aug. 24


Cambodia has given a delegation of United States specialists what are believed
to be the remains of an American missing in action during the war in Indochina,
the official Cambodian press agency said today.

Col. William H. Jordan of the United States Army, who heads the American group,
received the remains on Friday in Phnom Penh from Deputy Foreign Minister Long
Visalo, the report said.

The agency said Colonel Jordan also met with the Deputy Interior Minister, Khim
Pon, who heads Cambodia's M.I.A. commission. Mr. Khim Pon was quoted as saying
that his Government was "always ready to closely cooperate with the U.S.
Government in solving this humanitarian issue."

The American team arrived in Phnom Penh on Thursday to discuss the status of 83
American servicemen and civilians listed as missing. Some of the missing are
American news correspondents captured by the Khmer Rouge during the war between
the United States-backed Government of Lon Nol and the Khmer Rouge guerrillas
from 1970 to 1975. The Khmer Rouge, which brutally ruled Cambodia from April
1975 through late 1978, was ousted by a Vietnamese invasion and replaced with
another Communist leadership loyal to the Vietnamese.

This Government has shown more willingness to cooperate with Washington on the
issue. Last month, American representatives made the first investigation of
alleged sightings of surviving Americans in Cambodia.

They concluded that some photographs, including one last month purportedly
showing three surviving American prisoners, were fraudulent. Still, the Bush
Administration felt compelled to dispatch the 10-member team to Thailand to look
into the circumstances under which the photograph was supposedly carried across
the Thai border into Cambodia.

In July 1990, Cambodia returned six sets of remains that it said could have been
those of missing Americans. But the United States Army's Central Identification
Laboratory in Hawaii has been unable to confirm that any of the remains are
those of Americans.

Vietnam has also stepped up its cooperation on the issue of M.I.A.'s and
prisoners of war. A total of 2,273 Americans are listed as missing in action in
Vietnam, Cambodia, Laos and in Chinese coastal waters.

The issue has stirred deep emotion in the United States, especially among
families who cling to the hope that loved ones are alive. Assertions have
persisted for years that Cambodian officials have conspired to cover up evidence
that servicemen were held in prison camps, caves and cages.

LOAD-DATE: August 25, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              150 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 25, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

AFTER THE COUP;
From Idealism to Terror to Rejection: 74 Years of Pervasive Communist Rule

BYLINE: By FELICITY BARRINGER

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 15; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1880 words


The Soviet Communist Party, condemned to the ash heap across its native land in
the last 48 hours, was born of the vision of the 19th-century philosopher Karl
Marx and molded by the turn-of-the-century revolutionary Lenin into a blunt
instrument to take over and control a sprawling, impoverished society in
turmoil.

For almost 74 years, between its rise to power in November 1917 and its leader's
repudiation of it yesterday, this institution born of ideology was church,
state, government, watchdog, exclusive club and secret society, a pervasive
presence in every aspect of daily life for the millions of people of the Soviet
Union.

For four generations, party membership was something of a Holy Grail to which
ambitious young men and women aspired. Every profession, from the military to
academia to industry, had a glass ceiling beyond which only those with party
membership could rise. Every factory, every barracks, every school, every
hospital, every academic institute, every farm, every government office had a
party cell as its real master.

Sense of Mission

Seven-year-olds were offered their first taste of party doctrine in after-school
"circles" where they wore star-shaped red pins studded with a tiny likeness of
Lenin as a boy. Early Communists had the date of their entry into the party
inscribed on their tombstones.

The pride came in part from a sense of mission. The party's 15 million members
were described in party literature as "the vanguard," leading mankind from a
past of ignorance and greed into a glowing future, a utopia of equality and
enlightenment that would be called Communism.

"Although all nations are convinced of their own superiority, only the Soviet
Union claims to be providing a new type of man," Mikhail Heller, a historian and
literary critic, wrote in his 1988 book, "The Formation of Soviet Man."

"Medical students in the Soviet Union," he said, "begin their Latin course with
the sentence, 'Homo Sovieticus sum,' " which means "I am a Soviet man." The
country's most recent Constitution states that "the ruling and directing force
in Soviet society and the core of its political system and of all state and
social organizations is the Communist Party of the Soviet Union."

Party Was Place of Intrigue

"Armed with Marxist-Leninist teaching, the Communist Party lays down the general
direction in which society is to advance as well as the line to be followed in
domestic and foreign policy, directs the general creative activity of the Soviet
people and gives a planned and scientifically founded character to its struggle
for Communism."

The party was a place of intrigue, doctrinal squabbles and, for more than two
bloody decades under the leadership of Stalin, of imprisonment and murder that
cost the lives of millions of Soviet citizens. Among them were most of the
party's founding fathers.

Over the years, Communism was a faith that rose high and died hard. In 1956,
Nikita S. Khrushchev, then the leader of the Soviet Communist Party -- a job
synonymous with national leadership until two years ago, when the office of
Soviet President was created -- declared that in the struggle between capitalism
and Communism, "we will bury you."

Shortly after the end of the Vietnam War, Communist governments, their
structures modeled wholly or partly on the Soviet system, ruled more than 15
countries, from China to South Yemen and Mozambique, from Eastern Europe to
Ethiopia to Cuba. Since the start of the crumbling of Communism in the late
1980's, culminating in the destruction of the Berlin wall, China remains the
only Communist giant, with Cuba and a small handful of other countries sharing
its basic philosophy.

Began as an Idea

The Communist Party began as an idea, expounded in 1848 -- as revolutionary
turmoil was sweeping across Europe -- by a 29-year-old German living in London.
In a 12,000-word pamphlet called "The Communist Manifesto," Marx declared, "The
history of all hitherto existing society is the history of class struggles."

He added, "Society as a whole is more and more splitting up in two great hostile
camps, into two great classes directly facing each other: bourgeoisie and
proletariat."

Orthodox Marxism in Russia found its roots in 1883 with the organization of the
"Liberation of Labor" group, founded by Georgi V. Plekhanov, Vera Zasulich and
others. Soon a young revolutionary named Lenin would take up their teachings,
along with a wave of other young intellectuals disillusioned with Russia's
autocratic rule.

Eventually Marx's basic dichotomy became the underpinning of much of the
revolutionary writing done by Lenin in exile in the late 1890's and early
1900's, when decades of festering opposition to the rule of the Romanov czars
led revolutionary parties to spring up and spread almost as fast as their
leaders could be rounded up and sent to Siberia.

Utopia of Communism

Among these exile parties, the Social Democrats began to develop the widest
following. Adopting much of Marxist thought as their bible, they debated how to
bring their Russian homeland out of feudalism and into the utopia of Communism.
In 1902, Lenin, tutored in Siberia by old veterans of "People's Will," a violent
revolutionary movement of the 1880's, wrote his pamphlet, "What is To Be Done?"

"The People's Will was structured hierarchically and operated in a
quasi-military manner," wrote the historian Richard Pipes in his 1990 book, "The
Russian Revolution."

"It rejected the principle of equality of members, replacing it with a command
structure at the head of which stood the all-powerful Executive Committee," he
wrote. "To qualify for membership in the Executive Committee, one had not only
to subscribe unquestioningly to its program but also devote oneself body and
soul to its cause."

Discipline, professionalism and hierarchical organization -- "Lenin took over
these organizational principles and practices in toto," Mr. Pipes wrote.

In 1903, when Lenin wrote an opening paragraph for the statutes of the
All-Russian Congress of Social Democrats in Brussels, a paragraph contained what
would become an idea central to the party's future.

The idea, as explained by Isaac Deutscher, the biographer of Stalin and Leon
Trotsky, was this: "The members of the clandestine organization were to be
soldiers of the revolution, voluntarily accepting its discipline and ready to
act on the orders and instructions of the central leadership."

Those who propounded the authoritarian approach won control of the party's 1903
congress in a 19-to-17 vote. That group took for itself the name by which it
would come to be known, Bolsheviks, from the Russian word for "majority" --
because Lenin and his faction had received a working majority with the protest
walkouts of other delegates. Their opponents among the Social Democrats would
become known as the Mensheviks.

Doctrine and maneuvering, however, always went hand in hand. In the revolution
that would carry the Bolsheviks into power 14 years later, the Bolsheviks would
sweep aside not only the Provisional Government of democratically minded
reformers who forced the abdication of Czar Nicholas II in March 1917, but all
other parties, including the Mensheviks who were once their comrades in exile.

The Bolsheviks assumed power with ship crews and military units going over to
their side, much as some tank officers in the streets of Moscow this week went
over to the side of President Boris N. Yeltsin of the Russian federated
republic. There followed more than two years of civil war.

Leader of Society

By the end of the war, the Communist Party was in effect what it claimed to be
-- the leader of the society now called Soviet.

The Soviet party's first great crisis in power, after the civil war ended, was
the question of who would succeed Lenin in 1924. In a shifting series of
alliances and counter-alliances, the charismatic military commander Trotsky was
forced into exile after he lost power to his rival, Stalin, who aligned himself
at different times with Nikolai Bukharin, Lev Kamenev and Grigori Zinoviev.

Mr. Zinoviev and Mr. Kamenev, losing subsequent power struggles to Stalin and
Mr. Bukharin, spent several years on the sidelines of power. In this period,
Stalin moved the party against the indifferent or often hostile mass of the
peasantry, forcibly transferring the ownership of farms to party and state
control.

During this process of "collectivization" and the years of famine that followed,
millions perished, particularly in the Ukraine.

It was Stalin who created the paranoia that was to sweep through the party in
the 1930's, culminating in the purges that peaked in 1937 but continued for
nearly two decades. The purges led to a culture of denunciations, arrest,
torture and humiliating forced "confessions" followed by trials, exile or
executions. Vast numbers of innocents as well as those who had somehow deviated
in word or deed from Communist doctrine were sent to Siberia.

The ranks of the party were decimated, with figures like Mr. Zinoviev, Mr.
Kamenev and Mr. Bukharin offered to the public as self-confessed traitors, then
tried and executed.

General Staff Falls

Among those to fall to the executioners' guns were most of the General Staff of
the Red Army. That fact, Soviet historians would later say, helped leave the
Soviet Union helpless before the Nazi onslaught of 1939.

The immense brutality and the full extent of the purges would not be revealed to
the Soviet people until 1988, after Mikhail S. Gorbachev declared there should
be no "blank spots" in history.

After the war, in which 20 million Soviet people were killed, Stalin became a
godlike figure. After his death in 1953, no other Communist leader would wreak
the terror or command the devotion of the Soviet people in the same way.

But Communist structures and doctrine were still the lifeblood of Soviet
politics. Khrushchev, who succeeded Stalin as the leader of the Communist Party,
would tell his colleagues at the 20th Party Congress in 1956 that Stalin had
been wrong to create "a cult of personality" that overshadowed the party. He
also described, in a limited way, the terror under Stalin.

'The Epoch of Stagnation'

In 1964, Khrushchev himself was overthrown by Leonid I. Brezhnev, an event that
ushered in the period now scorned as "the epoch of stagnation." The huge riches
of the nation were squandered, the economy was further wounded, and the people
sank into apathy.

It was Mr. Brezhnev's powerful but sclerotic bureaucracy that Mr. Gorbachev
inherited in 1985 when his Politburo colleagues elected him head of the party.
Through all his reforms, and even through the failed coup attempt this week, he
reiterated his faith in the ideals of the party through which he had climbed to
power.

The party, he said, could be led to abandon its old reactionary role and once
again be the vanguard of change -- although the nation at large and many
Communists themselves made it clear that they believed the party to be culpable
in the events of the week.

By yesterday, even Mr. Gorbachev -- perhaps one of the nation's strongest
believers in the party's ideals and future -- had apparently also abandoned the
faith.

LOAD-DATE: August 25, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: August 27, 1991, Tuesday

CORRECTION:

Because of a production error, an article on Sunday about the history of the
Soviet Communist Party included scrambled paragraphs in some copies. The
affected passage should read:

"The party was a place of intrigue, doctrinal squabbles and, for more than two
bloody decades under the leadership of Stalin, of imprisonment and murder that
cost the lives of millions of Soviet citizens. Among them were most of the
party's founding fathers.

"Over the years, Communism was a faith that rose high and died hard. In 1956,
Nikita S. Khrushchev, then the leader of the Soviet Communist Party -- a job
synonymous with national leadership until two years ago, when the office of
Soviet President was created -- declared that in the struggle between capitalism
and Communism, 'we will bury you.' "


GRAPHIC: Photo: Soviet soldiers removing a bust of Lenin from the Communist
Party room of a Moscow military school. (Reuters)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              151 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 25, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Instant Monument

BYLINE: By Ronald Spector;  Ronald Spector, a professor of history and
international relations at George Washington University, is the author of "Eagle
Against the Sun: The American War With Japan."

SECTION: Section 7; Page 10; Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1110 words



IWO JIMA
Monuments, Memories,
and the American Hero.
By Karal Ann Marling
and John Wetenhall.
Illustrated. 300 pp. Cambridge, Mass.:
Harvard University Press.
$24.95.

On the morning of Feb. 23, 1945, the fourth day of the struggle for the tiny
volcanic island of Iwo Jima, one of the bloodiest battles of the Pacific War, a
33-year-old Associated Press photographer, Joe Rosenthal, made his way to the
top of Mount Suribachi, an extinct volcano that the Japanese had turned into a
deadly network of caves, pillboxes and gun emplacements. A patrol from E
Company, 28th Marine Regiment, under Lieut. Harold G. Schrier had pushed its way
to the crater on top of the mountain and raised a small American flag on a
20-foot pipe.

The sight of the flag, "tiny and wonderful, standing clear against the sky above
that awful mountain," in the words of a CBS radio correspondent, Don Pryor,
brought cheers from the tired marines and sailors below. James V. Forrestal, the
Secretary of the Navy, who had come from Washington to observe the operation,
turned to Marine Gen. Holland M. (Howlin' Mad) Smith and declared, "Holland, the
raising of that flag on Suribachi means a Marine Corps for the next 500 years."
Meanwhile, the marines had found a larger flag and sent it to the top to replace
the small one.

Reaching the summit as the marines were preparing to raise the larger flag,
Rosenthal piled up some rocks and sandbags to give him added height, hastily
sighted his Speed Graphic camera and clicked off a shot. Although he was unaware
of it, he had just taken the most famous American photograph of the Pacific war.
(The Rochester Times-Union compared it favorably to a Leonardo da Vinci
painting.) For a couple of weeks there was some dispute about whether Rosenthal
had staged the photograph, but Rosenthal soon convinced his superiors it was the
result of genuine good luck and the picture became immensely famous. Endlessly
reproduced, it earned a Pulitzer Prize for Rosenthal and became the emblem of
the Seventh National War Bond Drive. A frantic search began for the men who had
participated in the flag raising. Those who survived the battle were brought
home to be endlessly feted in press conferences and war bond rallies.

Meanwhile, an obscure artist then in the Navy, Felix de Weldon, hastily sculpted
a statue based on the photograph. The sculpture was an instant hit with Navy and
Marine brass who arranged for the artist to present it to President Harry S.
Truman. A 36-foot version was soon erected on Constitution Avenue in Washington.
By 1947, the Marine Corps, facing the threat of extinction 498 years earlier
than Forrestal's prediction, determined to erect a gigantic permanent Iwo Jima
statue in Washington as a memorial to the Marines' participation in World War
II.

Karal Ann Marling and John Wetenhall, two specialists on the social history of
American art and architecture, examine the extraordinary career of the Rosenthal
photograph and the de Weldon monument. They chose well, for as "Iwo Jima" amply
documents, few symbols better illustrate the ambivalent and ever-changing
American ideas about war heroism, patriotism and sacrifices.

Ms. Marling and Mr. Wetenhall are at pains to emphasize how ironic it was that
an aura of heroism surrounded the six flag raisers in Rosenthal's photo, who had
done nothing but replace a small flag with a larger one, while Schrier and his
patrol had been consigned to deliberate obscurity by the Marine Corps publicity
machine. Yet, as historical distortions go, this was a small one. If the six
flag raisers (the identity of one still remains a matter of controversy) were no
more heroes than hundreds of other men on Iwo Jima, they were not
unrepresentative either. Three were to die a few days later in the further
fighting for the island to which the authors devote almost no attention.

The high point of the book is its detailed account of the extraordinary
combination of backbiting, greed, bureaucratic maneuvers and patriotic excess
surrounding the design and building of the Iwo Jima memorial. The project
produced such bitter disagreement and scandal that it makes recent controversies
over the Vietnam Memorial pale into insignificance.

Once it became apparent that Felix de Weldon, an unknown and not a member of the
National Sculpture Society, would get the lucrative commission for the giant
memorial, he was subjected to the sort of vicious attacks, slander and blackmail
of which only the artistic community is capable. One critic even claimed to have
obtained a "secret dossier" on him from naval intelligence, showing him to be a
fraud, a liar and probably subversive. The Marine Corps War Memorial
Foundation's chief fund-raiser for the memorial, Harry Dash, was later
discovered to have defrauded the project of over $10,000. Ruth Chaney Streeter,
the former head of the Marine Women's Reserves, made good the losses from her
own pocket, and then resigned from the campaign in disgust. (The authors might
have added that Streeter, upon her retirement two years earlier, had been denied
the courtesy of being made a "Colonel USMCR (Ret)" on the ground that there
could only be one female colonel at a time.)

At the dedication ceremony, Schrier and other survivors of the patrol were kept
well in the rear, away from reporters, so as not to confuse the public with the
complexity of what had actually happened.

Almost as intriguing as the authors' narrative about the building of the
memorial is their discussion of the 1949 Hollywood epic "Sands of Iwo Jima," the
movie that established John Wayne forever as the symbol of the tough heroic
marine. (Twenty years later, marines in Vietnam would refer to an especially
dangerous act of bravado as "doing a John Wayne.") The Marine Corps arranged for
making the film at Camp Pendleton, Calif.; it lent jeeps, tanks, landing craft
and planes -- as well as the services of Col. David Shoup, a winner of the Medal
of Honor and a future Commandant of the Marine Corps, and Gen. Holland M. Smith
to act as technical advisers. After filming was completed, Camp Pendleton's
commanding general, Graves B. Erskine, in an instance of life imitating art,
ordered that the Iwo Jima sets be left standing for real marines to train on.

Ms. Marling and Mr. Wetenhall fittingly give the last words on Iwo Jima to a
former marine, Lucian Caste: "It was the insanity of war. In the beginning it
was the glory of going to war -- now, it was death, horrible and meaningless
death. Men torn apart by hate and false pride, brought here for man to kill his
fellow man -- it was like standing in the cauldron of hell."

LOAD-DATE: August 25, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Flag raising on Mount Suribachi, Iwo Jima, in 1945. (Joe
Rosenthal/Associated Press)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              152 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 26, 1991, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Review/Television;
A Hardware-Store Owner Crosses a Cultural Border

BYLINE: By WALTER GOODMAN

SECTION: Section C; Page 18; Column 5; Cultural Desk; Word and Image Page

LENGTH: 349 words


The television-movie flavor of the month seems to be a Hispanic-Anglo mix.
Unfortunately, "Finding the Way Home," the two-hour heart warmer and brain
freezer tonight at 9 on Channel 7, is a lot less flavorsome than "Crazy From the
Heart," which was shown on TNT last week.

The question tonight is whether the 60-year-old owner of a failing hardware
store can find happiness among migrant farm workers. George C. Scott plays Max
Mittelmann who, in a state of terminal despondency and temporary amnesia, lands
among the warmest bunch of Hispanic people this side of any border. They are led
by Ruben Lazarado (Hector Elizondo), who gives more signs than Max of being an
interesting character, but the dolorous plot does not allow either actor much
room for maneuver.

It's a relief when the characters stop saying things like "There's so much I can
do here" and "We're talking about another man's life here" and "I started to
live again," and the camera glides affectionately over the brass fittings in the
old hardware store. This is the sort of show that wins human-relations prizes
for those shameless enough to produce them.

'The Story of Vinh'

The programmers at Channel 13 have been looking east this month, which means
among other things that tonight at 10 you can see "The Story of Vinh," an
earnest account of the tribulations of an Amerasian teen-ager who came from
Vietnam to the United States, only to have troubles with foster homes, schools
and the law. The producers apparently believe that Vinh's difficulties in
adjusting are attributable to his rootlessness, a legacy of the Vietnam War. The
program may arouse sympathy or even guilt in excessively softhearted viewers;
others may find it difficult to get very interested in this sullen delinquent.

'Across the Jade Divide'

Tomorrow night at 9 comes "Across the Jade Divide," about the 1944 escape of
five Westerners from a Japanese internment camp near Shanghai. Keith Huxley, the
son of one of the men, retraces the 2,000-mile journey, offering lots of China
along the way. It's quite an adventure.

LOAD-DATE: August 26, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              153 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 28, 1991, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Sighted in Cambodia: Peace

SECTION: Section A; Page 20; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 410 words


Here's some good news that deserves to be heard above the Soviet din: The
killing in Cambodia's killing fields is nearing a negotiated end.

Yesterday, leaders of Cambodia's four political factions agreed to reduce their
armies by 70 percent and put the rest under U.N. supervision. That reinforces a
cease-fire in place since June. Major hurdles still stand in the way of a
comprehensive settlement. But two decades of intermittent carnage seem truly
over.

Give Mikhail Gorbachev a big share of the credit. Without his revolution in
Soviet foreign policy there could have been no agreement by the U.N. Security
Council's five permanent members on an overall peace plan. And Moscow's sharp
cut in aid to Vietnam helped push the stubborn Hanoi leadership toward
diplomatic compromise.

The final shove may have come from the reconciliation between Vietnam and China,
long sponsors of rival Cambodian armies. With the world's Communist regimes now
down to a lonely four, these two survivors may have judged further pursuit of
their proxy vendetta too grave a risk.

Once liberated by their foreign patrons, Prince Sihanouk, Prime Minister Hun Sen
and former Prime Minister Son Sann knew how to act in their country's interest.
The agreement also embraces the Khmer Rouge, led by the people responsible for
killing a million Cambodians in the 1970's. Americans are rightly uncomfortable
with their participation. But these gangsters, with Chinese support, fielded
possibly the strongest military force; they could not safely be excluded.

It will be up to the Permanent Five to see that the Khmer Rouge does not exploit
the cease-fire to intimidate civilians, hijack forthcoming elections or subvert
the lawful Government. A useful U.S. contribution would be to publicize
Washington's list of Khmer Rouge war criminals and insist on their exclusion
from Cambodian political life. Like Saddam Hussein, they warrant trial by an
international tribunal for crimes against humanity.

A successful overall settlement will require a lasting cease-fire, an adequate
U.N. presence and free elections under international supervision. The Five,
along with regional and U.N. representatives, will work on these issues later
this week.

For too long, Cambodia has been a murderous sideshow, a killing field to which
other countries cynically exported their power conflicts. The peace the rest of
the world has long owed Cambodia may now, at last, be in view.

LOAD-DATE: August 28, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              154 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 29, 1991, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

SOVIET TURMOIL;
SOVIET LEADERS PRESS A REBELLIOUS UKRAINE TO REMAIN IN THE UNION

BYLINE: By SERGE SCHMEMANN,  Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 2024 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW, Thursday, Aug. 29


With the future of the Soviet Union possibly hanging in the balance, delegates
from the Russian republic and Soviet Parliament flew to the Ukraine on Wednesday
to search for common ground with the nation's second most populous republic,
which like many others is seized with secessionist fervor in the wake of the
failed coup.

President Mikhail S. Gorbachev and a number of other prominent figures, notably
Mayor Anatoly A. Sobchak of Leningrad and Eduard A. Shevardnadze, the former
Foreign Minister, issued ever more urgent warnings that the Soviet Union must
survive, even if in a new and yet undecided form.

Boris N. Yeltsin, the President of the Russian republic, whose power was
enhanced because of his stand against the coup, has also come out strongly for
preserving some form of union, and that is why his republic sent a delegation to
the Ukraine on Wednesday to mollify the Ukrainians.

Declaration Issued

After several hours of talks, the Russian and Ukrainian officials pledged early
today in a statement to take joint action against "uncontrolled disintegration"
of the union.

It is hard to imagine the Soviet Union surviving as more than just a shell if it
lacks the Ukraine, which is a principal supplier of food and has highly
developed heavy and light industries. The three Slavic republics -- the Ukraine,
Byelorussia and Russia -- are the core of the Soviet Union.

Mr. Yeltsin, according to Mr. Gorbachev, expressed support on Tuesday for an
early signing of a new treaty to define relationships between the republics and
the central Government in a new union. But despite his expressions of support,
Mr. Yeltsin, by his actions in the past week in trying to enhance the powers of
his republic, has tended to antagonize leaders of other republics as well as Mr.
Gorbachev.

Irritation With Yeltsin

Speaking to the Soviet Parliament on Wednesday, Mr. Gorbachev displayed his
irritation with Mr. Yeltsin's actions by issuing his first public criticism
since the coup of Mr. Yeltsin's decrees imposing Russian control over central
institutions, most recently the central bank, the Ministry of Finance and the
Bank for Foreign Economic Relations.

Mr. Yeltsin's decrees assuming central powers during the coup were legitimate,
Mr. Gorbachev said, but now "I have to say that it is unacceptable for anyone,
including the Russian Supreme Soviet, the Russian government and the President
of Russia. Everything must be based on the Constitution, and now on
cooperation."

For now, only the independence declared by the three Baltic republics,
Lithuania, Latvia and Estonia, has won international recognition. A parade of
foreign nations, including the European Community, have issued formal
recognitions of the Baltic republics' independence, but it was unlikely that any
would move to quickly recognize the independence of other republics.

Even as the fate of the Soviet Union was being batted about across the vast
Soviet land, the aftermath of last week's upheaval continued to unfold.

New Foreign Minister

Mr. Gorbachev announced on Wednesday that his new Foreign Minister would be
Boris D. Pankin, a 60-year-old career bureaucrat who apparently earned his new
job by publicly protesting the coup while in Prague, where he was the Soviet
Ambassador. Before that, he served as Ambassador to Sweden, head of the Soviet
copyright agency and editor of the newspaper Komsomolskaya Pravda. A number of
other appointments were also made.

In Kiev, there were reports that the negotiators were prepared to resolve
immediate differences between the Ukrainian and Russian republics, most notably
those raised by Mr. Yeltsin's warning on Monday that the Russian republic
reserved the right to review its borders with other republics if they broke away
from the Soviet Union.

The declaration raised instant alarm in the Ukraine and Kazakhstan, both of
which have borders with the Russian federated republic and large ethnic Russian
populations.

Members of Russian Delegation

The Russian delegation to Kiev included the republic's Vice President, Aleksandr
Rutskoi, and Sergei B. Stankevich, a Yeltsin adviser. They were joined by a
delegation of deputies sent by the Soviet Parliament led by Mr. Sobchak, the
mayor of Leningrad, who came as observers.

Thousands of Ukrainian nationalists demonstrated against the envoys in Kiev
under signs reading "No to Russian Imperialism."

Television evening news broadcasts on Wednesday showed Mr. Rutskoi arguing to
the crowd: "Just as you are, we are worried about events happening today in our
country. There are notions that Russia and the Ukraine want to argue. Our
delegation came for one reason, to create cooperation and ties between the
Ukraine and Russia."

Leonid M. Kravchuk, the Ukrainian leader, said the territorial questions would
be put to rest. He said the two sides were working out "political, economic and
military" issues.

New Form of Union

But despite statements by both Mr. Yeltsin and Mr. Kravchuk, the Ukrainian
leader, that they still envisioned some new form of union, their actions and the
newly fired passions in their republics made it evident that whatever emerged
would not be the federation that was being shaped before the coup.

Mr. Kravchuk spoke somewhat vaguely of a "horizontal" confederation, in which
republics would be independent equals. Some others invoked arrangements like the
European Community or even the Commonwealth. But some found it difficult to
conceive each of these would-be independent republics as a nation having its own
currency, foreign ministry and armed forces, as the status of independence
normally connotes.

Mr. Gorbachev was among the few still talking about the union treaty that he had
planned to sign when the coup erupted, which envisioned a federation of
republics with considerable control over their resources. The pact was the
product of long negotiations with nine republics; Georgia, Armenia, Moldavia and
the three Baltic republics did not take part in the negotiations.

The announcement of Mr. Pankin's appointment came after a day of rumors that Mr.
Shevardnadze, who quit as Foreign Minister in December with sharp warnings of
the threat of dictatorship, would be asked to return.

Staff members at the Foreign Ministry had sent an appeal to Mr. Shevardnadze
urging that he return. But in a televised interview Mr. Shevardnadze said on
Wednesday that returning to his old job would be "difficult," and that he had
"new objectives" associated with the Democratic Reform Movement he helped found
in June.

New Broadcasting Chief

The change most immediately evident to the public at large was the announcement
on Tuesday by Mr. Gorbachev that Yegor Yakovlev, a pioneer of the new openness
called glasnost in his old job as editor of Moscow News, had been named head of
Soviet television and radio.

The familiar evening news program Vremya, long the primary vehicle of news for
most Soviet citizens, opened with an announcement of a new staff and a new name,
"TV-Inform."

The news readers, Tatyana Mitkova and Dmitri Kiselev, were both popular
broadcasters who had been dismissed from earlier television jobs in December,
and they began by apologizing for the fact that they had been brought in only 90
minutes earlier.

New Head of Tass

Mr. Gorbachev also named his spokesman, Vitaly A. Ignatenko, to become director
of Tass, the Government news agency. It is understood that Mr. Gorbachev's
announcements had the blessing of Mr. Yeltsin as well.

In the Kremlin, the Soviet Parliament continued its emergency meeting on
Wednesday, still focusing much of its attention on who knew what and when. An
attempt to produce a resolution on the state of the country in the aftermath of
the coup was postponed, and the major achievement of the day was to confirm Mr.
Gorbachev's decrees dismissing Prime Minister Valentin S. Pavlov and his
Cabinet.

Two deputy Prime Ministers, Vladimir I. Shcherbakov and Vitaly K. Doguzhiyev,
held the Parliament captive with poignant attempts to explain their hesitation
and indecision during the coup. Mr. Shcherbakov sought to explain that the
Cabinet of Ministers had always served more as a board of managers than as a
government, and so saw its duty as staving off economic collapse.

But Mr. Gorbachev, who sat magisterially throughout the deliberations, declared
sternly that "I cannot trust this Cabinet. That is that."

Economic Committee Broadened

In an apparent attempt to expand the national base of the acting government and
soften the impression that it was an all-Russian affair, the chairman of the
Committee for the Operational Management of the National Economy, Ivan S.
Silayev, who is also premier of the Russian federated republic, broadened the
committee's ranks to include members from most major republics, including
observers from the Baltic republics. Mr. Silayev also named several new acting
ministers.

There were reports that 30 ambassadors had been recalled.

In another development, the Prosecutor General of the Russian Federation,
Valentin Stepanenkov, announced that 12 men had been arrested and charged with
high treason, a crime punishable by death.

The list included the seven surviving original plotters -- Prime Minister
Pavlov, Defense Minister Dmitri T. Yazov, Vice President Gennadi I. Yanayev, the
K.G.B. chief, Vladimir A. Kryuchkov, the Farmers' Union chairman, Vasily A.
Starodubtsev, the Industrial Union chairman, Aleksandr I. Tizyakov, and the
deputy Defense Council chairman, Oleg D. Baklanov. The eighth member of the
junta, Interior Minister Boris K. Pugo, committed suicide.

Newly charged were Yuri S. Plekhanov, former head of K.G.B. security services
for officials; his deputy, Vyacheslav Generalov; Oleg S. Shenin, head of Mr.
Gorbachev's staff in the Communist Party; Viktor F. Grushko, first deputy
chairman of the K.G.B., and Valery I. Boldin, Mr. Gorbachev's chief of staff.

In his speech to Parliament, Mr. Shcherbakov said it was the presence of Mr.
Boldin among the coup leaders, and his insistence that Mr. Gorbachev was
incapacitated, that prevented him from rejecting the possibility outright.

Interrogation of Suspects

Asked by Tass how the suspects were conducting themselves under interrogation,
Mr. Stepanenkov said, "When giving testimony, each tries to come clean on the
activities of his associates, while playing down his own role in every way."

The prosecutor also said members of the Communist leadership will be questioned
in coming days, along with Anatoly I. Lukyanov, the former Speaker of the
Parliament.

Mr. Lukyanov, whose acquaintance with Mr. Gorbachev goes back 40 years, was
among the featured speakers in the parliament Wednesday, where he again
fervently denied any culpability. "I was not and could not have been a plotter
nor an inspirer of the plot," he said, insisting that he had argued to the coup
leaders that their act was unconstitutional.

As the Parliament continued to wrestle with questions of responsibility and
culpability, Mr. Yeltsin continued firing off decrees assuming Russian control
over key functions of the central government.

Decree on Financial Dealings

His latest order provided that all currency and financial transations by the
central Government be accomplished only with the consent of the Russian
government. Mr. Yeltsin also assumed control over all customs services on
Russian territory.

Mr. Yeltsin further ordered that the Russian government take possession of all
the property and funds of the Communist Party on Russian territory.

At the same time, Mr. Yeltsin met with 30 leaders of the ethnic regions that
comprise the Russian federation and announced that they all favored signing a
joint statement saying that the Russian republic would remain single and
indivisible.

Azerbaijan and Tadzhikistan were among the republics that followed suit in
seizing Communist Party property, and President Ayaz Mutalibov of Azerbaidjan
announced that centrally controlled enterprises would come under the
jurisdiction of the republic.

LOAD-DATE: August 29, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Aleksandr Rutskoi, the vice president of the Russian republic,
arriving in Kiev yesterday for talks with Ukrainian leaders. (Reuters) (pg. A18)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              155 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 30, 1991, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Diner's Journal

BYLINE: By BRYAN MILLER

SECTION: Section C; Page 16; Column 3; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 340 words



Vietnam in TriBeCa

Vietnamese food has never really flourished in New York City, and many of the
Vietnamese restaurants downtown are as unpredictable as the stock market. So
when a tip about an authentic new place in TriBeCa came my way, I couldn't strap
on my Roller Blades and head down fast enough.

Fourteen-week-old Kinh Do is in a squat, nondescript building on one of those
you-can't-get-there-from-here blocks just below Canal Street, on the Avenue of
the Americas. The convivial scene inside is surprising, with mostly Vietnamese
patrons and a few gastronomic sleuths from uptown munching away and trading tips
on best dishes. The long rectangular dining room is clean and colorful, with
mirrors along each wall, photomurals of palm-graced beaches and hanging plants.

The staff could not be friendlier and is happy to help first-timers choose a
suitable menu. We started with crisp spring rolls filled with brightly seasoned
pork and shrimp ($3 for four rolls, $5 for eight). We then received a platter of
thin-sliced beef in a sweet marinade with crushed peanuts and medium-size
butterflied shrimp. A waiter placed an electric grill on the table and showed us
how to cook the ingredients and place them in a rice paper roll with lettuce,
coriander, mint leaves, cucumber, bean sprouts and nuoc mam, a fermented fish
condiment. The combination, called tom bo nuong vi ($12.50), is vibrant and
refreshingly light.

Similar rolls can be made with a variety of other ingredients. One of the best
is the bo nuong sa, incredibly tender and slightly sweet marinated beef cubes
($6.50). I didn't tasted any of the promised lemon grass, but it was great
anyway. A special, chicken morsels with scallions, green peppers, coriander and
onions in a sweet-hot broth, was excellent, too ($4.50).

Kinh Do, 19 Avenue of the Americas, near Walker Street, (212) 219-3181, serves
from 11 A.M. to 10:15 P.M. Monday to Friday, from 10 A.M. to 10 P.M. Saturday
and from 10 A.M. to 9:30 P.M. Sunday. Mastercard and Visa are accepted.

LOAD-DATE: August 30, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              156 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 31, 1991, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Support by U.N. Powers Buoys Cambodian Hopes

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHENON,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 2; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 842 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Aug. 30


The five permanent members of the United Nations Security Council offered
qualified support today to efforts by the Cambodian Government and three rebel
factions to end the Southeast Asian country's long civil war, but called on the
Cambodians to resolve troublesome disputes over election procedures and
disarmament.

A joint statement of support issued by the five United Nations powers -- the
United States, the Soviet Union, China, Britain and France -- came as something
of a relief to Cambodian negotiators, who said that with the approval of the
Security Council, a final peace agreement could be signed by the end of the
year.

Earlier, the Cambodians had expressed worry that compromises reached in
negotiations this week among the warring factions might be scuttled by the
United States because the provisions deviated from a peace plan crafted by the
five Security Council members.

The joint statement, issued by the five after their representatives met with
Cambodian Government and rebel leaders in Pattaya, a Thai resort south of
Bangkok, hailed "very positive progress" in the weeklong talks that ended today.


Words of Sihanouk

Prince Norodom Sihanouk, a former Cambodian head of state and a major mediator
in the negotiations, told reporters that with the assistance of the Security
Council, "I am now confident there will be a peace agreement signed by the end
of this year."

In November, Prince Sihanouk is scheduled to return to Phnom Penh, the Cambodian
capital, for the first time since the city fell to invading Vietnamese forces
early in January, 1979.

Talks are expected to continue next month at the United Nations between the
Vietnamese-installed Cambodian Government and the three major rebel groups --
the followers of Prince Sihanouk, the rightist Khmer People's National
Liberation Front, and the Communist Khmer Rouge, who killed more than a million
people and brought about a total upheaval in Cambodian society during their rule
of the country from April 1975 through the end of 1978.

Western diplomats, while conceding that hopes for peace in Cambodia have been
dashed before, say the negotiations this week do seem to have abreviated the
timetable for final settlement of the civil war that followed the Vietnamese
military victory over the Khmer Rouge. That civil conflict has raged since 1979,
when Vietnamese forces installed a satellite Government now led by Prime
Minister Hun Sen, a former Khmer Rouge commander who left the Khmer Rouge ahead
of the advancing Vietnamese.

"You see it in the faces of the Cambodians," said a senior Western diplomat who
was monitoring the talks in Pattaya. "They are sick of the war and they see no
chance for a military solution."

An Asian diplomat said he remained concerned about the motives of the Khmer
Rouge in participating in a negotiated settlement.

"I wonder and worry about what the Khmer Rouge will do once it returns home with
the legitimacy that a settlement offers," he said. "We should all worry."

The permanent members of the Security Council retain what amounts to a veto over
any compromises worked out among the Cambodians, since the United Nations is
being called on to provide manpower and hundreds of millions of dollars in other
aid to monitor the truce in Cambodia and administer the country until elections
are held.

The Council members' statement today called on the Phnom Penh Government and the
rebels to resolve procedures for free elections and to "reflect further on the
question of total demobilization, preferably prior to the elections."

How to Apportion Votes?

The election procedure is perhaps the central unresolved issue in the
negotiations. Mr. Hun Sen's Government is seeking a constituency system, under
which voters would cast ballots for local candidates to represent them in a
national assembly.

Some of the rebels are instead demanding a proportional system, in which each
party would receive an allotment of seats in the assembly on the basis of the
proportion of the votes it got in nationwide balloting.

On Tuesday, the Cambodian factions reached agreement to reduce their military
forces by 70 percent.

Prince Sihanouk, among others, had warned that the United States might veto the
compromise because it did not provide for a total disarmament of the factions,
as members of the Security Council had sought. But the United States did not
take such an action.

Status of M.I.A. Talks

As the Government seemed ready to make peace with the rebel groups, there was
also evidence today of a warming in relations with its longtime adversary in
Washington.

A statement released by the United States Embassy in Bangkok said a Defense
Department delegation conducted "cordial and productive" meetings last week in
Phnom Penh and Hanoi, the Vietnamese capital, over the fate of Americans missing
since the Vietnam War.

During the delegation's visit to Phnom Penh, Cambodian officials turned over the
remains of what they said was an American apparently missing since the war.

LOAD-DATE: August 31, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              157 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 31, 1991, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

New Issues Born From Communism's Death Knell

BYLINE: By RICHARD BERNSTEIN

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1; Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 1414 words


When Communism died its formal death in Moscow, it seemed as though there was a
corresponding death knell in this country and in Western Europe.

Dead also, or, at least, considerably faded, was the question that has produced
the fiercest arguments and the sharpest conflicts among intellectuals in more
than 70 years, arguments about Marxism-Leninism and social revolution, about the
nature of the Soviet Union and about the existence of Communism as a major
ideological force in a bipolar world.

And so, the question is: if the debate about Communism is likely to lose its
force and centrality, what issues will consume left and right, liberals and
conservatives, in the future?

Interviews with scholars and political analysts indicate that the new splits
will not be about such grand questions as the way to organize society. The
debate between liberals and conservatives is already showing signs of focusing
individually on smaller, more personal, domestic issues like poverty, crime,
race, health care, abortion, multi-culturalism and the role of government in
subsidizing the arts.

"What we're looking at now is the end of utopianism and the all encompassing
model to explain human society," said R. Bruce McColm, the executive director of
Freedom House, a human rights organization based in New York.

"You have a collapse of ideologies, so there is no rigid orthodoxy that one has
to espouse, or risk being ejected from an entire subculture if one does not
espouse it. So, I think the freeing up of the intellectual climate is going to
be very beneficial."

The 'End of History'

Joseph Nye, a professor at the Kennedy School of Government at Harvard
University, put it slightly differently.  "We had a bipolar world, and we had a
bipolar intellectual debate," he said. "The fact that there was a clear and
present danger from an ideological enemy with enormous power had the effect of
polarizing the domestic debate."

Some might feel that the "end of history" heralded by the writer Francis
Fukuyama a couple of years ago, when he was a policy planner in the State
Department, has actually arrived. With the triumph of the Western liberal idea,
Mr. Fukuyama said, there will be no room for any meaningful evolution of the
human spirit.

Professor Nye disagreed. "Even though there's now no equivalent to American
power and no real alternative to liberal democratic ideology, there's going to
be a diffusion of power and ideas," he said. "In this sense, it's not the end of
history but a return of history."

A Change in Focus

Without the focus on the bipolar world, he said, there is going to be more
attention to the relationships among hundreds of nations and ethnic groups.

"That's going to raise a whole new set of questions," Professor Nye said,
"questions about identity, multi-culturalism, what we mean by nationality and
the national interest. A whole complex of issues regarding how we think about
ourselves, which was locked up in the world of bipolar competition, is going to
become unstuck."

Communism remains entrenched in China, the world's most populous country, as
well as in Cuba, North Korea and Vietnam. But it is virtually inevitable that
the disgrace and formal suspension of the Soviet Communist Party -- even as the
party remains legal in the United States -- will transform the nature of future
debates, since the Soviet party has been the font from which all other Communist
movements drew their original inspiration.

A New View of World

"For people of my generation, who grew up in the shadow of the cold war, it's
very difficult to conceive of a world that is not divided into two blocs," said
Eric Foner, a professor of history at Columbia University whose specialty is the
American left.

"It's true that one bloc has been disappearing for several years now, but how to
conceptualize a world in which the Soviet Union does not exist as a superpower
is very difficult for me. And think of students who will be entering school in a
few years. For them, this division of the world will seem like ancient history."

The most obvious power exercised by the Soviet Union over the Western mind was
its extraordinary power of attraction, its capacity to instill idealistic
visions of a new world in which exploitation would be swept away by a tide of
revolution.

During the 1930's in particular, the intelligentsia was split into hostile
camps, one treasuring the hope that Stalinism represented a path to genuine
social justice, the other furious over what it saw as blindness to Stalin's
crimes.

Other Brands of Communism

In later decades, particularly in the 1950's and 1960's, the appeal of the
Soviet Union itself sharply faded as it became more and more apparent that
Stalin and his successors were not flawed idealists but brutal totalitarians.

Still, the debate took on new forms.  There was the anti-Communist scare of the
late 1940's and early 1950's, particularly the brief ascendancy of Senator
Joseph R. McCarthy. There were the celebrated espionage trials of Alger Hiss and
Julius and Ethel Rosenberg.

From the 1960's to the 1980's, an argument raged, less about the nature of the
Soviet Union itself, and more about some of the inheritors of the
Marxist-Leninist tradition, particularly in countries like China, Ethiopia, Cuba
and Nicaragua, which seemed to many on the left to embody the revolutionary
virtues admittedly tarnished in the Soviet Union itself.

In the early 1970's, for example, there was a bitter debate in this country over
whether China under Mao Zedong was creating new forms of democratic
participation or was merely a new face of Communist totalitarianism.

In the United Nations for many years, the debate was often framed in terms of a
contest between the believers in individual rights, which were espoused by the
Western, free-market democracies, or what were called "social rights," or "group
rights," a code for socialist approaches in Africa and Latin America.

"It has to be remembered that until recently there was a strong feeling that
there was an alternative out there to Western liberal democracy," said Carl
Gershman, the president of the National Endowment for Democracy, a group in
Washington, partly financed by Congress, that fosters democratic movements
abroad. "There was a belief in a higher form of democracy, one that emphasized
results, equality, that could really achieve things.

"That debate was waged in the United Nations between those who believed in
political rights and those who believed in what were called social rights. It
took all of one's energies to make the case for why freedom was important."

Not everybody believes that this debate will disappear forever, or that the
tension between individual rights and the collective welfare will disappear
altogether.

Question for Future

"One aspect of the old debate is the tension between political democracy and
social democracy," said Victor Navasky, the editor of The Nation, a weekly
magazine of generally leftist opinion.  "The fact that the Soviet style,
totalitarianism, whatever you want to call it, was the apparent disaster that it
was does not mean that there is no value to economic democracy. It's going to
remain a question for the future."

More generally, however, the absence of global ideological conflict could have
the effect of freeing up various tendencies in American life to pursue what
might have been more natural directions.

Professor Foner argues, for example, that American political discourse was in
many ways distorted by the very existence of the Soviet Union.  American
radicals and liberals, those who wanted the state to insure economic justice,
tended to see the Soviet system as a model that had to be defended, even when
they were uncomfortable with its oppressiveness. Conservatives, seeking to put
the greatest distance between themselves and the Soviets, became almost
religious believers in the power of the unhindered free market.

What seems possible now is that some of the rigidity of the debate might
disappear. Broadly speaking, the left, as Professor Foner put it, "could think
about American society without having to bear the burden of some far away model
that does not hold the key to our society."

Similarly on the right, Professor Foner said, "It may be that without the need
to attack Communism, other forms of conservatism may appear, which are not so
fully married to the alleged virtues of the free marketplace."

LOAD-DATE: August 31, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Carl Gershman, President for the National Endowment for
Democracy. R. Bruce McColm, Executive Director of Freedom House. (William E.
Sauro/The New York Times); Joseph Nye, Professor at Kennedy School of Government
at Harvard University. (Harvard University); Victor Navasky, Editor of The
Nation. (William E. Sauro/The New York Times) (pg. 11)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              158 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 1, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THEATER;
'M. Butterfly' at Westport Playhouse

BYLINE: By ALVIN KLEIN;

"M. Butterfly," at the Westport Country Playhouse, 25 Powers Court, just off the
Post Road East (Route 1).  Remaining performances tomorrow through Friday at
8:30 P.M., Wednesday at 2 P.M. and Saturday at 5 and 8:30 P.M. Box office: (203)
227-4177.

SECTION: Section 12WC; Page 15; Column 1; Connecticut Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 816 words

DATELINE: WESTPORT


OUT of an astonishing true story, David Henry Hwang fashioned an astonishing
play. Although "M. Butterfly" is bloated with ideas, messages and interpretive
possibilities, Mr. Hwang has crafted an uncommon stage adventure from
reconstructed truth.

As an ambitious finale for its 61st summer, the Westport Country Playhouse, in
just two weeks, got together a play of intellectual weight and theatrical reach
in a creditable production -- an under-the-wire substitute for a canceled
comedy.

The play was inspired by the tale of Bernard Bouriscot, a French diplomat, and
Shi Peipu, a prima donna of the Peking Opera, his lover of 20 years and presumed
mother of his child. In 1986 the odd couple was convicted of spying for Maoist
China, and it wasn't until the real-life courtroom scene that the oddity was
revealed to Bouriscot, who then found out that Shi was a he.

In his wild associations to -- as opposed to real explorations of -- the
implications of such bizarre events, Mr. Hwang attempted to blend a soupcon of
lay psychology here, a touch of military and political theory there and,
throughout, his commentaries on racism and sexism, and that's only a sampling of
an overloaded buffet for thought.

And don't forget revisionist opera, the play's conceptual framework: a mock
sum-up of "Madama Butterfly," replete with Puccini highlights. Pinkerton, a
"womanizing cad," and Cio Cio San, the classic male fantasy of a submissive
object fulfilled. Here is Mr. Hwang's most successful fusion of form and
content, with the operatic references representing the dichotomy between East
(poor, feminine and delicate) and West (the "international rape mentality.")

The time span of 1960 to the present -- the play opened on Broadway in 1988,
with publicity and prizes aplenty -- allows the playwright's theories to
encompass the Vietnam War, the Cultural Revolution, "counterrevolutionary acts"
and the Communists' taunting of the diva, here called Song Liling. But the
important historical references to oppression of the Chinese, and of women in
general, are vague or nonexistent. The visual sweep across "time and space" of
an extraordinary original abstract production design, with its curved ramp, is
efficiently modified to the Westport stage.

Graeme Malcolm's performance as the diplomat, here called Rene Gallimard,
diverts intonations of homosexuality into a case study of a troubled,
analytical, homophobic man who is unable to deal with "loving a lie" -- and its
attendant new reality. The actor's performance fails to resolve the paradox of
Gallimard, as written. He protests too much that he is a wimp, clumsy and
inexperienced, while the plot keeps him sexually active, not just with Song, but
with two women, one of whom is his wife.

Other actors have highlighted the character's sexual ambiguity or the role's
sheer bravura potential. Mr. Malcolm does neither, and his weathered elegance,
wherein he covers up sexism with style, makes it hard to fall for his repeated
claims of low esteem.

A. Tung's wily performance as Song, the idealized pretend woman who knows how to
serve a man (because she is one) -- and is a "passionate listener" besides -- is
so imbued with cunning and sarcasm that the actor suggests Song's betrayal was
premeditated rather than set up.

In an otherwise passable supporting cast, serviceably directed by Bob Borod,
Craig Wasson is better than that, giving a welcomely satiric edge to the role of
Marc, Gallimard's buddy, and Puccini's Sharpless, a macho throwback who could be
easily a caricature, or just despicable. Mr. Wasson's performance reinforces one
of the playwright's more successful send-ups of the male mystique. Gallimard's
sexual power over Song gives him newfound confidence and boosts his career, and
that's "the way of the world," he observes.

Subtle undercurrents of Mr. Hwang's provocative and threatening themes could
have transformed "M. Butterfly" into a work of dramatic art. Instead, the
playwright settled, all too often, for blunt didacticism, bludgeoned home. And
the second act, which winds up with Song and Gallimard's separate and amazing
transformations, provide stunning moments of high theater, rather than the
inevitable outgrowth of developed ideas.

Mr. Hwang has taken shortcuts in plot, though not in verbiage, and the resulting
loose ends remain a puzzlement. In substance, however, the play is making a
powerful statement about a universal need for delusion -- even Gallimard's wife
adored the benefits of a charmed social life predicated upon pretense.

And with crafty skill, Mr. Hwang has taken us right into his invented world, so
that predetermined notions of logic become irrelevant. Only the most resistant
theatergoer will find nothing to ponder, argue or just be bothered about. Isn't
it reassuring that the contemporary theater still has the power to be so
imaginatively unsettling?

LOAD-DATE: September 1, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Graeme Malcolm, left, and A. Tung in "M. Butterfly," playing in
Westport. (Jayson Byrd)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              159 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 1, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

SOVIET TURMOIL;
Farewell, Red Menace: U.S. Starts Altering Its Perspective on the World

BYLINE: By ANDREW ROSENTHAL,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 14; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1711 words

DATELINE: KENNEBUNKPORT, Me., Aug. 31


Just when the United States had adjusted to the idea that the Kremlin had turned
from implacable enemy to benign adversary, the breathtaking events in the Soviet
Union have forced the country to confront the possibility that soon there may be
no adversary there at all.

The sudden prospect that the Soviet Union will cease to exist in its current
form has implications that go far beyond Soviet-American relations, and the
Soviet upheaval has already forced the Bush Administration to begin re-examining
its fundamental policy goals.

So far, Bush Administration officials, as stunned as everyone by the events in
Moscow, are focusing on short-term problems and making only modest changes in
policy.

Direct Aid to Republics

The White House made clear this week, for example, that it was prepared to send
humanitarian aid directly to the republics, bypassing the collapsing central
Government in Moscow. It also was encouraging the Soviet Union to maintain at
least an economic union, and taking advantage of the upheaval to press Moscow to
reduce military spending.

For 45 years, the Soviet Union has been the lens through which American foreign
policy around the world and American military thinking, especially nuclear
strategy, have been focused.

The threat of Communism has been at the heart of virtually every crisis the
United States has faced since World War II, crystallizing national resolve in
such seminal events as the Berlin airlift of 1948 and the Cuban missile crisis
of 1962, or convulsing American society in darker passages, like the Vietnam
War.

Pervaded American Life

Fear of Communism and the Kremlin has touched almost every aspect of American
life -- literature, theater, the movies, television, the universities, main
street.

Always painted in menacing shadows, the Kremlin has been a powerful and at times
distorting influence on domestic politics since the Bolshevik Revolution in
1917, from the anti-Communist raids led by Attorney General A. Mitchell Palmer
in 1919 to the witch hunts and blacklists of the McCarthy period in the 1950's
to the Reagan Administration's politically divisive efforts to roll back Soviet
influence in Nicaragua in the 1980's.

The effort to repel Communism was the binding force of the modern conservative
coalition, helping to keep Republicans in the White House, and the specter of
the Soviet enemy has helped define the nation's image of itself as the defender
of threatened freedoms. The Soviet Union was the yardstick by which Americans
measured their successes and their place in the world: the fear of losing the
space race and falling behind in science when Sputnik soared into orbit in 1957,
for example, or the national jubilation when sledgehammers tore into the Berlin
Wall in 1989, and now for many a sense that the American-led stand against
Communism and the Soviet Union has succeeded beyond anyone's expectations.

The 'New World Order' Ages

When President Bush offered his "new world order" a year ago to explain why the
nation had to face war with Iraq during another tumultuous August, he grounded
his vision on the assumption that there would continue to be a Soviet Union --
much like the one that had existed since 1917, just friendlier and less of a
military threat.

Last week, the President seemed to acknowledge the passing of that epoch. "Out
of this change in the Soviet Union, if we handle it properly and if things keep
going forward instead of slipping back, there's an opportunity for a vastly
restructured national security posture," he said.

Cautious as ever, he added, "It's way too early -- way too early -- to get into
that."

But even as he spoke, his Government was in the early stages of what eventually
may be a fundamental rewriting of American policy, and a new debate was quickly
developing in Washington about whether to make deeper cuts in the Pentagon
budget.

The short-term questions the Administration is studying are perplexing enough:
Who are the new people taking over the Soviet Union? Will Mikhail S. Gorbachev
or Boris N. Yeltsin emerge the nation's leader? Who is in control of the Soviet
nuclear arsenal? How much food will the Soviet Union need this winter?

"All we can do now is to try to do everything we can think of to position
ourselves to be able to move rapidly when the situation clarifies," a senior
official said.

More Fundamental Questions

But beyond these questions are more fundamental ones, each of which may require
sweeping changes in American policy. Will the central Soviet Government survive,
and if not, what will emerge? How will the United States do business with four
or five or more Governments where there is now one? What are the
responsibilities of the United States as the only superpower in what used to be
a two-superpower world? Against whom is the United States now arming itself
militarily and ideologically?

"We've got to begin to lay an intellectual base for U.S. involvement in the
world, a rationale that people understand and support and around which you can
build a consensus, as was done with containment," said Representative Lee
Hamilton, Democrat of Indiana. Mr. Hamilton was referring to the goal of
"containing" the Soviet bloc, which was set soon after World War II and has been
the driving force behind American policy on the Soviet Union since then.

Already, the upheaval in Moscow has complicated a central aim of American
foreign policy over the last two years: maintaining influence in Western Europe.


Justification for NATO

"We've been talking for some time now about how to manage the breakdown of the
cold war institutions, like NATO, without boxing us out of Europe," an
Administration official said. "That was hard enough with the collapse of the
Warsaw Pact and it's much harder now."

The United States will be "looking to the European Community to pick up a major
share of the financial burden" as Soviet republics emerge as countries, an
American official said.

The Bush Administration was confident before the coup that it had forestalled
the demise of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, but that debate is now
rejoined. What will justify NATO's existence if there is no Soviet military from
which to protect Western Europe?

Caspar W. Weinberger, the former Secretary of Defense, argued that the military
threat was not gone as long as whatever form of country emerged retained an
enormous nuclear arsenal and a large conventional military.

But Senator Richard Lugar, Republican of Indiana, said the United States should
consider a security system that might include Poland, Hungary and even some
former Soviet republics, like the Baltics, after they are free. "We ought to
take a careful look at people who share our same ethos for democracy and market
economics and right now are in a netherworld with regard to security," Mr. Lugar
said.

Questions About Asia

The Bush Administration also faces important questions about its dealings with
Asia, where the Soviet Union is less important and Japan is increasingly
powerful.

Domestically, the Administration will argue that there is a need for a strong
American military, citing the threat posed by Iraq last summer as a clear
example. That may buy some time. But it is increasingly apparent that with the
potential breakup of the Soviet Union, the current basis for American nuclear
policy may not be enough to hold a consensus for military spending.

Despite all the changes of the last two years, that policy is still based on the
principle of "strategic deterrence" -- the amassing of nuclear weapons,
initially to deter a Soviet attack on Western Europe and more recently to deter
a Soviet nuclear attack.

The American intelligence community, as well, is being challenged to change from
an organization devoted to spying on the Soviet Union and thwarting its foreign
policy to one that deals with a more diverse world.

As perceptions and attitudes change, longstanding principles are already
colliding with pragmatic goals. In the Soviet Union, the United States is torn
between its support for self-determination and the Administration's belief that
central control over the military, trade and foreign aid and some aspects of
foreign policy is desirable to maintain stability.

Political Considerations

Politically, Republicans have held on to the White House in large measure
because of the perception that their party has been better equipped to safeguard
the national security, even if opinion polls say that they do not handle the
economy as well as Democrats.

But the disappearance of a Soviet enemy stands that notion on its head. It may
no longer be enough simply to argue, as Mr. Bush does, that the United States
has a responsibility to keep the peace and, in fact, is the only country that
can do so.

"People are very proud of the fact that the United States is the superpower and
the leader in the world," Mr. Hamilton said. "At the same time, they think we
can better solve our problems at home if we scale down our efforts overseas.
They've got a real doubt in their minds about whether they want to pay the taxes
and send the young men and women abroad in support of that role."

As the Soviet Union undergoes its metamorphosis, even vocabularies will haveto
change. American officials now grope for a word to describe the Soviet Union.
Certainly, the word "Kremlin" is losing its symbolism as the monolith of Soviet
power. Hard-line, conservative, liberal, Communist, all have new meanings -- or
no meaning at all.

There is little in the modern American experience to prepare Washington for this
upheaval.

"The challenge now is the transformation of a vast empire and that was never
part of our agenda," said Richard Perle, former Assistant Secretary of Defense.

Mr. Perle added: "Our international agenda for 40 years was much more modest, to
cope with the Soviet Union, which we saw as a military threat, not to transform
the Soviet Union itself. Even the rollback policy, which was considered
adventurist in the cold war, never contemplated involving the United States in
the transformation of Soviet society or the Soviet republics."

LOAD-DATE: November 4, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: President Bush returning to the club house after a downpour
cancelled his golf game yesterday in Kennebunkport, Me. (Associated Press)

TYPE: News Analysis

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              160 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 1, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THEATER;
The Diplomat and the Prima Donna: M. Butterfly at Westport Playhouse

BYLINE: By ALVIN KLEIN

SECTION: Section 12CN; Page 11; Column 1; Connecticut Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 854 words


OUT of an astonishing true story, David Henry Hwang fashioned an astonishing
play. Although "M. Butterfly" is bloated with ideas, messages and interpretive
possibilities, Mr. Hwang has crafted an uncommon stage adventure from
reconstructed truth.

As an ambitious finale for its 61st summer, the Westport Country Playhouse, in
just two weeks, got together a play of intellectual weight and theatrical reach
in a creditable production -- an under-the-wire substitute for a canceled
comedy.

The play was inspired by the tale of Bernard Bouriscot, a French diplomat, and
Shi Peipu, a prima donna of the Peking Opera, his lover of 20 years and presumed
mother of his child. In 1986 the odd couple was convicted of spying for Maoist
China, and it wasn't until the real life courtroom scene that the oddity was
revealed to Bouriscot, who then found out that Shi was a he.

In his wild associations to --as opposed to real explorations of -- the
implications of such bizarre events, Mr. Hwang attempted to blend a soupcon of
lay psychology here, a touch of military and political theory there, and
throughout, his commentaries on racism and sexism, and that's only a sampling of
an overloaded buffet for thought.

And don't forget revisionist opera, the play's conceptual framework: a mock
sum-up of "Madama Butterfly," replete with Puccini highlights. Pinkerton, a
"womanizing cad," and Cio Cio San, the classic male fantasy of a submissive
object fulfilled. Here is Mr. Hwang's most successful fusion of form and
content, with the operatic references representing the dichotomy between East
(poor, feminine and delicate) and West (the "international rape mentality.")

The time span of 1960 to the present -- the play opened on Broadway in 1988,
with publicity and prizes aplenty -- allows the playwright's theories to
encompass the Vietnam war, the Cultural Revolution, "counterrevolutionary acts"
and the Communists' taunting of the diva, here called Song Liling. But the
important historical references to oppression of the Chinese, and of women in
general, are vague or nonexistent. The visual sweep across "time and space" of
an extraordinary original abstract production design, with its curved ramp, is
efficiently modified to the Westport stage.

Graeme Malcolm's performance as the diplomat, here called Rene Gallimard,
diverts intonations of homosexuality into a case study of a troubled,
analytical, homophobic man who is unable to deal with "loving a lie" -- and its
attendant new reality. The actor's performance fails to resolve the paradox of
Gallimard, as written. He protests too much that he is a wimp, clumsy and
inexperienced, while the plot keeps him sexually active, not just with Song, but
with two women, one of whom is his wife.

Other actors have highlighted the character's sexual ambiguity or the role's
sheer bravura potential. Mr. Malcolm does neither, and his weathered elegance,
wherein he covers up sexism with style, makes it hard to fall for his repeated
claims of low esteem.

A. Tung's wily performance as Song, the idealized pretend woman who knows how to
serve a man (because she is one) -- and is a "passionate listener" besides -- is
so imbued with cunning and sarcasm that the actor suggests Song's betrayal was
premeditated rather than set up.

In an otherwise passable supporting cast, serviceably directed by Bob Borod,
Craig Wasson is better than that, giving a welcomely satiric edge to the role of
Marc, Gallimard's buddy, and Puccini's Sharpless, a macho throwback who could be
easily a caricature, or just despicable. Mr. Wasson's performance reinforces one
of the playwright's more successful send-ups of the male mystique. Gallimard's
sexual power over Song gives him newfound confidence and boosts his career, and
that's "the way of the world," he observes.

Subtle undercurrents of Mr. Hwang's provocative and threatening themes could
have transformed "M. Butterfly" into a work of dramatic art. Instead, the
playwright settled, all too often, for blunt didacticism, bludgeoned home. And
the second act that winds up with Song and Gallimard's separate and amazing
transformations provide stunning moments of high theater, rather than the
inevitable outgrowth of developed ideas.

Mr. Hwang has taken shortcuts in plot, though not in verbiage, and the resulting
loose ends remain a puzzlement. In substance, though, the play is making a
powerful statement about a universal need for delusion -- even Gallimard's wife
adored the benefits of a charmed social life predicated upon pretense.

And with crafty skill, Mr. Hwang has taken us right into his invented world, so
that predetermined notions of logic become irrelevant. Only the most resistant
theatergoer will find nothing to ponder, argue or just be bothered about. Isn't
it reassuring that the contemporary theater still has the power to be so
imaginatively unsettling?

"M. Butterfly," at the Westport Country Playhouse, 25 Powers Court, just off the
Post Road East (Route 1). 227-4177. Remaining performances tomorrow through
Friday at 8:30, Wednesday at 2 and Saturday at 5 and 8:30 P.M.

LOAD-DATE: September 1, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Graeme Malcolm, left, and A. Tung in "M. Butterfly," playing in
Westport. (Jayson Byrd)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              161 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 1, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

TELEVISION VIEW;
In Celebration of the Bad Girl

BYLINE: By Gina Barreca;  Gina Barreca is an associate professor of English at
the University of Connecticut. This article is adapted from her book "They Used
to Call Me Snow White, but I Drifted: Women's Strategic Use of Humor" (Viking,
1991).

SECTION: Section 2; Page 21; Column 1; Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1649 words


Television, these days, is full of them. Where did they come from, these
fast-talking, wisecracking, brilliantly satiric, funny women? They all seem to
be a generic mid-30's to mid-40's and have repealed the restrictions that
proclaim Good Girls cannot be funny, a rule as tight and unnatural as a girdle,
and far more difficult to shed.

At what point was Good Girl Annette Funicello replaced by Madonna? (I keep a
close eye on both, these two being the only Italian-American women I remember
seeing on the small screen.) Both Annette Funicello and Madonna have the same
general shape, but Madonna encases her breasts in steel.

How did our culture come to accept a woman who could snap back an answer as well
as snap her gum? Good Girl Donna Reed has been replaced by Roseanne Barr-Arnold,
Mrs. Brady has been eclipsed by Mrs. Bundy. Like the new breed of female comics,
this new flock of wayward-women characters refuses to hand over the mike without
securing the last laugh. What has allowed us to forsake the Good Girl and
celebrate the Bad?

While growing up, I noticed that only certain kinds of people were allowed to be
funny on "The Dating Game" and "The Newlywed Game." On "The Dating Game" answers
could be sort of dirty, and on "The Newlywed Game" answers could be really
dirty, because the couples were married. The idea was to make people in the
audience shriek with laughter when the contestants got something wrong: "What
does your spouse miss most about his bachelor days?" Her answer: "Playing
baseball." His answer: "Playing the field." If he also said baseball, nobody
laughed.

"The Dating Game" was slightly different. The job of the show's bachelorette was
to ask questions that sounded innocent enough but could be answered by lines
heavy with innuendo. The audience was given permission to understand the double
meaning and laugh in appreciation of the guy's worldliness and wit, but the
female contestant could not, under any circumstances, show that she understood.
If she laughed, it gave away a terrible secret about her: she was not a Good
Girl.

Who and what are Good Girls? Melanie from "Gone With the Wind" was the
paradigmatic Good Girl. Mary Tyler Moore's character Mary Richards was Good, at
least in public and often despite herself. "That Girl" (Marlo Thomas) was a Good
Girl. The "good cousin," Cathy, on "The Patty Duke Show" was a Good Girl with an
affected English accent. Good Girls did not brazenly draw attention to
themselves or their ideas. They looked around to see what the other people in
the audience were doing before they let themselves smile or cry because they had
learned not to trust their instincts. Good Girls laughed with their mouths shut,
if they laughed at all.

One observant viewer of early 60's movies, the comedy writer Anne Beatts, notes
that Annette Funicello, the original Good Girl, never laughed. Instead, Annette
"just put her hands on her hips and got mad at Ricky or Tommy or Eddie or
whoever was carrying her surfboard, so that they could tell her how cute she was
when she was mad."

The "vocational school" girls on the other hand -- with their scary hairdos,
heavy eye makeup and spiked heels -- joked with the boys, chewed gum, laughed
with their heads thrown back, had the last word and came to a Bad End. But even
a Bad Girl's last word rarely crippled her opponent. In part, this is due to
what the feminist scholar Emily Toth has called "the humane humor rule." Ms.
Toth argues that women tend not to make fun of handicaps or physical appearance,
things people cannot change.

Women, therefore, are more likely to make fun of those in high or invulnerable
positions than their male counterparts. The bosses on "Roseanne" and "Murphy
Brown" are treated as inferior human beings. Rather than laugh at the insecure
mail clerk who always drops his papers, a "woman's show" will turn its humorous
lens on the Brahmins.

In "Designing Women" the heroines challenge repressive institutions, such as
nonunionized workplaces and the National Rifle Association by making fun of
rules that keep such institutions strong. When Suzanne Sugarbaker wanted to
protect her prize pig from pignappers, the show turned its humor on the fact
that she was permitted to have a gun in her house. If Suzanne, hysterically
selfish and unreasonable as she was, could own and misuse firearms, the argument
ran, gun laws needed work.

When we watch a woman initiating humor, we are watching a woman who breaks the
rules; it is invigorating and inspiring. Here is a woman who speaks her mind and
says aloud what we might think but dare not utter for fear of being considered
disgraceful.

Although the splitting of a woman into an angel or a whore is not particular to
contemporary culture (every book from the Bible to "Jane Eyre" seems to hold the
patent to this formula), it has saturated 20 years of television, manifesting
itself in bizarre ways.

Remember the immortal words from "The Patty Duke Show": "You can lose your mind/
When cousins are two of a kind"? It's a wonder we didn't lose our minds, given
the outrageous premise of a program that promised Identical Cousins. In this
program, Patty was the Bad Girl, and her twin cousin was the Good Girl. Cathy
adored a minuet and crepes suzette while Patty liked to "rock-and-roll, and a
hot dog made her lose control." Cathy smiled. Patty laughed.

The Identical Cousin Syndrome is the working out of the Good Girl-Bad Girl
split, which presupposes that any one woman cannot be both sweet and wicked. We
know that traditional heroes can be both mean and melting: the character Douglas
Brackman on "L.A. Law" is considered attractive even though he's stern, balding
and subject to flatulence during intimate moments; Bruce Willis's character
David on "Moonlighting" looked as if he had just come off heavy medication, but
that didn't stop him from being attractive to Maddie.

Our heroes often have feminine, vulnerable sides. The Good Girl-Bad Girl split
is the division of woman into two parts that seem never to meet. Heroines are
not allowed to show any emotional cleavage.

Good Girl Cathy typically looked out from underneath her eyelashes while
listening to someone else speak; Bad Girl Patty looked straight up and snapped
her gum while she spoke. Cathy listened to Beethoven, and Patty's father sighed
and said, "I hope some of Cathy's good taste rubs off on Patty," because Patty
liked raunchy rock music by the likes of, oh, Chad and Jeremy. Cathy's response
to anything Patty did was to sigh and say, "I shouldn't let her do this, but I
know how easy it is to get carried away." Ha!

Cathy was the perfect Good Girl. From today's perspective Patty didn't behave
too badly (put it this way: she came home late, but never encased her breasts in
steel). On the other hand, she was as close as 60's television could get to the
Bad Girl. Patty would not only laugh out loud, she would laugh at her own jokes.
If her boyfriend, Richard, said something stupid, she would whack him on the
forearm. Patty and Richard were destined to be the losing couple on "The
Newlywed Game."

The plot pivoted around Patty protesting against what she considered unjust:
often "injustice" was limited to a plain girlfriend not being invited to a
party. Patty would devise a scheme to right the wrong, and she would follow her
own enthusiastic but misguided initiative. Then she would fail because she got
carried away -- Patty's strong emotions or ideas would trip her up. Cathy, the
eternal moderate, would eventually be called in like a member of Miss Manner's
cavalry to rescue her cousin. Cathy never lost control, not over a hot dog, not
over anything.

It is Bad Girls who overdo things, make messes and are reluctant to control
themselves. Good Girls, you see, are never supposed to be too much of any one
thing.

Lucy Ricardo was always too much. Almost all episodes of "I Love Lucy" deal with
Lucy's excess -- excess ambition (to be in the chorus at Ricky's club), excess
desire for attention (to play the lead in the charity pageant) or longing or
envy.  Lucy always tried and failed; she was more Patty than Cathy.

What, after all, was so funny about the show? Well, Lucy wanted to do things --
she wasn't content only to play house with big and Little Ricky, keep the
apartment clean and cook balanced meals. Each show took Lucy through ambition
and deposited her safely back into domesticity -- until next time.

Control is the quality most explicitly associated with Good Girls. Immune to
temptation, the Good Girl can be counted on to have a sobering influence on any
group by her very presence. Good Girls don't swear, sweat, succumb or, most
significantly, satirize. We can deduce from this catalogue of characteristics
that there are, in fact, no Good Girls in real life. Everybody sweats.

Despair though we might at the thought of Madonna or Roseanne as heroines, we
must applaud the way they have blurred the line between acceptable and
unacceptable behavior for women. And, if we're lucky, the progressive blurring
of these lines might, in time, erase them. A recent study has shown that, while
in 1957 high-school girls identified almost exlusively with Melanie Wilkes from
"Gone With the Wind," within the last few years virtually all girls identified
with Scarlett O'Hara.

We are free, in other words, to hope that women are moving away from the
insidious grip of the ghost of the Good Girl. Yet even when we are no longer
schoolgirls, we often carry around with us an idea about what this Good Girl is
meant to be, and this image torments us without giving us help. It's like having
a Barbie doll for a role model: attractive but sexless. Decorous but mute. And
(echoes of "Pretty Woman"?), easy to position and dress, but basically boring.
Nobody -- no body -- looks like a Barbie. We all laugh out loud. And nobody is
always a Good Girl.

LOAD-DATE: September 1, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: On the "Patty Duke Show," Patty Duke played tow of a kind, the
"good" Cathy, left, and the "bad" Patty (Photographs by Photofest); Annette
Funicello--a Good Girl of the 1960's who always got her man (ABC); Lisa
Simpson--a Good Girl of the 1990's who always gets her "A's" (Fox Broadcasting);
Carolyn Jones as Morticia Addams, 1966--calculating and free-spirited (ABC);
Delta Burke as Suzanne Sugarbaker, 1991--calculating and free-spending (CBS);
(pg. 21); Donna Reed, an old-fashioned Good Girl, far left, has been eclipsed by
Roseanne Barr Arnold, a modern mom; Marlo Thomas ("That Girl"), center (ABC),
was a goody-goody; Mary Tyler Moore's character Mary Richards was good, at least
in public and often despite herself; in 1957, girls identified with Melanie
Wilkes of "Gone With the Wind," right; now it's Scarlett O'Hara. (pg. 22)

List:

Cathys (so named for the "good" cousin on "The Patty Duke Show") are sweet,
never lose control and neither sweat nor swear.

Cathys of the Past

Krystle Carrington
Doris Day
Mamie Eisenhower
Chris Evert
Jane Eyre
Annette Funicello
Gidget
The Madonna
Miss Marple
Mary Tyler Moore
Donna Reed
Mary Richards
Snow White
Melanie Wilkes

Cathys Today

Any Miss America (except Vanessa Williams)
Ariel, the Little Mermaid
Barbara Bush
Katie Couric
Diana, Princess of Wales
Jane Fonda, as exercise guru
 to the nation
Amy Grant
Ann Landers
Princess Leia
Lisa, Bart Simpson's little sister
Penny Marshall
Yoko Ono, as a widow
Jane Pauley
Sally Ride
Dr. Ruth
Martha Stewart
Amy Tan
Ivana Trump, post-divorce

Pattys (so named for the wild cousin) overdo things, make messes and are
reluctant to control themselves.

Pattys of the Past

Morticia Addams
Betty Boop
Lucrezia Borgia
Catwoman
Alexis Colby
Cruella DeVil
Jane Fonda, from Barbarella to Hanoi Jane
Janis Joplin
Natassia Kinski
Scarlett O'Hara
Yoko Ono, as the woman who "broke up" the Beatles
Lucy Ricardo
Suzanne Sugarbaker
Mae West

Pattys Today

Roseanne Barr Arnold
Sandra Bernhard
Elayne Boosler
Murphy Brown
Delta Burke
Carla ("Cheers")
Duchess of York
Linda Ellerbee
Leona Helmsley
Kitty Kelley
C. J. Lamb ("L.A. Law")
Fran Lebowitz
Madonna
Bette Midler
Jessica Rabbit
Joan Rivers
Judy Tenuta
Thelma and Louise
V. I. Warshawski

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              162 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 1, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

IN SHORT: FICTION

BYLINE: By BILL SHARP

SECTION: Section 7; Page 24; Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 281 words



MEMOIRS OF A CADDY
By David Noonan.
Simon & Schuster, $18.95.

A hormone-suffused teen-age caddy seems like a quirky choice of narrator for a
novel about America during the Vietnam War. But for David Noonan's wildly funny,
sad and vivid story of life far from the jungles and gunfire, the golf course is
an oddly appropriate setting. In his first novel, Mr. Noonan paints compelling
images of a quietly crazy home front, as seen through the eyes of 17-year-old
Jim Mooney. His is a funny and confusing world that evokes memories with every
scene, overlaying the seeming simplicity of small-town America with the
emotional complexities of young love, infidelity and the ailing nuclear family.
Mr. Noonan's descriptive prose simultaneously celebrates and lampoons the
1960's, as in this description of a caddy's car: "Even without Texas Billy's
worldly possessions in it, the car must have weighed nearly three tons. It was
an American dream of power, thousands of pounds of metal shaped for speed and
pleasure and aimed at the moon. It was supposed to look like a rocket ship; if
you tipped it on end you could drive it into space. But the way it hunkered down
on the blacktop, it was obvious the thing was a rolling slave to gravity." While
the book's characters are mainly drawn from a golf course, you need have no love
for the game to be delighted with "Memoirs of a Caddy." Jim Mooney looks out in
a hopeful, bewildered way at a small piece of a large nation that is living
through a time when country, family and destiny are being thoroughly questioned.
But a small piece of a country and an era can present a surprisingly amusing and
poignant picture of the whole.

LOAD-DATE: September 1, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              163 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 2, 1991, Monday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

Unions at a Loss to Reverse Falling Fortunes of Workers

BYLINE: By PETER T. KILBORN,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1; Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 1462 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 1


For all their exuberance, participants in Monday's Labor Day parades have rarely
had so little to celebrate.

No problem illustrates labor's waning influence better than its failure to join
with its historic ally, the Democratic Party, to exploit an issue that both
acknowledge could be a runaway vote getter: a declining standard of living for
most workers.

Throughout the Reagan-Bush years, most of the nation's families have been losing
ground economically, finding it harder to make ends meet, while a minority of
families, those with higher incomes who are primarily Republican, have gained
ground.

This coincides with the continuing erosion of labor's membership. Only one
worker in six belongs to a union today.

The House majority leader, Richard A. Gephardt, calls falling living standards
the "overarching issue" of the times. Yet unions see Mr. Gephardt and other
Democrats as part of the problem. In their frustration, some have decided to
withhold campaign contributions to Democrats who vote against their interests.
They also ponder running their own candidates in primaries, and on the fringe,
some talk of forming a third political party. In several big unions, rank and
file members have turned against their own leaders and voted them out of office.


'The Valid Issue'

Victor Gotbaum, once head of New York City's big municipal workers union and now
a professor of labor-management relations at the City University of New York,
said, "The standard of living is the valid issue. The question is, is there a
Democratic Party? Labor looks for a mechanism. Where is that mechanism?"

For much of organized labor, a better standard of living depends on protecting
American products and jobs from foreign competition by restricting imports and
on raising wages to regain the losses from inflation and from concessions made
to management in the 1980's. Unions also argue that tax breaks for workers would
unleash consumer spending and regenerate the overall economy.

For many Democrats in Congress, if not a majority, a better standard of living
depends on developing more high-paid, high-skill jobs and training people better
to do them. They find trade policies that thwart development of low-skill jobs
in poorer countries morally problematic. And they maintain that tax breaks,
whether for workers or for the rich, would only worsen a budget deficit that
contributes to the economy's sluggishness.

Living on One Paycheck

From the end of World War II until the start of the 1970's, when spending on the
Vietnam War and inflation pushed the country into the recession of 1974-75,
labor unions and Democrats collaborated to build the world's richest working
class, one in which a blue collar factory hand could own a home, and support a
family on one paycheck. Since then, more inflation, changes in the tax system,
the growth of the budget deficit and the rise of foreign competition, have
combined to depress most people's incomes.

Lawrence Mishel, an economist at the pro-labor Economic Policy Institute here,
calculates that the typical production or nonsupervisory worker's average wage
in July of $10.30 an hour is 6.8 percent less than 10 years ago in terms of what
it will buy. He said young males with high school diplomas but no college, the
backbone of the organized work force, have lost even more during the decade --
20 percent of their wages.

In contrast, Pearl Meyer & Partners, an executive recruiting firm in New York,
reports that the average salary of chief executives of the nation's 200 biggest
companies doubled over the last decade to $800,000.

The erosion in incomes shows up in delayed marriages, the growth of two-paycheck
families, more young adults living with parents, and the difficulty young people
have buying homes.

Victor Fingerhut, a poll taker and adviser to six unions, said the issue is ripe
for labor and Democrats to pluck. "People have a sense of being hurt," he said.
"If the Democrats had any sense, they would hammer on that stuff."

The decline of the standard of living coincides with organized labor's waning
influence and the demise of the old manufacturing industries where wages were
highest and labor strongest. Leading Democrats in Congress are partly
responsible, trade unionists say.

Mr. Gephardt, of Missouri, and other Democratic leaders like Senator Edward M.
Kennedy of Massachusetts, chairman of the Senate Labor and Human Resources
Committee, and Senator George J. Mitchell of Maine, the majority leader, stunned
labor in May by voting to grant President Bush authority to negotiate a trade
agreement with Mexico. Labor loudly opposed the proposal because it contended
that the pact would spell the loss of jobs.

Betrayed and Ignored

Now unions feel betrayed and ignored. "When Democrats are running and looking
for people to put up the yard signs and seal envelopes and collect voluntary
contributions, the labor movement is able to deliver," said Gerald W. McEntee,
president of the big American Federation of State County and Municipal
Employees. "Once the Democrats get in Congress, the amount of influence we have
comes up short."

With their fortunes still in descent, unions for the first time are thrashing
about for new ways to recapture their old influence, including turning against
Democrats. The United Mine Workers has started running its own members in
primaries against incumbent Democrats who vote against its agenda. The
Communications Workers of America has decided to deny campaign contributions to
Democrats who oppose a ban against employers' hiring of new workers to replace
permanently those who go out on strike.

As an expression of its fury over his vote on Mexican trade, the Machinists
union canceled an invitation to Mr. Gephardt to appear at its convention in
June. And the secretary-treasurer of the Oil, Chemical and Atomic Workers union,
Tony Mazzochi, has formed a group, Labor Party Advocates, that could become the
nucleus of a third party.

The president of the United Mine Workers, Richard L. Trumka, whose union's
membership has plunged with the automation of coal mining, said the idea of a
third party could have "a tremendous amount of merit."

"But first," he said, "we have to demonstrate to the worker that the Democratic
Party won't be a voice for him."

Greg Tarpinian, senior economist at the Labor Research Association, a labor
advocacy group in New York, made a similar point. "There's a much higher level
of debate within the labor movement over the kinds of demands that labor should
make on the Democratic Party," he said. "We've had a decade of openly
reactionary anti-labor rule by Republicans, and the Democratic Party has yet to
come up with an alternative."

Reliable Supporters

Labor leaders still find Democrats reliable supporters of initiatives that help
all workers, like expanding benefits to the long-term unemployed, expanding
civil rights protections in the workplace and granting unpaid leave for workers
who have children or care for elderly parents, all measures which the President
has vetoed or stalled.

And people blame union leaders for labor's waning clout as much as they blame
Democrats, who to win elections have to be sensitive to the concerns of more
voters than just the 16 percent who belong to unions, a figure less than half
the level following World War II.

These critics say that 35 members of the A.F.L.-C.I.O.'s executive council, made
up largely of white males in their 50's and 60's, are mired in the battles of
the past, and far more secure in their jobs than the popularly elected Democrats
they berate.

More and more, rank-and-file members are challenging their leaders. For example,
they voted out the presidents of two transportation unions for their role in
settling last April's railroad strike.

"When you're losing members and influence, people start wondering why," said
Susan Jennik, executive director of the Association for Union Democracy, a group
in New York that supports rank-and-file efforts to open unions to more
democratic practices.

Salvation for the unions and the Democrats lies in seizing the initiative to
rebuild the standard of living, some Democrats say. "Trade protection strategy
is not going to make us prosper," said Al From, president of the Democratic
Leadership Council, an association of moderate Democrats.

Representative Sander M. Levin, Democrat of Michigan, called the decline of the
standard of living "the Achilles' heel of the Republican Party.

"The situation is ripe for someone to come forth and say the whole world is
changing for the better, and America is changing for the worse, and we can do
better," he said. "But lacking an overall vision, we Democrats get lost in the
details."

LOAD-DATE: September 2, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: September 5, 1991, Thursday

CORRECTION:

Because of a production error, an article on Monday about the declining
influence of labor unions included scrambled paragraphs in some copies that
truncated the identification of a labor expert and rendered a quotation from him
incompletely. The expert, Greg Tarpinian, senior economist at the Labor Research
Association, a labor advocacy group in New York, said: "There's a much higher
level of debate within the labor movement over the kinds of demands that labor
should make on the Democratic Party. We've had a decade of openly reactionary
anti-labor rule by Republicans, and the Democratic Party has yet to come up with
an alternative."


GRAPHIC: Graph: "Thinning Wallets," tracks real wages, the average weekly
earnings of production or nonsupervisory employees on private nonfarm payrolls
after adjustments for inflation, 1950-1991* (*1991, 7-month average) (Source:
Bureau of Labor Statistics) (pg. 10)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              164 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 3, 1991, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Slaying Divides A Neighborhood On Racial Lines

BYLINE: By MICHEL MARRIOTT,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 18; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1305 words

DATELINE: PHILADELPHIA, Sept. 2


It is not readily apparent how much tension and trouble lurk in the
working-class neighborhood where David Reilly lived and died in Southwest
Philadelphia.

Children on Chester Street play touch football on the pavement and family men
play softball in a "beer belly league" on a nearby asphalt schoolyard. American
flags wave here and there over front stoops of row houses.

But the signs of conflict are there in Mr. Reilly's neighborhood, between Cobbs
Creek and Woodland Avenue. A police car is regularly parked outside a row house.
And McCreesh Park, a popular hangout for youths, is nearly empty at night.

It has been a month since Mr. Reilly, an 18-year-old former high school
basketball star, was stabbed to death in the park in what the police say was a
clash between whites and Asians. Shortly after the incident, Ty Truong, a
24-year-old Chinese-Vietnamese restaurant worker, was charged with the murder.

Fear of Reprisals

The police are parked outside the home of Mr. Truong and his sister, Lan Truong,
28, who said she came to the United States as a refugee from Vietnam in 1979
because "I wanted a freedom country."

The Asians fear reprisals for the slaying. Some young whites in the neighborhood
unblinkingly refer to Asians as "gooks" and speak about them in threatening
tones. Many Asian families say they venture outside only when absolutely
necessary.

The widely publicized tensions have forced some Philadelphians to begin asking
tough questions about how harmony can be achieved between racial and ethnic
groups in their city, which, like much of urban America, is undergoing rapid
change.

"America is never going to be what it used to be," said Leah Gaskin Coles,
executive director of the Philadelphia Commission on Human Rights. "Diversity
will be the life style of this country, and nobody is safe to say that they are
not going to participate in this diversity."

Many whites in Southwest Philadelphia are unable to move anywhere better. But
for the Asian newcomers, Southwest Philadelphia is a first step in moving into
the American mainstream.

The cycle of mistrust and misunderstanding that has characterized parts of
Southwest Philadelphia, like the neighborhood where Mr. Reilly lived, is similar
to that in troubled New York neighborhoods like Bensonhurst, Canarsie and, more
recently, Crown Heights, Dr. Coles said.

Figures from the census show how the racial and ethnic composition of
Philadelphia, a city of more than 1.5 million people, is being rewritten.

The number of Asians in the city rose to 43,522 last year from 17,764 in 1980.
The number of Hispanic Philadelphians rose to 89,193 from 63,570. The city's
black population fell slightly, to 631,936 from 638,878, while the number of
whites declined, to 848,586 last year from 983,084 in 1980.

Sociologists studying ethnic conflict in neighborhoods like Southwest
Philadelphia say the problems are more complex than simple racism and are often
greatly influenced by forces like the loss of industrial jobs and by national
economic and housing policies. Moreover, the problems are sometimes magnified by
the refugees' difficulties in adjusting to a new world and new life, the experts
say.

Lost Manufacturing Jobs

"Neighborhoods which are segregated internally and are relatively poor and have
lost manufacturing jobs are neighborhoods where you are most likely to find
integration conflict," said William L. Yancey, a sociology professor at Temple
University.

In the 1950's and 1960's large numbers of middle-class whites were able to
abandon much of West Philadelphia for new and better housing in nearby suburbs,
opening the way for the area to become predominantly black, Dr. Yancey said. By
comparison, he said, many whites in declining areas like Southwest Philadelphia
are "economically entrapped."

"Even if they wanted to move, they are hard-pressed to do so," he said.  "They
can't sell their houses and get enough for a new house in suburbia."

Fear and frustration are an understandable consequence, sociologists said.

"I think they feel like they can push us out," Tony Burns, 14, said about Asians
moving into his neighborhood. "We ain't going nowhere."

Beginning in 1975, large numbers of Southeast Asians, many of whom were refugees
from Vietnam, Cambodia and Laos, began settling in Philadelphia, a study by the
Commission on Human Relations found. Many were placed there by resettlement
agencies because the housing was stable and affordable. When relatives and other
Southeast Asians followed, they settled in the same neighborhoods for support
and a sense of the familiar in unfamiliar surroundings, said Samien Nol,
executive director of Southeast Asian Mutual Assistance Association Coalition
here.

By the mid-1980's, Southwest Philadelphia had the largest population of
Southeast Asians in the city, said Elaine Simon, associate director of the Urban
Studies Program at the University of Pennsylvania.

With mass immigration disruptions have come in the traditional ways of life and
behavior among some young Asians.

"Some of these who have grown up in this country have picked up the bad habits
of the inner city, too," Mr. Nol said.

The fears and frustrations of urban children from Southeast Asia, as well as
those of many of their parents, are multiplied when they encounter native-born
Americans who do not understand them.

'I Want to Leave'

"This neighborhood is stupid," said a teen-age Vietamese girl who asked not to
be identified for fear of reprisals. "It's prejudiced and I want to leave, go to
Canada."

Mr. Nol said he had recently taken several trips through Southwest Philadelphia,
though he would not get out of his car there. He said he, too, is worried by the
possibility of anti-Asian acts.

But Lan Truong, the murder suspect's sister, has no such choice.

When visitors come, she peeks from behind sun-faded curtains, even with police
officers parked less than 25 feet away, before answering the door.

"I had no trouble before," Ms. Truong said in halting English. "Now police guard
me. They protect me."

She said she came to Southwest Philadelphia from Queens two years ago because
she heard the rent was cheaper here. It was. She pays $250 a month for a row
house. In New York she paid $600 a month for two rooms for her and her three
children.

Unemployed, she spends much of her days worrying about her brother, who is in
jail awaiting a bail hearing.

"My brother did not do it," Ms. Truong insisted. She said he went to a movie in
New Jersey the day of the stabbing. He came home shortly before the killing and
could not have had time to get involved in it, she said.

But a witness told the authorities that Ty Truong was the leader of a group of
Asian youths armed with knives and that he killed Mr. Reilly.

'We Were Standing Around'

A burly 24-year-old white man who was interviewed in the neighborhood recently
and who would identify himself only as Rob, said he was with Mr. Reilly in
McCreesh Park the morning of Aug. 3.

"It was about 2:30 in the morning and we were standing around drinking some
beer," he said. He said some of his friends walked over to a group of Asians who
were in another part of the park and asked them if one of them had recently
pulled a knife on a white youth from the neighborhood.

One of the Asians walked away and out of the park, Rob said.

Minutes later, about a dozen Asians returned "with cleavers, knives and stuff,"
Rob said. "They ran right up behind him and stabbed him," he said of Mr. Reilly.

Rob said he and his friends ran. Mr. Reilly ran with them, but in a few moments
he said his back hurt, and he collapsed.

"Blood was just pouring out of him," Rob said.

Mr. Reilly died a short time later in a hospital. For more than a week, flowers
marked the place where he fell.

LOAD-DATE: September 3, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Four youths in the working-class neighborhood between Cobbs
Creek and Woodland Avenue in Southwest Philadelphia, where David Reilly, a
former high school basketball player, was killed last month. (Sal DiMarco Jr.
for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              165 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 3, 1991, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

A Friendship, a Washington Bank and a Trail of Money Leading to B.C.C.I.;
Clifford and Altman, Mentor and Protege, At Center of Inquiry

BYLINE: By NEIL A. LEWIS,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section D; Page 1; Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1442 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 2


Somewhere near the center of the tangled financial story of First American
Bankshares Inc., Washington's largest bank holding company, is the mentor and
protege relationship of Clark M. Clifford and his junior law partner, Robert A.
Altman.

At 85 years old, Mr. Clifford, a former poker-playing partner of President
Truman and Winston Churchill, was the Secretary of Defense who helped persuade
President Johnson to wind down the Vietnam War, the man who counseled President
Kennedy about his private life, and the diplomat sent on special missions by
President Carter.

Mr. Altman, at 44 years old, has done little in his adult life but practice
corporate law and prosper under Clark Clifford at their small Washington law
firm. Until he became embroiled in the widening problems surrounding First
American, Mr. Altman was best known as the husband of Lynda Carter, the actress
and model who starred in the television series "Wonder Woman."

As Federal and New York State officials intensify their investigations of how
First American came to be secretly controlled by the Luxembourg-based Bank of
Credit and Commerce International, Mr. Clifford and Mr. Altman stand at the
center of the prosecutorial bull's-eye.

The focus of the investigators' interest is the role of the two men in helping a
group of Middle Eastern investors take over First American in 1982. Federal
regulators approved the takeover after assurances from Mr. Clifford and Mr.
Altman that First American would have nothing to do with B.C.C.I., a largely
unregulated international bank that was trying to expand its reach into the
United States.

Mr. Clifford became First American's chairman, and Mr. Altman its president.

But this year, facts became known that strongly suggested to investigators that
Mr. Clifford and Mr. Altman played a far different role than what they had
described.

In January, an audit disclosed that several original investors in First American
had been merely fronting for B.C.C.I.; that Mr. Clifford and Mr. Altman were
given loans by B.C.C.I. on unusually favorable terms to buy First American
stock, and that in little more than a year they sold that stock for a profit of
$9.8 million. The nominal buyer of the stock was a small money-lender whose
purchase was bankrolled by a shadowy B.C.C.I. affiliate.

One of the first indications that B.C.C.I. had a secret interest in the Clifford
and Altman bank was in September 1988, when a B.C.C.I. official was heard on a
tape recording bragging to an undercover Customs Bureau agent on the trail of
the Panamanian leader Manuel A. Noriega. The official said that his company
controlled a bank in Washington through Mr. Clifford. He described Mr. Clifford
as "practically the godfather of the Democratic Party" and Mr. Altman as the man
"married to Wonder Woman."

Mr. Clifford and Mr. Altman resigned their First American posts on Aug. 14,
insisting that it was for the good of the bank. But it was clear that they had
been forced out by Federal regulators and the bank's board.

The personal Clifford-Altman story begins in the early 1970's, when Mr. Clifford
rejoined a small Washington law firm that specialized in helping blue-chip
corporate clients navigate the capital.

Views on Vietnam

During his term as Secretary of Defense, which ended in 1969, he was transformed
from a hawk on Vietnam to someone convinced it was a grave mistake to continue
the war. The issue of Vietnam meant something different to Mr. Altman's
generation, a choice of whether to serve or resist. Mr. Altman was spared that
decision because asthma assured him a medical deferment.

He enrolled in George Washington University Law school after graduating from the
University of Wisconsin. The Clifford firm asked the law school to recommend a
summer clerk in 1971 and Prof. David Seidelson, greatly impressed with Mr.
Altman even as a first-year student, sent him.

After graduation, at the age of 25, Mr. Altman joined the lobbying firm and
began a relationship with Mr. Clifford that deepened as Mr. Clifford grew to
depend on his younger colleague. The adulation of the younger man, friends said,
was repaid by a growing respect from the older.

"There is obviously a strong bond there," said one lawyer who spoke on the
condition that he not to be identified. "Clark has great respect for his legal
skills and a personal affection for him."

Over the years, Mr. Altman picked up some of Mr. Clifford's trademark habits.
Frequently dressed in the dark double-breasted suits associated with Mr.
Clifford, Mr. Altman will often put his hands together at the fingertips, a
gesture so identified with his mentor that it is known in Washington as the
"Clifford tent" or "Clifford steeple."

Some Traits Not Shared

Some gestures that Mr. Clifford has brought off with great panache over the
years Mr. Altman does not try to duplicate. Mr. Clifford likes to telephone
lawyers and officials and introduce himself with an exaggerated modesty, saying,
"My name is Clark Clifford, and I practice law in Washington," confident the
other person will certainly know who he is. Mr. Altman, several lawyers said,
seems more sensitive to the need to show that he is person of standing.

Mr. Altman's 1984 marriage to Ms. Carter gave him a glittering social stature in
Washington. The couple met in Nashville, where Ms. Carter was a spokeswoman for
Maybelline cosmetics. They were married in Bel Air, Calif., in 1984 in a
ceremony that Mr. Altman boasted brought together the glitz of Hollywood and the
importance of Washington.

Mr. Clifford was the best man. Aga Hassan Abedi, the founder of B.C.C.I., was a
guest and offered to give Ms. Carter a car of her choice as a gift. She chose a
black Jaguar, she recently told People magazine.

Tennis and a Waterfall

In recent years, the Altmans have been Olympic-class socializers in the capital,
often entertaining at their huge suburban home that is typically referred to in
newspapers here as a 16-bathroom residence. The house also has lighted tennis
courts, an artificial waterfall and what one regular guest called "a Hollywood
grandiosity but a nice lived-in feeling."

Ms. Carter counts among her friends Mary (Honey) Skinner, the wife of the
Transportation Secretary, Samuel K. Skinner, and Dorothy Bush LeBlond, President
Bush's daughter. She has been active in the kinds of charity drives that thrive
on celebrity associations.

But Mr. Altman's legal difficulties have put strains on some relationships. When
The Wall Street Journal called Michael J. Boskin, the chairman of the
President's Council of Economic Advisers, to ask about his friendship with the
Altmans and a recent ski trip to Aspen, Colo., a Boskin spokesman emphasized
that the Altmans and Boskins had "skiied on separate mountains."

Victims of Deceit?

As the legal drama is played out, lawyers, bankers and friends of both men are
waiting to see how Mr. Clifford and Mr. Altman will treat each other. So far,
they have a common set of lawyers and a common line of defense: they were both
deceived by Aga Hassan Abedi, the founder of B.C.C.I.

"I have a choice of seeming either venal or stupid," Mr. Clifford told The New
York Times this year. Mr. Altman has declined to be interviewed, but through
lawyers has similarly insisted he was taken in by Mr. Abedi.

Many of Mr. Clifford's friends yearn to believe in a sequence of events in which
he was led astray in his twilight years by a younger and more hustling
colleague. To many people watching for any indication that the common front will
crack, such a split would be unthinkable. Over the years, Mr. Clifford, who has
three daughters, has often called Mr. Altman the "son he never had." Mr. Altman
named his first child Clark.

Prosecutors, who acknowledge that Mr. Altman is a more palatable target than Mr.
Clifford, note an area in which Mr. Altman was more actively involved with
B.C.C.I. One thing that made investigators skeptical about Mr. Clifford's and
Mr. Altman's professed ignorance of the B.C.C.I. role in running First American
was the fact that the two had said they used B.C.C.I. as a liaison with First
American shareholders. Mr. Clifford said it was a matter of convenience, since
the shareholders were spread throughout the Middle East and Mr. Abedi saw them
often.

But records show, in the words of one investigator, that 90 percent of the
telephone calls and visits to B.C.C.I. officials were made by Mr. Altman.
According to a report by the Federal Reserve, B.C.C.I. officials did not act as
a liaison but appeared to control the decisions at First American on things like
hiring.

NAME: Clark M. Clifford; Robert A. Altman

LOAD-DATE: September 3, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: September 5, 1991, Thursday

CORRECTION:

Because of an editing error, an article in Business Day on Tuesday about the
friendship between Clark M. Clifford and Robert A. Altman referred incorrectly
to Mr. Altman's son. He is James Clifford Altman.


GRAPHIC: Photo: Clark M. Clifford, left, the former Secretary of Defense and
adviser to Democratic Presidents, and Robert A. Altman, with his wife, the
acress Lynda Carter. Mr. Clifford is shown last month as he announced his
resignation as chairman of First American Bankshares; Mr. Altman, the junior law
partner of Mr. Clifford who resigned as the bank's president, and Ms. Carter are
seen at the Democratic National Convention in 1988. (Associated Press; Agence
France-Presse)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              166 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 5, 1991, Thursday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

Nebraska Senator Comes to Brink Of Democratic Bid for Presidency

BYLINE: By ROBIN TONER,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 22; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 687 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 4


Senator Bob Kerrey of Nebraska edged closer to a race for the Democratic
Presidential nomination today, saying he would formally announce his plans in
late September but leaving little doubt among Democrats that he intended to
plunge in.

Mr. Kerrey's statement, issued this afternoon, came after two weeks of rising
speculation about the Nebraska Democrat, a first-term Senator, a former Governor
and a Medal of Honor winner who lost part of his leg in Vietnam.

Mr. Kerrey's move reflected a sudden quickening in the race for the Democratic
nomination, coming one day after former Gov. Edmund G. Brown Jr. of California
announced he was forming a Presidential exploratory committee..

Former Senator Paul E. Tsongas of Massachusetts, for four months the only
declared major candidate in the race, said he welcomed the entry of new
candidates. "I've been debating myself," said Mr. Tsongas, who in a speech at
George Washington University today called for "a new Marshall Plan" to aid the
Soviet Union.

Mr. Kerrey's brief statement declared: "My interest in running for President is
based upon the belief that the possibility of a better future 20 years from now
will be determined by our actions today. I will make a formal announcement of my
plans toward the end of September."

Mr. Kerrey, 48 years old, earlier said he would make his decision before
returning to Washington next week when Congress ends its summer recess. Today's
statement, while still giving Mr. Kerrey the option of backing out, was taken by
some party professionals as a signal that he would, in fact, enter the race but
wanted more time to organize a candidacy.

"What he's trying to do is set up a way to make sure people know that he's
inclined to run, but wants to put the pieces in place so that he can run well
when he begins running," said a Democrat close to Mr. Kerrey, who spoke on
condition that he not be identified.

The statement today allows Mr. Kerrey more time to orchestrate a formal
announcement, when a candidate usually tries to make the most of his moment in
the limelight -- particularly important in a campaign starting so late.

Paul Tully, the political director of the Democratic National Committee, said of
Mr. Kerrey and his supporters: "Everything we see is that they're on recess, I
think he got a much better sense of the void that was out there in the public
debate, that the case wasn't being made very well against Bush," said the
Democrat close to Mr. Kerrey.

Moreover, the withdrawal of several leading Democrats, including Representative
Richard A. Gephardt of Missouri, the House majority leader, and Senator Al Gore
of Tennessee, has left the field wide open for a new generation of Democrats
like Mr. Kerrey to step into the fray.

"I think he brings a real star quality to the race, maybe more so than anybody
else who's a candidate or potential candidate save Mario Cuomo," said Geoffrey
Garin, a Democratic polltaker.

Mr. Kerrey, widely seen as the kind of outsider candidate who might fare well in
1992, ran for office for the first time at the age of 39, waging, and winning, a
dark-horse race for the governorship in 1982.

Tsongas Urges Aid to U.S.S.R.

Mr. Tsongas came to Washington today with a foreign policy address in which he
sought to outline policy responses to the developments in the Soviet Union.

"I propose that America take the lead today in promoting a new Marshall Plan,"
he said. "The issue is not whether we can provide aid. We must provide aid. If
George Bush can find $2 billion to add to 'Star Wars,' he can take some of the
NATO money and provide it to the Soviet Union."

Mr. Tsongas added, "This winter in the Soviet Union, America can buy more
defense with food aid than with additional missiles."

He also took the opportunity to attack his own party, arguing that "the reason
we don't win the White House is because the country doesn't trust us with the
economy -- and they're right."

Mr. Tsongas said the party should foresake "corporate bashing, class warfare,
protectionism" and adopt policies encouraging economic growth and job creation.

NAME: Bob Kerrey

LOAD-DATE: September 5, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: September 6, 1991, Friday

CORRECTION:

A picture in some copies yesterday showing a man without a jacket, with an
article about the Presidential aspirations of Senator Bob Kerrey of Nebraska,
was published in error. The man pictured was Senator John Kerry of
Massachusetts.


GRAPHIC: Photo: Senator Bob Kerrey, who said yesterday he would formally
announce his Presidential nomination plans later this month. (Paul Hosefros/The
New York Times)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              167 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 6, 1991, Friday, Late Edition - Final

On Stage, and Off

BYLINE: By Alex Witchel

SECTION: Section C; Page 2; Column 2; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1063 words



$50,000 to Shakespeare Festival

Although the appointment of JoAnne Akalaitis to succeed Joseph Papp as the
artistic director of the New York Shakespeare Festival has received a lukewarm
response from the theater community -- so far, at least -- one of its most
prominent members is handing her a check. Jujamcyn Theaters, the Broadway
theater owner and producer, will give its annual $50,000 cash award to the
festival in a ceremony scheduled for Oct. 14.

Rocco Landesman, president of Jujamcyn, says the award is also intended as a
tribute to Mr. Papp, who recently stepped down. Mr. Landesman says: "Joe has
always insisted on productions that challenge, disturb and provoke. And his
independence has been almost pathological. No board, no critic, no audience
consensus could keep him from doing a play that interested him. But to confound
everyone, he's also managed to produce the most successful Broadway musical of
all time."

As for Ms. Akalaitis, Mr. Landesman says: "JoAnne is, like Joe, an enemy of
comfort and complacency in the theater. Her tenure promises to continue the
tradition of breaking traditions."

On a High Horse About 'La Mancha'

Dale Wasserman, who wrote the book of the hit musical "Man of La Mancha," the
story of Don Quixote, has been tilting at some windmills of his own. He has
spent the last week telling anyone who will listen that he may sue the producer
Mitch Leigh, who is also the show's composer, to stop a 25th-anniversary
production of "La Mancha" starring Raul Julia and Sheena Easton.

The issue is one of control. Mr. Wasserman, who holds the copyrights to the
musical's book and the teleplay on which it is based, says he objects to
mounting the same production with the same designs and the same director, Albert
Marre, who's been overseeing companies of "La Mancha" since 1965. "I do not
consider Mitch a producer," Mr. Wasserman says. "He's a re-producer." Mr. Leigh,
on the other hand, says he is of the "if it ain't broke, don't fix it" school of
thought.

A Broadway producer, who insisted on anonymity, says, "Dale wants to maintain
the integrity of the original production by exploring new design and directing
ideas, not just hanging up the name of a star and putting out all the old
scenery."

"He wants a flop, is what he wants," says Arthur Rubin, executive vice president
of the Nederlander Organization, which has booked "La Mancha" into its Gershwin
Theater on Broadway, and also into its theaters in Los Angeles, San Francisco
and Chicago. "Take a good show and change it and you've got a flop. Why an
author who could make so much money would fight it is beyond my comprehension.
It's crazy time."

Mr. Wasserman says he makes plenty of money writing for television, and has
already returned a "very large check" that Mr. Leigh sent him. "He thinks that
if you pay people, they will shut up," Mr. Wasserman maintains. "If I were that
practical a man, I wouldn't have written 'Man of La Mancha' to begin with."

Mr. Leigh is unmoved. "Dale Wasserman behaves like he invented Cervantes," he
says.

'Brady Bunch,' and It's Not a Rerun

If you're under 35, chances are that "The Brady Bunch" baby-sat for you more
often than your mom. You probably know all the words to its theme song by heart.
(Admit it. You just started singing it.) Well, the Bradys aren't just for
television anymore. Starting on Sept. 26 at the Village Gate is "The Real Live
Brady Bunch," a theatrical re-creation by adult actors of the original
television scripts. For the last year, this event has been the toughest ticket
in Chicago, where it has played at the Annoyance Theater, sometimes turning away
as many as 100 people a night. The producer and promoter Ron Delsener is
bringing the show and its Chicago cast to New York, where it is scheduled to run
through Dec. 8. There are 26 "Brady" scripts that are performed in rotation for
two weeks apiece, so repeat visits are possible, especially if the show extends.

But the Bradys are only the second half of the evening. "The Real Live Game
Show," an audience-participation takeoff on "The Price Is Right," precedes it,
using the same actors. Both shows break for commercials as they do on
television, and local merchants can pay $25 per spot to have the actors perform
their ad. Mr. Delsener says this is "ancillary box-office income" and since
there are about eight commercials a night during the two shows, that means
$1,400 a week.

And if you hit it on the right night, who knows what could happen? In Chicago,
Eve Plumb, the actress who originated Jan, the middle daughter, on television,
made a surprise guest appearance. Can Florence Henderson be far behind?

Let's Hear It From the Dentists

The good news for the Manhattan Theater Club is that Terrence McNally's "Lips
Together, Teeth Apart" is selling out at City Center and has been extended
indefinitely. (Dentists love it so much that many have sent in their own
pointers on the "lips together, teeth apart" method, which helps people stop
grinding their teeth while they sleep).

The bad news is that as a result the theater's first show of the season, Shirley
Lauro's "Piece of My Heart," a drama about six women who served in Vietnam,
finds itself homeless. The solution, the artistic director Lynne Meadow has
decided, is to move Ms. Lauro's play to the Union Square Theater on 17th Street,
formerly home to the Roundabout. Previews are to begin on Oct. 15. Ticket
information: (212) 645-5590.

Making a Cake and Then Eating It

A piece of the cake is what you'll get on Sept. 25 at the opening of "Bon
Appetit" and "The Italian Lesson" at CSC Repertory. Chocolate cake, to be exact,
also known as Julia Child's Gateau au Chocolat l'Eminence Brune, which is apt,
since Jean Stapleton, who stars in both one-act plays, portrays Ms. Child in
"Bon Appetit." The play, which is sung, is a lesson in making the cake, and the
staff of Bon Appetit magazine will provide the real thing after the show. They
will be joined by the chefs of Le Cirque, Union Square Cafe, Mondrian and
Felidia, among others, who will bring their own chocolate creations, accompanied
by Cognac and coffee. The magazine will also hold a drawing for six dinners at
one of the restaurants, and at every performance, from Sept. 16 through Nov. 3,
Bon Appetit will give away one free subscription. Tickets: (212) 677-4210.


LOAD-DATE: September 6, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH



GRAPHIC: He may not be Eddie Murphy, but Eric Bogosian is equally raw in his
first performance film, "Sex, Drugs, Rock & Roll," based on his one-man show at
the Orpheum last season. Mr. Bogosian performs 10 monologues, shot live, under
the direction of John McNaughton, who knows life's seamier side after directing
"Henry, Portrait of a Serial Killer." The film opens next Friday. (Jerry Bauer)
Photo: "Monologues by Eric Bogosian"

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              168 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 6, 1991, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Concierges: Baedekers In the Flesh

BYLINE: By NANCY SHARKEY

SECTION: Section C; Page 1; Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 2660 words


TO hear John Neary describe his job as concierge at the Carlyle Hotel, you would
think he was reciting the Boy Scout motto.

A good concierge, he says, is a trustworthy, loyal, helpful, friendly, courteous
and kind professional. He "asks, tries, denies, replies, demands, begs, borrows,
searches, explores, tests, calls, looks for, adds up, tastes, runs, mends,
advises, consults and warns" on behalf of his clients in such matters as
transportation, theater tickets, tour itineraries, amenities, shopping and
dining, including "restaurants with great wine lists, restaurants close to the
hotel, French restaurants, California grill restaurants and restaurants without
purple in them."

No small task, but that is why New York luxury hotels have top-flight concierges
who are a guest's personal representative in a big and often baffling
metropolis, particularly with Labor Day behind and the fall cultural season
beginning. These uniformed ombudsmen pride themselves on an insider's ability to
get things done as quickly and quietly as possible.

Full-range concierge service was uncommon even in luxury American hotels until
10 or 15 years ago, when travelers returning from Europe began to demand more
from the old-style information desks in hotel lobbies. The number and quality of
concierges in the United States has grown so much in the last 10 years that the
international society of concierges, the Clefs d'Or, now has 180 members
nationwide and about 60 in New York City. From their stations, usually near the
check-in desk, concierges pull strings to solve all kinds of problems. According
to their ethical guidelines, concierges charge no fee for their services and
accept no commission from businesses they send guests to. They do expect a tip,
from $5 for a routine reservation to $20 or $25 for a more difficult task, like
arranging a weekend tour schedule. They especially appreciate guests who write a
thank-you note to the hotel management.

For customized service, it helps to be clear about what you want. "We need to
know what the guest is like, their psychology, what makes them feel
comfortable," says Mario Cinti, chief concierge at the Lowell Hotel.

Even jaded New Yorkers might be surprised to see what a good concierge can add
to a stay in the city. To see what they recommend, nine of the top concierges in
Manhattan, all with the gold-key pins of the Clefs d'Or, were asked to devise
interesting New York itineraries for three kinds of clients, providing a broad
cross section of interests, tastes and budgets. They were told that these
hypothetical tourists had a weekend to spend in the city:

*A typical family from a small Midwestern city. The parents are baby boomers and
their two children are 8 and 10 years old. First-time New York visitors, they
want a full-blown tour of the city's sights.

*A woman of what used to be called a certain age, widowed, from the Northeast.
She used to visit New York with her husband, who made all the arrangements. She
likes art and antiques and retains an interest in fashion.

*A gay couple from Los Angeles in their 40's, both in the entertainment
industry. They've been to New York many times and think they've seen it all.
They're looking for something new and different to do.

Some of the concierges, like Mr. Neary, Thomas P. Wolfe of the Plaza Hotel and
Florence Waterman of the Pierre Hotel, jumped at the opportunity to recommend
offbeat itineraries -- Mr. Neary suggested a Vietnam Day (a helicopter tour,
dinner at a Vietnamese restaurant and "Miss Saigon" on Broadway), for example.
Several, like Tito Fornari of the Mayfair Regent Hotel, kept their suggestions
to New York classics like the Frick Collection, Le Cirque and the Cathedral of
St. John the Divine. Still others had special interests that figured in their
suggestions. Anthony Pike of the Westbury Hotel, a former jazz drummer, was up
to date with the club scene; Mario Cinti of the Lowell, a former food and
beverage manager, had a wide knowledge of New York restaurants.

Here is a sampling of the concierges' recommendations.

FAMILY OF FOUR

PLAN 1, THE GRAND TOUR: Suggested by Tito Fornari of the Mayfair Regent Hotel,
at 610 Park Avenue, at 65th Street. After an early dinner at the Hard Rock Cafe
in midtown, they have ice cream at Serendipity 3 on the Upper East Side. On
Saturday morning, they stroll over to the Central Park Zoo via Fifth Avenue,
then have lunch at Rumpelmayer's on Central Park South or at the Loeb Boathouse
Restaurant in Central Park.

In the afternoon, they hire a limousine and guide for a four-hour sightseeing
trip through the city, with stops along the way. Their route goes north to
Harlem, across to the West Side and south past Lincoln Center, down Broadway
through the theater district, then south to Chelsea, Greenwich Village and
TriBeCa, through Little Italy and Chinatown and on to the World Trade Center for
a visit to the observation deck. Then they travel around the Battery to the
South Street Seaport, past the United Nations, stop at the Empire State Building
and check out the Guinness World of Records inside.

After dinner at Fu's or Shun Lee Palace East on the East Side, Mom and Dad drop
off the children with a baby sitter at the hotel and head off to dance at the
Rainbow Room. Sunday morning after a big breakfast, they do a quick tour of the
Bronx Zoo and go to a matinee of "The Secret Garden" on Broadway.

PLAN 2, BICYCLES AND MORE: Suggested by Florence Waterman of the Pierre Hotel, 2
East 61st Street. Lunch on Friday at Mickey Mantle's ("hamburgers again") on
Central Park South. They see Strawberry Fields in Central Park, in memory of
John Lennon, and hire a rowboat or ride bicycles. If it rains, they can go to
the Children's Museum of Manhattan, on West 83d Street, the Intrepid
Sea-Air-Space Museum on the Hudson River, and then, if they're in town in
October, over to Fifth Avenue to see "The Legends of King Arthur," an exhibition
opening Oct. 19 at the New York Public Library. In the evening, they go to Cafe
Un Deux Trois (where there are crayons on the table) in midtown, and see "Cats"
on Broadway.

Saturday morning, Dad takes the kids to the American Museum of Natural History's
Hayden Planetarium on Central Park West and the A.T.&T. Infoquest center on
Madison Avenue, while Mom heads for Fifth Avenue and has a half-day make-over at
Elizabeth Arden, then shops at Bergdorf Goodman and Saks. They meet for lunch at
Serendipity 3, on the Upper East Side, and in the afternoon, they take a car
service to the Bronx Zoo. The next day, they tour the Empire State Building,
stop at Rockefeller Center, then visit the South Street Seaport, where they eat
lunch.

PLAN 3, CELEBRITY SIGHTINGS: Suggested by Thomas P. Wolfe of the Plaza Hotel, at
Fifth Avenue and Central Park South. On Friday afternoon the family goes to
Windows on the World on the 107th floor of the World Trade Center for drinks,
snacks and the view in the Hors d'Oeuvrerie. Then to South Street Seaport for a
90-minute ride on the Seaport line to see lower Manhattan. On Saturday, a tour
with Stardom Tours, a small company with mini-vans, which gives celebrity tours,
pointing out the Dakota apartment building, the 70th Street apartment where Joan
Crawford lived, and the Frank E. Campbell Funeral Chapel, where luminaries from
Valentino to Tennessee Williams were mourned. They go to E.A.T. for lunch ("the
East Coast version of Schwab's") on the Upper East Side.

A pre-theater dinner is in the Edwardian Room of the Plaza ($42 prix fixe), and
the family goes to "The Phantom of the Opera" or "The Will Rogers Follies" on
Broadway.

OTHER TIPS: From Giorgio Finocchario of the Mark Hotel, 25 East 77th Street:
They arrive before check-in on Friday and have a late lunch on Second Avenue, at
Juanita's for Mexican food. "Then they go immediately to a toy store. They go to
the Upper East Side, where there are lots of toy stores." Then they look at the
latest video games at Tower Records on the Upper West Side.  They go to the
South Street Seaport, because they are interested in it, "but it is a deja vu
scene for them because so many malls in America look like this." So they cross
the tip of Manhattan, go to the World Financial Center, walk through the marina
and atrium and sit in a cafe like Pipeline for dinner. Saturday night, a steak
dinner at Peter Luger, the Brooklyn steakhouse.

THE WIDOW

PLAN 1, ART AND FASHION: From Florence Waterman at the Pierre. "Assuming she is
still interested in fashion, I would send her to Madison Avenue, to Valentino
and Ungaro. She can continue on to walk and look at the art galleries," said Ms.
Waterman, one of only a handful of women who are Clefs d'Or concierges in the
United States.

She has lunch on the Upper East Side at La Goulue's sidewalk cafe ("one of the
nicest in New York"), and then goes to 57th Street to Hermes and Chanel. Then
she visits Place des Antiquaires on East 57th Street -- "lots of marble and very
pretty." After tea at the Pierre, she changes for dinner, which she has at
Aureole, close to the hotel.

Saturday is her art day. The Frick Collection, the Annenberg exhibition at the
Metropolitan Museum of Art, then lunch at Le Refuge on the Upper East Side. In
the afternoon a cab to the Cloisters in Fort Tryon Park, then late in the day a
carriage ride through Central Park. A drink at Tavern on the Green in the park,
then "The Phantom of the Opera" or "The Will Rogers Follies." Late supper at La
Grenouille in midtown.

Sunday, the Biblical Garden at the Cathedral of St. John the Divine on 122d
Street, a limousine to the New York Botanical Garden in the Bronx, then lunch at
the River Cafe in Brooklyn, and later a stop at the flea market at Broadway and
Grand Street in SoHo.

PLAN 2, VINTAGE NEW YORK: From Tito Fornari of the Mayfair Regent. She visits
Place des Antiquaires and the Manhattan Art and Antiques Center in midtown in
the afternoon, then returns to the hotel to change before dinner at La Cote
Basque in midtown.

On Saturday morning, she has breakfast in the lounge, then has a car and guide
from a limousine service pick her up at 10 for a museum tour to the Metropolitan
and the Frick. She has lunch at Coco Pazzo on the Upper East Side. In the
afternoon she visits the galleries on 57th Street and Madison Avenue. She
returns to the hotel for afternoon tea, then rests before dinner at Remi
("northern Italian-Venetian") or Bice ("northern Italian-Milanese"), both in
midtown.

On Sunday, she goes to the Cathedral of St. John the Divine for the service,
then continues north to visit the Cloisters. She returns for lunch at the
Terrace restaurant near the cathedral, or brunch at Tavern on the Green. If she
prefers something more formal, Sign of the Dove on the Upper East Side, with its
art and antiques. Then to the hotel and airport.

OTHER IDEAS: From Said Ouriaghli of the Parker Meridien Hotel, at 119 West 56th
Street: Early dinner at Cafe des Artistes on the Upper West Side. On Saturday,
Christie's on Park Avenue for an auction preview and lunch at Ferrier on the
Upper East Side. Antiques shopping on Second Avenue between 50th and 54th
Streets, then at Hudson and Perry Streets, with later stops at galleries in
SoHo. Dinner at the Water Club on the East River, then a drink at the Rainbow
Room.

From Giorgio Finocchario of the Mark: Friday afternoon, a stroll around the
neighborhood, with good shops, museums, arts. Maybe a drink at Coco Pazzo on the
Upper East Side, then the 8 P.M. show of "Lost in Yonkers" on Broadway. Dinner
at Remi in midtown. Saturday dinner at Le Comptoir on the Upper East Side.

From Anthony Pike of the Westbury Hotel, 15 East 69th Street: Petrossian in
midtown for Champagne and caviar "to loosen up for the weekend."

THE GAY COUPLE

PLAN 1: VIETNAM AND HARLEM: An itinerary suggested by John Neary, chief
concierge of the Carlyle Hotel, at 35 East 76th Street, who is the national
president of Clefs d'Or.

"You want to send people to places where they'll be treated well," he said. The
men arrive Friday evening and leave for dinner at the TriBeCa Grill and an Off
Broadway show, like "Lips Together, Teeth Apart" at the Manhattan Theater Club.

On Saturday, he suggests a Vietnam-day theme, with a private helicopter tour of
New York, a matinee of "Miss Saigon" on Broadway and dinner at Indochine in the
East Village.

On Sunday, a gospel tour of Harlem, stopping at the Abyssinian Baptist Church,
then Lola in Chelsea for a gospel brunch.

Plan 2, FOOD AND DRINK: Suggested by Tom Wolfe, the chief concierge of the
Plaza. "I'd recommend a dining experience, and on Friday night, they could check
out what Kerry Simon, the chef, is doing in the Plaza's Edwardian Room."

Then he would send them uptown, to the Diva club on the Upper East Side. The
pianist Charles DeForest "knows every song ever written," Mr. Wolfe contends.

On Saturday, he says, he would put them on a boat tour of the harbor or a trip
to Ellis Island. "I love to put people on boats," he says. He recommends a
Saturday matinee ("maybe not that fashionable, but convenient") of an Off
Broadway show. Then more water, this time in Central Park, where they can hire a
gondolier to take them for a half-hour tour from the Loeb Boathouse. Then dinner
at Le Cirque on the Upper East Side. "We'll pull out all the stops," he said.

A hotel brunch on Sunday, and Lincoln Center for ballet or music, with a quick
bite afterward nearby at Sfuzzi.

PLAN 3, NEW YORK, NEW YORK: Suggested by Florence Waterman of the Pierre. "I'd
start out grand with them," she said. "Make a splash." She'd line up a white
Rolls-Royce limousine for the afternoon. ("Can they arrive early?") And take
them to the Four Seasons in midtown for lunch, then send them shopping in the
area, to Bijan on Fifth, Ferragamo and Armani. Then it's on to drinks in the
Rainbow Room, and dinner at Giorgio in midtown or Le Comptoir or Coco Pazzo on
the Upper East Side.

Saturday, the men would hire a private boat and crew from the Yacht Owners
Association of New York for either a harbor tour, with lunch catered from
Zabar's, or a full-day trip to Montauk, L.I., for lunch there at the yacht club.
If they take the harbor tour, they would return late in the afternoon for a
snack at Cafe des Artistes on the Upper West Side and then "Miss Saigon." A late
supper of caviar at Petrossian and a drink at Au Bar, both in midtown, finishes
the evening.

On Sunday, she suggests brunch at the TriBeCa Grill, a walk in SoHo with a stop
at Jour et Nuit on West Broadway ("a now place"), and jazz at Condon's in the
Village.

OTHER IDEAS: From Anthony Pike of the Westbury Hotel: A drink upstairs at Tatou
in midtown, Saturday brunch at the Paramount Hotel in midtown, dinner at Barolo
in the garden in SoHo, then on to the Building in Chelsea for industrial rock
music; Sunday brunch at the Russian Tea Room in midtown and a walk around the
Village, with an early drink at Planet Hollywood, which is opening in
mid-October in midtown.

From Tito Fornari of the Mayfair Regent: Pre-theater dinner at the Four Seasons,
"The Will Rogers Follies" and jazz at the Blue Note in the Village. On Saturday
evening, drinks and the view at the World Trade Center, then dinner in a French
restaurant in TriBeCa, Bouley or Chanterelle. On Sunday, a car trip into the
Hudson Valley, to West Point or Tarrytown, with lunch en route home at the Chart
House in Dobbs Ferry, "a nice waterside restaurant."

From Said Ouriaghli of the Parker Meridien: Go to Le Bar Bat on West 57th
Street, "new and unique," and then a taxi to dinner at Au Bar on East 58th
Street, then Uncle Charlie's in the Village. On Saturday, Petrossian in midtown
for brunch, then a stroll through SoHo, visiting galleries and clothing shops.
Back to the hotel to change, then a World Yacht dinner cruise in the harbor,
followed by drinks at the China Club on the Upper West Side.


LOAD-DATE: September 6, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Thomas P. Wolfe, of the Plaza, suggests ways to sight
celebrities. (John Sotomayor/The New York Times) (pg. C20)

Drawing (pg. C1)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              169 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 6, 1991, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Books of The Times;
Small-Town Life After a Huge Calamity

BYLINE: By MICHIKO KAKUTANI

SECTION: Section C; Page 21; Column 1; Weekend Desk; Word and Image Page

LENGTH: 738 words



The Sweet Hereafter

By Russell Banks

257 pages. HarperCollins. $20.

Sam Dent, the fictional small upstate New York town that is the backdrop for
Russell Banks's latest novel, will remind readers of the working-class
communities portrayed in his last several books, "Continental Drift," "Success
Stories" and "Affliction." It's an impoverished town, where only the summer and
winter people from New York, who own vacation homes, have any money or
resources. The local people struggle to make ends meet, working at part-time
jobs and living in trailers and old disheveled houses. The men drink too much,
and the women seem worn down by housework and squabbling children. Everybody
knows everybody else.

What happens one cold winter day will forever change the lives of the people of
Sam Dent: on the way to school one morning, the local school bus swerves off the
road, tumbling down a ravine and sinking into an ice-covered sand pit. Fourteen
children are killed; others are severely crippled.

"For us," says a father who lost his children in the accident, "there was life,
true life, real life, no matter how bad it had seemed, before the accident, and
nothing that came after the accident resembled it in any important way. So, for
us, it was as if we, too, had died when the bus went over the embankment and
tumbled down into the frozen water-filled sand pit, and now we were lodged
temporarily in a kind of purgatory, waiting to be moved to wherever the other
dead ones had gone."

In relating the story of Sam Dent, Mr. Banks uses the school bus accident as a
catalyst for illuminating the lives of the town's citizens. It's as though he
has cast a large stone into a quiet pond, then minutely charted the shape and
size of the ripples sent out in successive waves. His portrait is rendered
through the voices of four people whose lives have been permanently altered by
the accident: Dolores Driscoll, the perky, well-meaning bus driver, who says she
swerved the vehicle to avoid hitting a small dog; Billy Ansel, a Vietnam veteran
and widower, who loses his two beloved children in the accident; Mitchell
Stephens, a high-powered New York laywer, who is determined to sue the state for
negligence in the children's deaths, and Nicole Burnell, a beautiful 14-year-old
student confined to a wheelchair since the accident.

Through their first-person reminiscences, Mr. Banks creates a mosaic like study
of the ways in which a community copes with tragedy. For all the people
involved, the accident creates a Maginot line in their lives, forever dividing
the past from the present and the future. Many attempt to deny what happened:
they move away from Sam Dent to try to begin new lives in other towns; they lose
themselves in drink and drugs; they embrace the church's talk of life
everlasting. Others try to assign blame. Susceptible to the arguments of
Stephens and other out-of-town lawyers, they grope around for villains: the
state, the town, the school district, whoever might have legislated stronger
guard rails on the road, drained the fatal sand pit or hired more experienced
bus drivers.

In the end, of course, there is no one person or agency responsible for the
accident. The accident is just that -- an accident, one of those frighteningly
random events that occasionally disrupt the even flow of daily life,
underscoring the innate precariousness of life, our susceptibility to grief and
loss and hurt.

This has been a favorite theme of Mr. Banks's recent fiction, and in "The Sweet
Hereafter," he does a smoothly professional job of developing it while at the
same time giving the reader a finely observed portrait of small-town life. The
novel does not have the passion and mythic sweep of "Continental Drift," which
tried to do no less than define the promises and failures of the American Dream;
it lacks a protagonist as fully and sympathetically delineated as that novel's
hero, and it tends to sidestep the deeper emotions raised by its story by
hopscotching from one character's point of view to another's. At the same time,
however, the volume also avoids the pretentiousness and narrative
discontinuities of his last novel, "Affliction."

All in all, "The Sweet Hereafter" is a smaller, more modest book than its
predecessors, a book that has been nicely if somewhat mechanically assembled. It
is often gripping, consistently engaging and from time to time genuinely
affecting.


LOAD-DATE: September 6, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Russell Banks (Nathan Farb)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              170 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 6, 1991, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Seeing F.B.I. Files on Lennon: A Hard Day's Night

BYLINE: By DAVID MARGOLICK,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 5; Column 3; National Desk; Law Page

LENGTH: 1451 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES, AUG. 31


Imagine that in the early 1970's, at the behest of the Nixon Administration, the
Federal Bureau of Investigation began tailing John Lennon. Imagine that years
later a Beatles fan-turned-scholar seeking to write a social history of the
period invoked the Freedom of Information Act to obtain the F.B.I.'s file on the
singer. Imagine the bureau, and the Justice Department, fighting him every step
of the way.

For the scholar, Jon Wiener of the University of California at Irvine, all of
this is very real. After a magical mystery tour through the Federal bureaucracy
and the courts, lasting nearly as long as Lennon's career as a Beatle, Mr.
Wiener is finally closing in on his cache. But he admits that a long and winding
legal road still lies before him.

In February 1981, three months after the 40-year-old Lennon was slain outside
his Manhattan apartment, Mr. Wiener requested the file the F.B.I. had amassed on
the British-born musician a decade earlier. The material, he hoped, would shed
light on Lennon's politicization in the Vietnam era and on how, at the behest of
the Nixon Administration, the bureau had monitored his activities.

Many Big Black Blotches

Strictly in terms of pages, the F.B.I. substantially complied with Mr. Wiener's
request, producing roughly two-thirds of its Lennon file. But much of what it
furnished was heavily censored -- white photocopies filled with big black
blotches, the work of some anonymous deskbound Rothko in the Federal apparat.
Many other documents, including those that included what Mr. Wiener believes are
the most significant disclosures, were withheld completely.

In court papers, the bureau maintains that its interests in Lennon were both
legitimate and quite limited. But producing everything it came up with, it says,
would either jeopardize national security, disclose confidential sources,
compromise intelligence gathering or threaten relations with foreign
governments, perhaps even prompting them to retaliate.

In July a Federal appeals court in San Francisco ruled that the bureau's
explanations were vague, formulaic and unconvincing, and directed the bureau to
be more specific. But the bureau insisted that any further explanations would
themselves contain compromising information and asked for a rehearing.

"We're closer today than ever, but I've learned not to be too optimistic about
this," Mr. Wiener said.

Reticence Called Puzzling

He expressed puzzlement that the F.B.I. and the Justice Department, which is
representing the bureau in court, would defend their predecessors so doggedly.
"I would have thought the Reagan or Bush administrations would have said: 'This
is all ancient history. J. Edgar Hoover is gone and Nixon is, too, and
historians are welcome to the files,' " he said. Their reticence, Mr. Wiener
added, could reflect either a desire to suppress embarrassing information or
merely the reflexive behavior of bureaucrats for whom saying "no" is invariably
the safest course.

Donnita Clark, a spokesman for the bureau, said it would have no comment on what
was in the disputed documents or on any other aspect of the case. Nor did a
Justice Department spokesman, Douglas Tillett, have comment.

Mr. Wiener said he hoped to use the withheld material to update his 1984 book,
"Come Together: John Lennon In His Time," published by the University of
Illinois Press. But to his lawyer, Mark Rosenbaum of the American Civil
Liberties Union of Southern California, the case has also become a test of the
continued vitality of the Freedom of Information Act itself. "If Peeping Tom
surveillance of a dead rock musician constitutes national security, we might as
well fold up and discard the F.O.I.A.," he said.

Lennon's widow, Yoko Ono, has taken no role in the case and would not comment on
it. "She wishes the A.C.L.U. and Wiener well, but has just not actively pursued
it," said Elliot Mintz, a spokesman for the Lennon estate.

Material Seen as 'Sanitized'

Mr. Mintz himself expressed doubts that the files still contained anything
remarkable or revealing. "I would assume this material was sanitized a long time
ago, that the Magic Marker has already done its magic work," he said.

Mr. Wiener, now 47, was a Princeton undergraduate when the Beatles made their
famous appearances on the Ed Sullivan Show in 1964. Moreover, at a time when one
could categorize people by their favorite Beatle, Mr. Wiener preferred the more
cerebral and sardonic Lennon to the cute Paul McCartney, the shy George Harrison
and the lovable Ringo Starr.

By 1981, Mr. Wiener was teaching and writing late 20th-century American social
history. Believing that Lennon's political activism had been overlooked in
posthumous assessments and anxious to show how the Lennon saga fit into
political and social movements of his day, Mr. Wiener asked the F.B.I., the
Central Intelligence Agency and the Immigration and Naturalization Service for
whatever it had on collected on him.

The immigration agency promptly produced all its files and the intelligence
agency's materials were minimal. The bureau sent only two-thirds of the 281
pages it said it had in its Lennon dossier.

An Antiwar Concert Tour

The bureau opened its investigation into Lennon's activities in early 1972 after
linking him to a planned antiwar concert tour that was to culminate in a
"political Woodstock" at the Republican National Convention.

Mr. Hoover, then Director of the F.B.I., sent directives to bureau offices in
New York, Los Angeles, San Diego and Washington, and Federal agents began
tailing Lennon.

In March one memorandum reported that the musician had established "temporary
residence" at "the Saint Regis Hotel, 150 Bank Street" in New York. In April
another partly redacted memorandum, an unsigned letter sent to H. R. Haldeman,
then chief of staff of the Nixon White House, described efforts to deport Lennon
before the Republicans met.

Some 'Confidential' Lyrics

The investigation fizzled after the Republican convention, which Lennon did not
attend. "In view of subject's inactivity in Revolutionary Activities and his
seemingly rejection by N.Y. radicals, his case is being closed," one document
states.

On some of the documents that were made public, little remained except the word
"confidential" and the number of the exemption under the Freedom of Information
Act the bureau was invoking to justify withholding the material. One document
recounted his remarks on the "Mike Douglas Show" in February 1972.  Others are
merely photocopies of news reports of Lennon's political activities and reviews
of his concert appearances, including an appearance in Ann Arbor, Mich., in
December 1971

An F.B.I. informer attended that concert and transcribed the lyrics of a song
Lennon had written for the occasion. The words were classified as "confidential"
for the next 10 years even though 15,000 people heard them that night and they
were later printed on the cover of one of Lennon's record albums.

Many of the documents obtained by Mr. Wiener are written in the almost
cataclysmic tone of antidrug tracts like the film "Reefer Madness." One
memorandum is entitled "JOHN WINSTON LENNON. SECURITY MATTER DASH
REVOLUTIONARY." Another contains the legend "All Extremists Should Be Considered
Dangerous."

There is an ample array of the bureau's jawbreaking jargon and exotic acronyms,
as well as numerous reminders of just how alien Lennon's world was to the people
investigating him. The memorandum to Mr. Haldeman, for instance, referred to
Lennon as "a British citizen and former member of the Beatles singing group."

Judge's Ruling Overruled

In February 1988, after reviewing the disputed documents privately, Federal
District Judge Robert M. Takasugi, in Los Angeles, threw out Mr. Wiener's
lawsuit. The bureau's explanations, he ruled, were sufficient.

But in July a three-judge panel of the United States Court of Appeals for the
Ninth Circuit, in San Francisco, unanimously overruled Judge Takasugi. The panel
of Judges James R. Browning, Mary M. Schroeder and Warren J. Ferguson ruled that
simply citing the relevant exemptions under the Freedom of Informaiton Act,
without furnishing further information, afforded Mr. Wiener no genuine chance to
rebut those claims.

Mr. Wiener said Lennon would have stood squarely behind his inquiry. "First of
all, he was a fighter," he said. "He stood up to Nixon and won his green card,
and I wouldn't be surprised if he also would have fought to have found out what
was in his F.B.I. file. Ane he was a great wit. He would have appreciated the
ironies and absurdities, both in the content of the files and F.B.I.'s immense
efforts to withhold them."

NAME: John Lennon

LOAD-DATE: September 6, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: John Lennon in 1969. (Associated Press); John Wiener of the
University of California at Irvine, who has been battling the Justice Department
to obtain John Lennon's F.B.I. file. (Scott Robinson for The New York Times)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              171 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 6, 1991, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Miami Prosecutor's Stormy Passage

BYLINE: By LARRY ROHTER,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 5; Column 1; National Desk; Law Page

LENGTH: 1000 words

DATELINE: MIAMI, Sept. 5


The Senate has twice declined to act on his nomination to be the United States
attorney here. But when Miami's most notorious case, the trial of Gen. Manuel
Antonio Noriega, began today, Dexter W. Lehtinen was still at the helm of the
biggest Federal prosecutor's office outside Washington.

Since June 1988, when he was appointed interim United States Attorney by former
Attorney General Edwin Meese 3d, Mr. Lehtinen has been surrounded by disputes.
His friends describe him as brilliant; his foes call him erratic. But all agree
that his tenure has been an exceptionally stormy one, marked as much by bitter
public conflicts as by high-profile successes.

Senator Joseph R. Biden Jr., the Delaware Democrat who is chairman of the
Judiciary Committee, may have been referring to those conflicts when he spoke
last year of "concerns" about Mr. Lehtinen's record and background, and said the
Senate should continue its investigation.

Mr. Lehtinen has also scrapped with the Justice Department on the Noriega case.
Some Federal officials said Mr. Lehtinen fought to control the prosecution from
his office rather than having it handled from Washington, and pushed hard to
overcome Washington's apparent reluctance to keep him abreast of the
negotiations over the seizure of the former Panamanian leader's assets.

Ready for a Fight

In person, Mr. Lehtinen makes it clear that he is not a man likely to back away
from a fight. Built like a boxer and brimming with energy, he is dismissive of
critics and voluble and passionate in defense of his record. Indeed, confronting
government officials is almost a hallmark of his career.

Shortly after becoming United States Attorney, Mr. Lehtinen, who is 45 years old
and was born and raised in the Miami area, sued the State of Florida for
violating its own water standards and permitting the deterioration of the
Everglades. After a bitter and costly struggle, the case was settled in July
when the state agreed to clean up polluted water flowing into two large sections
of federally protected wetlands.

But some of Mr. Lehtinen's offical actions have raised murkier questions. In
July he came under fire after he met privately with Sheriff Nick Navarro of
Broward County and then told the press that Mr. Navarro "is not the target of a
Federal grand jury investigation." That action came amid a wide-ranging inquiry
into allegations of corruption in Mr. Navarro's department.

A Departmental Investigation

Two assistants who protested Mr. Lehtinen's handling of the matter -- including
his quashing of subpoenas that would have required Mr. Navarro to hand over
records -- have been removed from the case and unofficially demoted, Justice
Department officials said. The department's Office of Professional
Responsibility is investigating the matter.

"There was nothing in that meeting that had to do with politics," Mr. Lehtinen
said in an interview here, referring to his conversation with Mr. Navarro. "He's
not a target. I made that statement, and it was true.

In another incident Mr. Lehtinen's spokeswoman last year publicly criticized a
former assistant, saying he had nearly been dismissed for "egregious misconduct"
and that his resignation was welcome. In fact, the assistant had been rated an
outstanding employee and had been awarded a merit raise just months before his
departure. The incident prompted the Office of Professional Responsibility to
start an investigation of that matter, too.

Several former and current prosecutors here say Mr. Lehtinen demands a strict
discipline carried over from his days as an Army lieutenant. Although Mr.
Lehtinen says "only someone who has never served in the Army" could say he
treats his staff as if he were still a battlefield commander, he is clearly
proud of his military background. In 1971, while serving in Vietnam, he was
severely wounded in a mortar attack, leaving the left side of his face
disfigured and his eyesight diminished.

An Explosive Temper

Lawyers who have worked with Mr. Lehtinen have said he has an explosive temper.
And in a deposition taken during divorce proceedings in 1983 and later published
in The Miami Herald, Mr. Lehtinen's first wife, Donna Stevenson, said he had
"grabbed me and thrown me" as the result of what she termed "psychological
problems."

"I have a long record in public service, and man, they get me for the temper,"
Mr. Lehtinen said.

Still, Mr. Lehtinen has the support of the judges who in 1988 extended
indefinitely his original interim appointment. On a Miami television program
last month the Chief Judge for Southern Florida, James L. King, praised Mr.
Lehtinen for doing "a superb job in organizing and expanding the busiest United
States Attorney's office in America today."

Mr. Lehtinen, who graduated from Stanford Law School at the top of his class, is
politically well-connected through his wife, Ileana Ros-Lehtinen, who in 1989
became both the first Cuban-American and first Hispanic woman in Congress. The
couple met when both were serving in Florida's House of Representativesw, he as
a Democrat and she as a Republican.

Mr. Lehtinen later switched parties, and he and his wife were elected to the
Florida Senate from adjoining districts before moving on to their current posts.

Lawyers here say that President Bush's son Jeb, who managed the campaign that
led to Ms. Ros-Lehtinen's upset victory in a traditionally Democratic
Congressional district, is one of Mr. Lehtinen's most important supporters.

Still, the White House has not committed to resubmitting Mr. Lehtinen's
nomination. "We'll have to consider it in September," Marlin Fitzwater, the
President's spokesman, said last month after the Senate Judiciary Committee sent
the nomination back to Mr. Bush. "We don't know what we're going to do."

Mr. Lehtinen said he was confident that his nomination would be resubmitted. "I
will survive this because the facts are the only things that will matter in the
end," he said.

NAME: Dexter W. Lehtinen

LOAD-DATE: September 6, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Although his tenure has been stormy and filled with bitter
public conflicts, Dexter W. Lehtinen, the interim United States Attorney in
Miami, has a record marked by high-profile successes. (Susan Greenwood for The
New York Times)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              172 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 7, 1991, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Don't Rush to Dismiss Evidence of M.I.A.'s

SECTION: Section 1; Page 22; Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 393 words


To the Editor:

Members of the New York State chapter of the National Alliance of Families for
the Return of America's Missing Servicemen find your reporting on recently
released photos of American prisoners of war from the Vietnam War shocking. The
headline and tone of "The M.I.A. Racket" (editorial, July 31) suggest that any
evidence presented by a prisoner-of-war activist group is fraudulent.

The United States Government's attempt to discredit all evidence is criminal.
The Pentagon states that the photos are fake. Yet it offers no proof. The only
organization releasing fake photos is the Defense Department. No prisoner-of-war
or missing-in-action group has released any photos without a form of positive
identification based on family members' acceptance of the photo or detailed
analysis.

Analysis continues on the photos. However, the identity of Capt. Donald Carr in
one such recently released photo is undeniable (news article, July 27). The
forensic anthropologist Michael Charney said, "I don't think it's the same guy;
I know it is." State-of-the-art methods were used to compare the Carr photo to
one taken 20 years before. Dr. Charney stated, "For the very first time there is
proof that there's a live prisoner of war over there."

Why were allegations by Col. Millard A. Peck, former head of the Defense
Intelligence Agency's P.O.W.-M.I.A. office, of official foot-dragging and
cover-up ignored? Representative Stephen J. Solarz of New York stated that
Colonel Peck could not back up his allegations in a closed hearing on May 30.
The news media quickly reported this, but failed to mention that Mr. Solarz was
present for only the first 20 minutes of 3 1/2 hours of testimony.

Why does Ann Mills Griffiths, civilian head of the American League of
P.O.W./M.I.A. Families, direct the Pentagon's response to the inquiries of
family members? As Colonel Peck has charged, Mrs. Griffiths actively inhibits
investigation of live-sighting reports.

Successive administrations have given lip service to the phrase "highest
national priority" on the P.O.W.-M.I.A. issue. The news media could truly raise
it to "highest national priority."

LYNN MARIE O'SHEA
Ozone Park, Queens, Aug. 29, 1991

The writer is director, New York State chapter, National Alliance of Families
for the Return of America's Missing Servicemen.

LOAD-DATE: September 7, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              173 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 7, 1991, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Don't Rush to Dismiss Evidence of M.I.A.'s;
Incredible Notion

SECTION: Section 1; Page 22; Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 204 words


To the Editor:

Upon returning to the United States from Thailand for an annual visit three
weeks ago, I was taken aback to learn that the issue of servicemen missing in
action has remained precisely that, an issue.

I was therefore heartened to read David C. Unger's comments in "How to Look for
M.I.A.'s" (Editorial Notebook, Aug. 4). The flow of traders, international
relief workers, business people, development experts, tourists, diplomatic
personnel and others -- not to mention the transmission of information, ideas
and gossip through both formal and informal channels -- between Vietnam and
Thailand is such as to make it patently absurd to entertain for a moment the
thought that there are American survivors of the Vietnam War present in that
country against their will.

The widening gap between the normalization of relations between most
international players and Vietnam, and the continuing "abnormalization" of
relations between the United States and Vietnam, will only result in our loss of
the economic battles raging there and across Southeast Asia.

CHRISTOPHER W. ATKINSON
W. Boothbay Harbor, Me., Aug. 19, 1991

The writer is managing director, PAC RIM Group Company, Bangkok.

LOAD-DATE: September 7, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              174 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 8, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THE NEW SEASON: THE ANNOTATED CALENDAR;
TELEVISION

BYLINE: By BILL CARTER

SECTION: Section 2; Page 48; Column 3; Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 2344 words


Here is a selective guide to cultural events in New York and beyond in the
months ahead. Programs may change. Dates and locations for some events have not
been made final; other events are sold out. Unless indicated, all dates listed
are openings, all addresses are in Manhattan, and all telephone numbers have a
212 area code. Addresses for locations in New York City cited more than once are
on Page 49.

New Series

ABC

"THE COMMISH" A new cop series from Stephen J. Cannell, a veteran of the genre
("Wiseguy," "Hunter"). A tough but charming police commissioner gets involved to
get the job done. A star turn for Michael Chiklis, who played John Belushi in
"Wired." Premiere: Sept. 28. Saturdays at 10.

"F.B.I.: THE UNTOLD STORIES" Re-enactments of crimes, TV's latest
cheap-to-produce phenomenon, but this show goes for the Federal cases. Premiere:
Sept. 26. Thursdays at 9.

"GOOD AND EVIL" Satirical serial comedy in the tradition of "Soap" and from the
same writer, Susan Harris. Broad characters; broad reaches for laughs; it even
makes fun of a blind man. Teri Garr stars as the evil sister. Premiere: Sept.
25. Wednesdays at 10:30.

"HOMEFRONT" "Twentysomething" in the 40's. A small American town welcomes home
the boys from World War II, and every relationship goes wrong. From the makers
of "Knots Landing," it's a soap in period costume, long on star-crossed romance,
short on realism, sure to alienate the demanding fans of the canceled
"Thirtysomething," whose spot it inherits. Premiere: Sept. 24. Tuesdays at 10.

"HOME IMPROVEMENT" The standup comedian Tim Allen is cast as host of a
home-fix-it show with Patricia Richardson as his wife. May prove to be the
biggest hit of the past three seasons. Premiere: Sept. 17. Tuesdays at 8:30.

"PROS AND CONS" Last year this was called "Gabriel's Fire" and was a moody drama
about an angry former black radical. Then it was changed to "Bird and Katt," a
comedy with the same character, played by James Earl Jones teamed with a cop
played by Richard Crenna. Now it has yet another name, but the concept remains
unclear. Premiere: Sept. 26. Thursdays at 8.

"SIBS" A comedy about three sisters (NBC's new drama already took the title this
one wanted) with all the right pedigrees: writers headed by James L. Brooks
("Broadcast News") and Heidi Perlman ("Tracey Ullman"), stars headed by Marsha
Mason (all those Neil Simon movies) and Alex Rocco. Preview: Sept. 17.
Wednesdays at 9:30.

"STEP BY STEP" The luckiest show on TV. It gets the prize spot in ABC's
"T.G.I.F." kiddie lineup. Two single parents run away, get married over a
weekend and break it to their children later. Patrick Duffy is the goofy father;
Suzanne Somers is the mother, and she says she intends to "bring some sex" to
"T.G.I.F." -- just what every parent in America wants to sit down to with their
children. Premiere: Sept. 20. Fridays at 8:30.

CBS

"BROOKLYN BRIDGE" The personal vision of the writer Gary David Goldberg ("Family
Ties"), this comedy chronicles the lives of two Jewish boys growing up in
Bensonhurst in the 50's. CBS bought Mr. Goldberg's reputation, his passion for
the project and a superb pilot script. Premiere: Sept. 20. Fridays at 8:30.

"THE CAROL BURNETT SHOW" Not really a new show but a revised version of her NBC
series from last season, only an hour long and more like her CBS show of 20
years ago. Premiere: Late Oct. Fridays at 9.

"PALACE GUARD" An ex-hotel thief turns security guard for a chain of resort
hotels in scenic spots like Acapulco. D. W. Moffett, the star, is supposed to
make female viewers swoon and ignore the fact that this kind of show went out 15
years ago. Premiere: mid-Oct. Fridays at 10.

"PRINCESSES" A comedy heavy on "situation": Two roommates from a cramped
Manhattan apartment -- one a WASPy airhead, the other a Jewish wisecracker --
think they have been given a to-die-for duplex overlooking the park, only to
learn that a real princess, an obscure British noble down on her luck, also
thinks it's her apartment. So they all share it. With Julie Hagerty
("Airplane"), Fran Drescher and Twiggy (yes, that Twiggy) Lawson. Premiere:
Sept. 27. Fridays at 8.

"P.S.I. LUV U" Beware of a show that can't spell. A couple is mismatched in a
witness protection program and yaks it up on the lam.  Two stars of many
previous failed series, Connie Sellecca and Greg Evigan, change identities and
try to hide out in this one. Preview: Sept. 15. Saturdays at 10.

"THE ROYAL FAMILY" Redd Foxx and his put-down jokes are back. This time his
grandchildren have come to his house, threatening to ruin his retirement.
Premiere: Sept. 18. Wednesdays at 8.

"TEECH" Sort of "Dead Poets Society" as sitcom, with racial overtones. A black
music teacher is hired by a snobby prep school to satisfy a quota requirement.
He's hip, they're not. From the team that created "Doctor, Doctor." Phill Lewis
plays the teacher. Premiere: Sept. 18. Wednesdays at 8:30.

NBC

"THE ADVENTURES OF MARK AND BRIAN" A team of radio disk jockeys, Mark Thompson
and Brian Phelps, play to the Los Angeles crowd and so are heard by all the
program executives driving to work, who think these guys are funny. The
adventures consist of events like going weightless and singing with the
Temptations. Aimed at children. Preview: Monday. Sundays at 7.

"EERIE, INDIANA" One of the season's more intriguing shows, a kind of comic
"Twilight Zone" for pre-teens. The pilot, about Tupperware madness, is original
and funny, with a boy and his friend coming to grips with a small town's
weirdness. Many of the ideas for future plot lines, including one about a dog
conspiracy to take over the town, have a twisted appeal. Premiere: Sept. 15.
Sundays at 7:30.

"FLESH 'N' BLOOD" A comedy built around David Keith as a redneck con man out to
take advantage of his long-lost sister, now an assistant district attorney in
Baltimore. Backed by a strong comedy production team, with input from the
"Cheers" creators. Preview: Sept. 19. Fridays at 9:30.

"I'LL FLY AWAY" A thoughtful drama set in the 1950's South with Sam Waterston as
a sensitive prosecutor cut from the same cloth as Atticus Finch of "To Kill a
Mockingbird." From the "Northern Exposure" team. Premiere: Oct. 8. Tuesdays at
8.

"MAN OF THE PEOPLE" A star vehicle without an engine. NBC brings James Garner
back to TV in a comedy, but leaves him in a lame plot about a sleazy con man who
takes over as town councilman for his late ex-wife. The network promises more
charming ro guishness and less sleaze in future episodes. Premiere: Sept. 15.
Sundays at 8.

"NURSES" More like an extension than a spinoff: the nurses from the hospital
featured in "Empty Nest" get a comedy of their own, with jokes as predictable as
the regular appearance of a bedpan. Premiere: Saturday.  Saturdays at 9:30.

"PACIFIC STATION" Old-fashioned comedy: lots of one-liners, lots of obvious
jokes, lots of genuine, somewhat guilty laughs. Robert Guillaume plays a veteran
detective in the wacky Venice district of Los Angeles teamed with a touchy-feely
new partner, fresh off psychiatric leave, played by Richard Libertini. Premiere:
Sept. 15. Sundays at 8:30.

"REASONABLE DOUBTS" Marlee Matlin stars as a hearing-impaired prosecutor paired
with Mark Harmon, a cop who can use sign language. The series is about their
relationship as much as it is about crime-solving. Preview: Sept. 26. Fridays at
10.

"THE TORKELSONS" A not entirely successful attempt at truly offbeat comedy, with
a family on the edge of financial collapse trying to survive. Lots of kids, a
never-say-die Southern mamma and a potential star in Olivia Burnette. Premiere:
Sept. 21. Saturdays at 8:30.

 Fox

"DREXELL'S CLASS" A new comedy vehicle for Dabney Coleman in which he again
plays a perpetually irascible character alienated from normal society -- in this
case children.  He's a con man sentenced to do public service by teaching in the
fourth grade. The show was originally titled "Shut Up, Kids," which was dropped
when the producers learned that a lot of parents don't approve of the term shut
up. Premiere: Sept. 19. Thursdays at 8:30.

"HERMAN'S HEAD" Borrowing from an idea seen in such unlikely places as Woody
Allen movies and "Animal House," this comedy anthropomorphizes the emotions of
an aspiring writer, played by William Ragsdale. His "angel" is his sweet side,
his "wimp" urges him to give in to his fears, his "genius" supplies his
intelligent thoughts (such as they are) and his "animal" supplies the more base
instincts. Premiere: Tonight. Sundays at 9:30.

"THE ULTIMATE CHALLENGE" A show that raises an immediate question. If the first
week is the ultimate challenge, what do they do the next week? Stunts by
stuntmen, challenges among athletes, outdoor adventures, done in the style of a
sports telecast. Premiere: Friday. Fridays at 9.

TV Movies

"BACKFIELD IN MOTION" Roseanne and Tom Arnold in a comedy about a mother who
forms an all-women's football team. The movie is produced by the comedienne in
an attempt to break out of her "Roseanne" character. On ABC.

"BROADWAY BOUND" Film version of the Neil Simon play, with Anne Bancroft, Hume
Cronyn and Jonathan Silverman. On ABC.

"FACE OF A STRANGER" A rich widow meets a homeless woman and realizes they have
much in common. With Gena Rowlands and Tyne Daly. On CBS.

"I STILL DREAM OF JEANNIE" If Barbara Eden doesn't find a master, she'll be
eternally exiled to Mesopotamia. Oct. 20, on NBC.

"THE LAST P.O.W." Serious exploration of the true story of Bobby Garwood, the
Vietnam soldier convicted of collaborating with the enemy. Starring Ralph
Macchio and Martin Sheen. On ABC.

"MISSION OF THE SHARK" An account of the U.S.S. Indianapolis, sunk in
shark-infested waters at the end of World War II. With Richard Thomas and Stacy
Keach. Sept. 29, on CBS.

"O PIONEERS" Coming this winter, a classy Hallmark Hall of Fame adaptation of
the Willa Cather novel, starring Jessica Lange. On CBS.

"THE STORY LADY" A widow whose talent for entertaining children is exploited by
TV. Starring Jessica Tandy. Dec., on NBC.

"US" The pilot for a new Michael Landon series that never went into production
because of his death. The story of a man wrongly imprisoned for 18 years. Sept.
20, on CBS.

"WILD TEXAS WIND" Dolly Parton plays a singer accused of killing her abusive
husband. A rare dramatic part for the singer. With Gary Busey. Sept. 23, on NBC.


Mini-Series

"A WOMAN NAMED JACKIE" One more re-telling of the saga of Jacqueline Kennedy,
this one based on the C. David Heymann biography. With newcomer Roma Downey as
Jackie. Oct. 13-15, on NBC.

"DYNASTY: THE MINI-SERIES" Four-hour continuation of the series that tries to
tie up all the loose ends. It features most of the original cast, including John
Forsythe, Linda Evans and Joan Collins. One highlight is yet another fist fight
between the two leading ladies. Oct. 20 and 22, on ABC.

"STAY THE NIGHT" Another true-life crime epic, this one about a woman who
seduces a teen-ager and gets him to kill her abusive husband. With Barbara
Hershey and Jane Alexander. On ABC.

Cable

"CHOPPERS" How about a series on the history of helicopters? From Leonardo da
Vinci to attack copters in the Persian Gulf. Premiere: Oct. 4. Fridays at 9, on
Discovery Channel.

"EARTH GUIDE" A documentary magazine on the environment with how-to advice. The
author Wade Davis is the host. Premiere: Oct. 5. Saturdays at 7, on Discovery
Channel.

"LOVEJOY" Ian McShane stars in the British mystery series that always
investigates the world of antiques, as written in the popular Jonathan Gash
novels. Premiere: Sept. 22. Sundays at 8, on A&E.

"MOMENTS OF COURAGE" Catastrophes that changed the world, as reported on ABC's
"20/20," with updates on survivors. The host is the "20/20" correspondent Tom
Jarriel. Premiere: Oct. 2. Wednesdays at 10:30, on Discovery Channel.

"PRISONER OF HONOR" Ambitious movie based on the Dreyfus Affair in France, with
Richard Dreyfuss -- who has had a fascination with the case thanks to the name
similarity -- playing a French officer who risks his career to declare Dreyfus's
innocence. Nov., on HBO.

"SESSIONS" A new series written and produced by Billy Crystal, which deals with
one man's discussions with his psychiatrist. His fantasies are dramatized, often
hilariously. Michael McKean plays the subject, Elliott Gould the shrink.
Premiere: Oct. 6. Sundays at 10, on HBO.

Public Television

"THE AMERICAN EXPERIENCE" Documentaries on Lyndon Johnson (Sept. 30, Oct. 1);
the story of the 54th Massachusetts Infantry in the Civil War, narrated by
Morgan Freeman, who starred in the movie version, "Glory" (Oct. 14); "The
Johnstown Flood" (Nov. 4); "The Quiz Show Scandal" (Jan. 6); the attack on Pearl
Harbor (Nov. 11).

"CHILDHOOD" A seven-part series that triesto be a comprehensive portrait of
children around the world, from birth through adolescence. Premiere: Oct. 14.
Mondays at 8.

"COLUMBUS AND THE AGE OF DISCOVERY" One year before the 500th anniversary of his
famous voyage, this seven-hour series looks at the world Columbus lived in, the
navigational advances he took advantage of, the worlds he found and his impact
on them. Oct. 6-9, at 8.

"EDGE" Specials about pop culture served on wry by Robert Krulwich of "CBS This
Morning" and National Public Radio. He will look at such subjects as Japan's
influence on the movies and MTV's effect on young Americans. Oct. 2, Nov. 6 and
Dec. 4, at 9.

"MASTERPIECE THEATER" Segments include an adaptation of John le Carre's "Murder
of Quality" (Oct. 13, 20), "Sleepers" (Oct. 27-Nov. 17), one more look at those
Soviet spies that infiltrated British society, and "Parnell and the
Englishwoman" (Dec. 29-Jan. 19), about the Irish hero and his adulterous affair.
Sundays at 9.

"MYSTERY!" New episodes for the P. D. James detective Adam Dalgliesh, starring
Roy Marsden, including "Devices and Desires" (Oct. 3-Nov. 7). Also on tap more
Sherlock Holmes stories, starring Jeremy Brett (Nov. 14-Dec. 12). Thursdays at
9.

LOAD-DATE: September 8, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: D.W. Moffett, star of the CBS series "Palace Guard," which has
its premiere in October (CBS); Lyndon Johnson, the focus of an "American
Experience" segment, Sept. 30 on Channel 13 (PBS)

TYPE: List; Schedule

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              175 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 8, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THE NEW SEASON: THE ANNOTATED CALENDAR;
FILM

BYLINE: By CARYN JAMES

SECTION: Section 2; Page 46; Column 5; Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 3541 words


Here is a selective guide to cultural events in New York and beyond in the
months ahead. Programs may change. Dates and locations for some events have not
been made final; other events are sold out. Unless indicated, all dates listed
are openings, all addresses are in Manhattan, and all telephone numbers have a
212 area code. Addresses for locations in New York City cited more than once are
on Page 49.

September

"DOGFIGHT" In 1963, Marines compete to find the ugliest date; River Phoenix
discovers Lili Taylor. The director Nancy Savoca has to find the quirks in this
obvious plot, but she did that in "True Love," a comic gem about an
Italian-American wedding. Opening Friday.

"FREDDY'S DEAD: THE FINAL NIGHTMARE" Opening on Friday the 13th, this is
supposedly the last installment of the visually impressive "Nightmare on Elm
Street" series about the dreamy Freddy Krueger, complete with lethal nails and
debonair fedora.

"PARADISE" It's easy to believe that Melanie Griffith and Don Johnson are
married in real life, but will he be convincing as her shrimp-fisherman husband
on screen? A friend's son comes to stay with them in the country, evoking
memories of their own dead child. Another remake of a French film, the sweet
"Grand Chemin." Sept. 18.

"THE FISHER KING" Jeff Bridges is an obnoxious disk jockey who causes a tragedy.
Robin Williams is a wise fool, a homeless, former professor of medieval history
who thinks the Holy Grail is hidden in a tycoon's apartment. Terry Gilliam gets
the benefit of the doubt for having directed "Brazil." Sept. 20.

"INDIAN RUNNER" Sean Penn directs and writes this story of rivalry between
Nebraskan brothers, one good, one bad. Viggo Mortensen plays the rebel and David
Morse the cop, with Charles Bronson and Sandy Dennis as their parents. Shown at
Cannes, it's reportedly a solid, distinctive first film. Sept. 20.

NEW YORK FILM FESTIVAL The opening-night film is the Polish director Krzysztof
Kieslowski's "Double Life of Veronique," with Irene Jacob (best actress at
Cannes) as two women, one Polish, one French. Other highlights include: "La
Belle Noiseuse," Jacques Rivette's story of a painter; Jim Jarmusch's "Night on
Earth," which tells five stories about taxi drivers; "The Adjuster" by the
talented young Canadian director Atom Egoyan. Sept. 20-Oct. 6, Lincoln Center.
(875-5050)

"RAMBLING ROSE" Laura Dern is ahead of her time as a sexually free woman in the
1930's. She goes to visit a Southern town, where Robert Duvall and Diane Ladd
are among the shocked folks. Martha Coolidge, the director of "Valley Girl,"
takes on a different female type; Calder Willingham adapted his
semi-autobiographical novel.

Sept. 20.

"DECEIVED" A non-cute Goldie Hawn movie? When her husband (John Heard) dies, it
turns out his identity was fake, and she's in big trouble. Co-written by Bruce
Joel Rubin (the megahit "Ghost" and megaflop "Jacob's Ladder"). Sept. 27.

"THE SUPER" Joe Pesci plays a slumlord ordered by the court to live in one of
his own buildings. His hard heart softens (so he's not as tough as the
"Goodfellas" killer for which he won an Oscar). Directed by Rod Daniel ("K-9"),
it will need Joe Pesci's manic edge. Sept. 27.

"MY OWN PRIVATE IDAHO" If you thought "Drugstore Cowboy" was offbeat, wait till
you see Gus Van Sant's new film, a story of street hustlers with echoes of
Shakespeare's "Henry IV, Part 1." River Phoenix and Keanu Reeves are the
hustlers, with a Falstaffian pimp. The movie will be shown at the New York Film
Festival, where its ambition and artiness may find its most accepting audience.
Sept. 29.

 October

"THE BUTCHER'S WIFE" Clothed and not visibly pregnant, Demi Moore returns to
"Ghost"-land as a clairvoyant from North Carolina. She marries a New York
butcher, falls for a psychiatrist played by Jeff Daniels, and brings romantic
comedy to her Greenwich Village neighborhood.

"CITY OF HOPE" John Sayles's gritty but hopeful view of politics involves
construction workers, the Mob, a virtuous councilman (Joe Morton), and too many
other characters to keep straight. The fictional Hudson City is the scene of
police brutality, racial violence and the writer-director's relentless
intelligence.

"COOL AS ICE" Can the blond white rapper Vanilla Ice stay hot long enough to
make this movie a hit? And will he try to play this plot straight? His
motorcycle breaks down in a small town, he raps, he wins a good girl's heart and
the good citizens' respect. Sure.

"FRANKIE AND JOHNNY" If you can buy Michelle Pfeiffer and Al Pacino as losers,
you'll buy this film. Pfeiffer gets plain (which makes her a gorgeous woman with
no makeup) as an emotionally repressed waitress involved with a short-order cook
(Pacino). Garry Marshall ("Pretty Woman") directs. Terrence McNally adapted his
play "Frankie and Johnny in the Clair de Lune."

"HARD PROMISES" Sissy Spacek and William Petersen star in this romantic comedy
about a rogue who tries to win his ex-wife back on the eve of her wedding.
Sounds trite, but the director, Martin Davidson, did the wonderful HBO baseball
movie "Long Gone."

"HOMICIDE" David Mamet's latest is the closing-night feature of the New York
Film Festival. His regular and best actor, Joe Mantegna, is a confused Jewish
cop who investigates the murder of a Jewish woman and thinks he is onto an
anti-Semitic conspiracy. Mamet's smart-guy mind game won't reveal too much too
soon.

"HOUSE PARTY 2" Wholesome rap stars Kid 'n' Play return in this sequel, but not
Reginald and Warrington Hudlin, who directed and produced the high-energy
original. There may be plenty of new energy from this grab-bag cast: Full Force,
Iman, Queen Latifah and Georg Stanford Brown. George Jackson and Doug McHenry
(producers of "New Jack City") co-direct.

"KAFKA" The brilliant Jeremy Irons, who can be Kafkaesque under the sunniest
circumstances, plays Kafka. The second film by Steven Soderbergh is daringly
different from "Sex, Lies and Videotape." Shot in black and white in Prague, it
is an imaginative journey into Kafka's life and mind, with Theresa Russell as
his love and Alec Guinness as his boss.

"LET HIM HAVE IT" Peter Medak's last film, "The Krays," was the story of
real-life criminal brothers from England. It was first-rate but too English for
American audiences, and this sounds the same: the story of Derek Bentley, a
retarded British teen-ager who was hanged for taking part in a 1952 warehouse
robbery and murder.

"LITTLE MAN TATE" Smart, no-nonsense Jodie Foster parlayed her best-actress
Oscar for "The Accused" into her first directing job: the story of a lonely
7-year-old prodigy, Fred Tate, caught in a tug-of-war between his working-class
Mom (Foster)and a child psychologist (Dianne Wiest).

"OTHER PEOPLE'S MONEY" Great casting can save this no-longer-timely version of
the 1989 play. Danny DeVito mixes greed with comedy as Larry the Liquidator, the
ruthless Wall Street takeover king, who targets a factory run, with old-time
humanity, by Gregory Peck. Penelope Ann Miller is Peck's soft-looking,
tough-talking lawyer. Directed by Norman Jewison ("Moonstruck").

"THE RAPTURE" Mimi Rogers is a woman who turns from sex to evangelical
Christianity and prepares for the Apocalypse. The first film directed by the
screenwriter Michael Tolkin tackles an ambitious, slippery subject. Meant to be
haunting and provocative, it convinced the New York Film Festival, which will
present it.

"29TH STREET" This could be a breakthrough for Anthony LaPaglia, who stole
"Betsy's Wedding" from Alan Alda. Here he is a finalist in the New York State
Lottery, in conflict with Dad (Danny Aiello) and thugs who want his lucky
ticket.

"WHORE" If it's as blunt as its title, this might be the ultimate rejoinder to
"Pretty Woman." Ken Russell brings his typically lush style and controversial
approach to this not-pretty story of a prostitute. Played by Theresa Russell (a
no-holds-barred actress herself), her life is rough, vulgar, passionless.

November

"THE ADDAMS FAMILY" Charles Addams's lovable ghoulish family is hilariously cast
-- Anjelica Huston is Morticia and Raul Julia is Gomez. The first film directed
by the cinematographer Barry Sonnenfeld ("Miller's Crossing"), with a script by
the very funny Paul Rudnick ("I Hate Hamlet").

"ALONE TOGETHER" Goldie Hawn does the plucky-single-Mom routine. Set in Key West
in 1969, this is heavy on 60's memorabilia. Hopeful signs: it's directed by
Chris Menges ("A World Apart"), with a fine cast including Arliss Howard and
Keith Carradine.

"AN AMERICAN TAIL: FIEVEL GOES WEST" In this sequel to Don Bluth's animated
mouse-tale, the Russian-immigrant Fievel Mousekewitz fulfills every kid's
fantasy: he becomes a gunslinging lawman in the Wild West. Voices by Amy Irving,
Jimmy Stewart, Dom DeLuise and John Cleese. "Presented by" Steven Spielberg,
directed by Phil Nibbelink and Simon Wells.

"ARTICLE 99" Deja vu, Catch-22. Irreverent but dedicated doctors and nurses,
this time in a veterans' hospital. Ray Liotta, Kiefer Sutherland, Forest
Whitaker and Kathy Baker star.

"AT PLAY IN THE FIELDS OF THE LORD" Missionaries and mercenaries threaten a
village on the Amazon River in this version of Peter Matthiessen's
newly-topical, politically correct 1965 novel. Hector Babenco ("Kiss of the
Spiderwoman") directs Aidan Quinn and Kathy Bates.

"BEAUTY AND THE BEAST" Set in 18th-century France, this animated feature blends
the classic Disney-musical treatment with the classic fairy tale. Music by the
"Little Mermaid" people.

"BUGSY" The first Beatty-Bening baby, with Warren Beatty as the man who built
Vegas and Annette Bening as the glamour-girl he loves. Barry Levinson directs.

"CAPE FEAR" Martin Scorsese, one of the few best directors alive, remakes the
1962 film noir. Robert De Niro is the ex-con who terrorizes a lawyer (Nick
Nolte) and his wife (Jessica Lange).

"LOVE CRIMES" Sean Young is an ambitious Atlanta prosecutor, who tracks down an
alleged rapist (Patrick Bergin). He is more interested in sex games than in sex;
she wants to be his victim, to test her kinky side. Lizzie Borden, who directed
the smart semi-documentary about prostitutes, "Working Girls," is aiming for
controversy and will probably get it.

"THE MAMBO KINGS" Based on Oscar Hijuelos's rich, Pulitzer Prize-winning novel.
Armand Assante and Antonio Banderas are Cuban brothers who move to New York in
the 1950's and find brief success with a musical group called the Mambo Kings.
They idolize Desi Arnaz, played here by Desi Arnaz Jr. Great possibilities, but
can first-time director Arne Glimcher -- an art dealer turned movie producer --
pull this off?

"MEETING VENUS" She can act, but can she lip-sync? Glenn Close plays a Swedish
opera diva with Kiri Te Kanawa's dubbed-in voice in this romantic comedy about a
tyrannical conductor trying to pull off a major Paris production. Directed by
the Hungarian director Istvan Szabo ("Mephisto"), with Niels Arestrup as the
conductor. An international goulash, with music.

"MY GIRL" The new Macaulay Culkin movie, even though he only plays the heroine's
best friend. Anna Chlumsky is an 11-year-old tomboy, jealous when her widowed
mortician father (Dan Aykroyd) falls for his cosmetologist (Jamie Lee Curtis).
This is not a John Hughes film, but you'd never know.

"NOISES OFF" Peter Bogdanovich (who needs a hit) directs this version of Michael
Frayn's popular Broadway farce. Carol Burnett, Michael Caine and Christopher
Reeve are members of a disaster-prone theater troupe.

"PROSPERO'S BOOKS" Peter Greenaway's visually extravagant, eccentric version of
Shakespeare's "Tempest," with John Gielgud as Prospero guiding us through the
books he has taken to his island exile. Praised and excoriated for "The Cook,
the Thief, His Wife and Her Lover," Mr. Greenaway returns to the lyrical
meditations about art that informed his "Draughtsman's Contract." Included in
the New York Film Festival.

"SHINING THROUGH" Melanie Griffith fights World War II and doesn't even have to
get dirty. She is a half-Jewish secretary from Queens sent by the O.S.S. to
Berlin, on a mission to spy on a Nazi officer. With Michael Douglas as her
sometime-lover and boss. Based on Susan Isaacs's best-selling novel.

 December

"CITY OF JOY" Patrick Swayze, who plays a doctor in the poorest section of
Calcutta in this film directed by Roland Joffe ("The Killing Fields").

"FATHER OF THE BRIDE" A sure sign of regressive times: a big-wedding-movie
remake. This updated version of the Spencer Tracy-Elizabeth Taylor classic stars
Steve Martin as the Dad who worries about losing his little girl and Diane
Keaton as the good Mom. From Charles Shyer and Nancy Meyers, who made "Baby
Boom," the least realistic having-it-all film in recent memory.

"FOR THE BOYS" Personal traumas, historical battles and music as Bette Midler
and James Caan play long-lived U.S.O. performers seen from World War II through
Vietnam.  A pet project of Midler's, directed by Mark Rydell, who also directed
her best film, "The Rose."

"FRIED GREEN TOMATOES" Kathy Bates visits Jessica Tandy in a nursing home and
hears her story about female friendship in an old Southern town. In flashbacks
to the 1920's, Tandy turns into Mary Stuart Masterson. From Fanny Flagg's
affecting comic novel, "Fried Green Tomatoes at the Whistle-Stop Cafe."

"GRAND CANYON" Lawrence Kasdan, of "Big Chill" fame, turns his serio-comic
ensemble approach to Los Angeles in the 90's. Danny Glover, Kevin Kline, Steve
Martin, Alfre Woodard and Mary McDonnell, among others, discover that the city
is a killer but it's a wonderful life.

"HIGH HEELS" Pedro Almodovar's women are always on the verge of some sort of
nervous breakdown. Here a daughter marries her mother's former lover. He turns
up dead, and the women share the mother-daughter experience of being murder
suspects.

"HOOK" Or "Peter Pan II," Steven Spielberg's glitzy, updated fantasy about a
grown-up Peter (Robin Williams), a still-villainous Hook (Dustin Hoffman) and
the spritely Tink (Julia Roberts). The year's most-awaited and probably biggest
movie, arriving in time for Christmas vacation.

"THE INNER CIRCLE" Andrei Konchalovsky ("Runaway Train") shot this in Moscow --
within Kremlin walls and K.G.B. headquarters, we're told. Bob Hoskins plays a
K.G.B. agent who seduces the wife of Stalin's personal projectionist. Tom Hulce
and Lolita Davidovich star, with a cast of Soviet actors. Why is this opening on
Christmas Day?

"JACK THE BEAR" Danny DeVito grapples with life as the widowed father of two
small sons and host of a late-night horror show. Directed by Marshall Herskovitz
(a "Thirty something" creator), written by Steven Zaillian ("Awakenings"), it
sounds heavy on Feelings and will need all the star's bittersweetness.

"THE LAST BOY SCOUT" A buddy-movie-mystery, with Bruce Willis as a detective
whose client is murdered (good work, Bruce) and Damon Wayans as the dead woman's
ex-football-player boyfriend. They team up to solve the murder and along the way
make the world safe for professsional football. Action by the director Tony
Scott ("Top Gun"). Words by Shane Black ("Lethal Weapon"), who got $1.75 million
for this script.

"MADAME BOVARY" Claude Chabrol's faithful version of Flaubert's novel, starring
Isabelle Huppert as the hopelessly romantic housewife. Visually these bourgeois
are more hauts than petits, in a film that was widely praised in France, where
they take Emma seriously.

"MAP OF THE HUMAN HEART" Anne Parillaud ("La Femme Nikita"), Patrick Bergin,
John Cusack and Jeanne Moreau star in a complicated love story spanning 30
years, two continents and you don't want to know how many coincidences. A
Canadian Inuit Indian loves a half-Cree woman, who falls for him and a white map
maker. Directed by the New Zealander Vincent Ward, whose exquisite
time-traveling film, "The Navigator," suggests he can maneuver through this.

"MEDICINE MAN" The first of many eco-movies comes from John McTiernan, the
director of "Die Hard." Sean Connery is a temperamental scientist in an
endangered rain forest; Lorraine Bracco is his assistant. Written by Tom
Schulman, who wrote the mawkish "Dead Poets Society"; maybe the stars can
prevent this from being "Dead Trees Society."

"THE PRINCE OF TIDES" Columbia Pictures is working triple-time to put out the
word that it's great, but this vanity-production could still turn out to be the
"Hudson Hawk" of the winter. Barbra Streisand directs, stars and co-wrote this
version of Pat Conroy's best-selling novel. She is a New York psychiatrist, Nick
Nolte is a Southern man whose suicidal sister was Streisand's patient. The last
time she directed, it was "Yentl."

"RHAPSODY IN AUGUST" From one of the true masters, Akira Kurosawa. Set near
Nagasaki, it explores the effects of the atomic bomb on three generations of a
family. Sachiko Murase plays a woman who lived through the bombing, with Richard
Gere as her Japanese-American nephew.

"RUSH" The superb Jennifer Jason Leigh ("Last Exit to Brooklyn") plays an
addicted undercover narcotics agent, in a drama of crime, cocaine and love with
Jason Patric. Based on Kim Wozencraft's autobiographical novel, this is the
first film directed by Lili Fini Zanuck, who co-produced "Driving Miss Daisy."

"STAR TREK VI: THE UNDISCOVERED COUNTRY" After "Star Trek V," this should be
called "Star Trek VI: How Dare They?" But it's the 25th anniversary of "Star
Trek," so the old standbys -- William Shatner, Leonard Nimoy and the rest of the
Enterprise crew -- take on the Klingons for a "final adventure," so they say.
The promising sign is that it was directed by Nicholas Meyer ("Star Trek II: The
Wrath of Khan").

January

"ALIEN 3" Look out, slimy space creatures, Sigourney Weaver is back as the macho
Ripley and this time she's directed by David Fincher, the man behind Madonna's
Vogue video. Charles Dance joins her on a distant planet to fight that annoying
alien-in-the-stomach feeling.

"BLUE SKY" Jessica Lange is an emotionally volatile wife and Tommy Lee Jones her
scientist husband. In 1962, they become involved in a military cover-up.
Directed by the always-smart Tony Richardson ("Tom Jones").

"FREEJACK" Billed as a "futuristic action adventure," it better have a sense of
humor.  Emilio Estevez is a race car driver who crashes into the year 2009.
There he is pursued by a bounty hunter played by, really, Mick Jagger. Anthony
Hopkins (Hannibal Lecter himself) stars as a sleazeball selling immortality.
Directed by Geoff Murphy ("Young Guns II").

"NAKED LUNCH" David Cronenberg ("Dead Ringers") brings the right creepy-crawly
sensibility to William Burroughs's apparently unfilmable novel. Peter Weller,
better known as Robocop, plays a writer in a bizarre land of addicts, spies and
monsters. The cast includes Judy Davis, Ian Holm and Julian Sands.

February

"BASIC INSTINCT" Gay activists have called this movie homophobic. Its star,
Michael Douglas, and director, Paul Verhoeven, say it is an unbiased murder
mystery. On the streets of San Francisco, Douglas is a cop tracking down a
serial killer. Verhoeven's last film was the Schwarzenegger smash "Total
Recall," but he can get much stranger ("Spetters").

"BEETHOVEN" Charles Grodin's suburban family is disrupted by a St. Bernard named
Beethoven. Do stories get sillier than this?

"MISSISSIPPI MASALA" The second film by the talented Indian-born director Mira
Nair ("Salaam Bombay") is a romance about race, prejudice and cultural identity.
Denzel Washington falls in love with the daughter of an Indian family expelled
from Uganda, now running a motel in the South.

Spring

"FERNGULLY: THE LAST RAIN FOREST" The little rain forest that could. This
ecologically responsible animated feature, based on a children's book, is a
fantasy about a jungle in jeopardy. Voices by Christian Slater, Robin Williams,
Tim Curry.

"HOWARD'S END" E. M. Forster's elegant 1910 novel about an unconventional
Edwardian family is given the Merchant-Ivory treatment. Starring Anthony
Hopkins, Vanessa Redgrave and Emma Thompson.

J. F. K. Oliver Stone's already-controversial film takes on the Kennedy
assassination and the possibility of a conspiracy. Kevin Costner plays Jim
Garrison, the district attorney who tried to prove a conspiracy, with Gary
Oldman as Lee Harvey Oswald.

"LOVE FIELD" Another J. F. K. movie, this one with an interracial theme.
Michelle Pfeiffer is a Dallas housewife obsessed with Jacqueline Kennedy. On a
bus to J. F. K.'s funeral, she meets a black man and his small daughter.
Directed by Jonathan Kaplan ("The Accused").

"PRELUDE TO A KISS" Alec Baldwin and Meg Ryan in a fairy tale about love. Ryan's
spirit enters an old man's body, and Baldwin must decide whether beauty is skin
deep. Written by Craig Lucas and directed by Norman Rene, who brought the play
to Broadway.

"SHADOWS AND FOG" How is Madonna connected to Mia Farrow and John Malkovich?
Could she be their long-lost daughter? We'll have to wait for Woody Allen's new
comedy to find out, but we know it is set in the 1920's, shot in black and
white, and also features Jodie Foster, Kathy Bates, John Cusack and Allen.

LOAD-DATE: September 8, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Sir John Gielgud in Peter Greenway's "Prospero's Books,"
opening in November (Miramax); River Phoenix in Gus Van Sant's "My Own Private
Idaho," opening Sept. 29 (Abigayle Tarshes/Fine Line Features); Jodie Foster and
Adam Hann-Byrd in Ms. Foster's "Little Man Tate," opening in October (Orion
Pictures)

TYPE: List; Schedule

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              176 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 8, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Q and A

BYLINE: By Carl Sommers

SECTION: Section 5; Page 4; Column 4; Travel Desk

LENGTH: 1130 words



Testing Ceramics for Lead

Q. I recently purchased stoneware in Mexico but am reluctant to use it because
it may possibly contain lead. Is there a way to test for lead? -- Moira
Tamayo-Cole, Brooklyn

A.  Most ceramics have lead in the glaze. Dishes and cookware from large
domestic manufacturers are fired at temperatures high enough to sufficiently
harden the glaze and keep lead from leaching into food. But handmade ceramics
and some imported ceramics are fired at lower temperatures or for an
insufficient time, making the release of lead a risk. The Food and Drug
Admistration singles out ceramics from Mexico, India, China and Hong Kong as
risks. Stoneware from Italy is also sometimes cited.

Further, glaze in ceramic ware can wear down from repeated washing in a
dishwasher and lead can leach. Also, acidic foods like wine, vinegar and tomato
or orange juice can speed up the release of lead. For that reason, even if your
ceramics test as safe, you might want to recheck them periodically. Lead
accumulates in the body, mainly in the bones, and can lead to disorders of the
nervous system, reproductive and cardiovascular system and the kidneys. The
F.D.A. tests some commercial imports of ceramic ware, but it is very unlikely
that ceramics brought in by travelers will be inspected.

If you have any concern, home testing kits can be used. The kits listed here can
be used to check for lead in solder in food cans and copper pipes and in paint,
dust or soil.

Frandon Lead Alert Kit, Frandon Enterprises, Post Office Box 300321, Seattle,
Wash. 98103; (800) 634-2341, or for those using Visa or Mastercard, (800)
359-9000. The cost is $29.95 plus $3.50 for shipping and handling. This kit,
good for 100 tests, consists of a mild acid put on a cotton swab or piece of
filter paper, which is then rubbed on the surface to be tested. Then, a
lead-sensitive dye, also provided, is applied to the swab or paper. If lead is
present the swab will become pink to red, depending on the concentration. The
makers of the kit recommend that no items be used if any lead is indicated.

Lead Check Swabs, HybriVet Systems, Post Office Box 1210, Framingham, Mass.
01701; (800) 262-5323. Four swabs are $13.45, 8 are $17, 16 are $28.45, and 48
are $68.50; all prices include shipping and handling. The swabs are described as
being like a cigarette in shape and size. Each is crushed in the middle,
releasing to the tip a solution that is activated by lead. The tip is rubbed
against the tested surface. If there is more than 1 milligram per square
centimeter (the F.D.A. standard threshold is 2.5 to 7 parts per million,
depending on type of ceramic ware), the tip will change to pink. If there is no
reaction, a swab can be used immediately for another test. This kit can be used
on dust, the manufacturers say.

Leadcheck II, Abotex Enterprises, Tecumseh Postal Station, Post Office Box 3276,
Windsor, Ontario N8N 2M4; (519) 735-8645. This kit, good for 60 uses, is $24.95,
which includes shipping and handling. With this method, vinegar is left for 24
hours on the surface to be tested, then taken up by the included dropper and
released in a test tube. Solutions are added to the vinegar, which may turn
color from yellow to brown, depending on the amount of lead; the concentration
is determined by checking the solution against a color-comparison chart. Water
can also be tested. The kits are also distributed for the same price by Bailey
Ceramic Supply, Post Office Box 1577, Kingston N.Y. 12401; (914) 339-3721, and
Michigan Ceramics Supply, Post Office Box 342, Wyandotte, Mich. 48192; (313)
281-2300.

Flooding in China

Q.  I am planning a trip to China in mid-October. I've heard that flooding there
has disrupted travel and caused disease. Will travel be curtailed? -- Grace
Peng, New York, N.Y.

A.  This summer's severe flooding in China has subsided, and tour companies
report that itineraries, including cruises, will not be affected this fall.

Heavy rainfall over two months had swollen the Yangtze River system, which
includes the Chu River, the Qinhuai River and Dongting Lake. The flooding was
believed to have caused hundreds of deaths. But the Beijing bureau of The Times
reports that there is no flood-related health threat to travelers, such as
cholera.

The province hardest hit was Anhui, where tourists rarely visit, and there are
still people left homeless there. The main tourist destination that was affected
during the summer was the area around the city of Suzhou, popular for a Grand
Canal cruise past classical gardens. In some cases, the cruise was canceled; in
others, travelers took a train rather than ship from Suzhou to Hangchou.

Forbidden Countries

Q.  Which countries are United States citizens forbidden to visit? -- Marcus
Alan Spevak, Brooklyn

A.  According to Federal law, United States passports are not valid in Iraq,
Lebanon and Libya. American citizens may be allowed to enter by those countries.
If Americans return to the United States with stamps from any of the three in
their passport they are subject to a fine of up to $2,000 and imprisonment up to
five years, according to the State Department.

Waivers allowing visits to Iraq, Lebanon and Libya may be granted to
journalists, those working for a humanitarian organization like the
International Red Cross or traveling for "compelling humanitarian reasons,"
which a State Department spokeswoman defined as visiting a terminally ill family
member, or other reasons deemed to be in our national interests. Requests for
waivers should be sent to Pamela Covington, Deputy Assistant Secretary for
Passport Service, Department of State, 14255 K Street NW, Washington, D.C. 20522
(attention citizenship appeal and legal assistance, room 300).

The Treasury Department's Foreign Assets Control Regulations, while not
forbidding travel per se, bars citizens from spending United States currency in
Cuba. Exceptions can be made for journalists, those visiting close relatives,
Government officials on business or those engaged in professional research
related to Cuba. Treasury also bans travel-related expenditures in Iraq and
Libya, except for journalists and those with immediate family there. Individual
American citizens may travel to Cambodia, North Korea and Vietnam, but American
travel companies are not allowed to arrange trips.

Amsterdam in December

Q.  I plan to visit Amsterdam in early December. What weather can I expect? --
Winnie Gefter, Stamford, Conn.

A.  The average high temperature in Amsterdam in December is 42 degrees and the
low averages 34, and in the early part of the month temperatures a a bit higher.
There are usually seven days of precipitation; snow is unusual in the early part
of the month.

LOAD-DATE: September 8, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Question

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              177 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 8, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Surviving Sexual Abuse

SECTION: Section 7; Page 39; Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 313 words



To the Editor:

As a writer and a survivor of sexual abuse myself, I was pleased to see a review
of Betsy Petersen's "Dancing With Daddy: A Childhood Lost and a Life Regained"
(Aug. 4). However, Dara Culhane makes some rather damaging statements toward the
end of her otherwise favorable review.

"Can't we condemn the sexual exploitation of children without reducing all of
life's complex problems to reflex-like responses to such abuse?" she writes,
evidently doubting that Ms. Petersen's numerous adult "ills" can all be traced
back to her father's violation of her in childhood. "Reflex-like responses"?
This sounds like a not-so-subtle form of "Get over it, it was so long ago. Don't
let it affect your whole life."

But it does. Would we tell a political refugee who has survived years of
imprisonment and torture that his or her "pervasive fears of losing control" are
groundless and unreasonable? Should we expect a child who grows up a frequent
target of racist violence and abuse not to show numerous and lasting effects of
this? As a society we have either refused to acknowledge things that are too
disturbing to stomach, or we have institutionalized them. That doesn't mean they
aren't really bad. It's taken this long just to name the range of physical and
emotional disorders that battered women, survivors of rape and Vietnam veterans
have always known about as post-traumatic stress syndrome.

Many of us were victims of incest for years, often from infancy, when we were
without language and at our most malleable and vulnerable stage of existence. It
was a betrayal of everything we trusted by the people who were supposed to keep
us alive. People die from this. If Ms. Petersen says she has nightmares to this
day, if she says she suffers physically in telling areas of her body, I'm not
surprised. I believe her.

SYLVIA FOLEY
Brooklyn

LOAD-DATE: September 8, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              178 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 8, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Field of Maybes Is a Spirit Lifter For Democrats

BYLINE: By ROBIN TONER,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 1; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1076 words

DATELINE: SIOUX CITY, Iowa, Sept. 7


The race for the Democratic Presidential nomination finally lurched to life in
Iowa this weekend with a fledgling class of potential candidates, a lot of
full-throated Bush-bashing and an almost palpable relief among Democratic
loyalists that their party was fighting back.

"We have, finally, candidates who are willing to take on George Bush and point
out what his vulnerabilities are," said John Roehrick, the chairman of the Iowa
Democratic Party, as he joined with more than 500 Democrats to cheer on the
potential standard-bearers in Sioux City on Friday night. "For far too long
we've been silent."

After a long, ominously quiet summer in Democratic Presidential politics, this
weekend's forum in Iowa, the scene of the first Presidential nominating contest
in February, signaled the start of a busy fall.

Over the next month, Gov. Bill Clinton of Arkansas, Gov. L. Douglas Wilder of
Virginia and Senator Bob Kerrey of Nebraska are all expected to announce their
Presidential intentions.  And all are seen as likely, if not certain, to enter
the race, joining former Senator Paul E. Tsongas of Massachusetts, who announced
his candidacy last spring.

Senator Tom Harkin of Iowa told The Associated Press today that he planned to
announce his candidacy on Sept. 15.

Former Gov. Edmund G. Brown Jr. of California announced the formation of an
exploratory committee this week, injecting another variable into the field,
while the Rev. Jesse Jackson has yet to announce his decision, although many
Democrats expect him to forgo a race in 1992.

Ronald H. Brown, the chairman of the Democratic National Committee, has suddenly
found himself with several horses to tout after a summer of nonstarters. "The
dynamic is shifting rapidly and it appears we will have a strong field by the
end of September," he said this week.

This new class of potential candidates, most of them novices to Presidential
campaigns, is filling a vacuum created when many of the party's heavyweights
decided not to challenge Mr. Bush, who maintains his high ratings in the public
opinion polls.

"I always thought that people would see the merit of getting into a race that
people didn't expect them to win," said James Ruvolo, a member of the Democratic
National Committee from Ohio.  "They're somewhat liberated."

At the very least, Mr. Ruvolo argued, "they can raise issues and build a
five-year plan," thus positioning themselves for 1996.

'Year of the Leapfrog'

Carter Eskew, a Democratic consultant who has worked for Mr. Harkin, suggested
that it was "the year of the leapfrog" in Democratic politics, with rare
opportunities for "people who are very appealing" but would not be heard in
ordinary years.

The Democratic fund-raising dinner in Sioux City offered candidates and
potential candidates a chance to be heard by Democrats from Iowa, Nebraska and
South Dakota. Each of the Presidential speakers sought to stake out his market
position.

Mr. Tsongas offered himself as the prophet of economic decline, a Democrat who
can remake his party's economic philosophy to encourage investment and job
creation.

'Get Off Our Knees'

Senator Harkin, addressing a hometown crowd, delivered a rousing version of his
Democratic credo, a plea to return to traditional party values, "get off our
knees" and take the fight to Mr. Bush.

One of his liveliest lines concerned the Republicans who deride him as another
George McGovern, the party's 1972 Presidential nominee, who lost 49 states and
who was the keynote speaker last night.

"Charlie Black and Roger Ailes and old George Herbert Walker Bush and J.
Danforth Quayle, if they want me to repudiate George McGovern, if they want me
to repudiate what he stood for all his life in politics, from Food for Peace to
ending the Vietnam War and bringing our troops home, to getting that crook Nixon
and his den of thieves out of the White House," Mr. Harkin roared, "if they want
me to do that, why they can just go straight to hell." The crowd went wild.

Mr. Clinton argued that the nation had a host of dangerous problems, from
lagging educational progress to the failings of the health care system that had
to be confronted by national leadership. "The President counts a thousand points
of light, but I promise you that leaves a lot of darkness," Mr. Clinton said,
referring to Mr. Bush's emphasis on voluntarism to solve domestic problems.

Tone of a Centrist

Still, Mr. Clinton, trying to position himself as the centrist in the race, said
the Democrats must couple their belief in an active, problem-solving government
with a new emphasis on personal responsiblity. That would apply, he said, both
to people at the bottom of the economic ladder and to the people at the top.

"I'm still waiting for George Bush to say the first word about what Salomon
Brothers did the other day, about the S.& L. ripoff, about all these things that
have happened in America, where people on the top have taken advantage of people
on the bottom," Mr. Clinton said.

There were some common strains among the potential candidates, particularly a
strict focus on domestic issues and a demand for new Federal spending priorities
to reflect the realities of the post-cold-war era.

Mr. Harkin put it starkly: "If you want to continue to spend $160 billion of
your money to defend Europe from the Soviet Union, or whatever it's called now,"
he said, "take your ballot and put it in the Bush box."

He added, "But if you believe, as I believe, that Europe is strong enough and
rich enough and powerful enough to defend itself if it wants to, and we can take
some of your wealth and we can invest it in new roads and highways and bridges
and health care, then you take your ballot and put it in the Democrats' box."

In addition to Mr. Clinton, Mr. Harkin and Mr. Tsongas, the group also heard
from Larry Agran, the former mayor of Irvine, Calif., and a dark horse
candidate, who wants to cut military spending in half.

Mr. McGovern's keynote address was an unabashed attack on Mr. Bush's foreign
policy, including his handling of the war in the Persian Gulf.

Arguing that sanctions should have been given more time to work against Iraq,
Mr. McGovern asserted, "After American bombers devastated the vastly overmatched
forces of Iraq and its civilian infrastructure, Mr. Bush led the nation in an
outpouring of self-congratulatory jingoism that would have been more appropriate
in the days of Caesar."

LOAD-DATE: September 8, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Potential Democratic Presidential candidates at a forum in Sioux
City, Iowa on Friday were, from left, Paul E. Tsongas, a former Massachusetts
Senator, Senator Tom Harkin of Iowa and Gov. Bill Clinton of Arkansas. Mr.
Tsongas has already announced his candidacy; the others are expected to run.
(Associated Press)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              179 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 8, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Fortress Cuba, Lonely Cuba

SECTION: Section 4; Page 18; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 483 words


Stunned by events in Moscow, Fidel Castro now talks of a "zero option": Cuban
socialism will carry on alone, even without Soviet aid. "Whatever happens in the
Soviet Union," blusters the party newspaper, "we will not move away from the
path we have chosen. We will continue with our independent, Cuban, socialist
line."

But who is "we"? Not once since seizing power in 1959 has Mr. Castro submitted
his reign to electoral judgment. Like other Communist fortresses in China, North
Korea and Vietnam, Cuba has scorned democratizing reforms. And who is the "we"
responsible for Cuba's colonialist dependence on a no-longer-willing foreign
partner? Mr. Castro.

For three decades, Cuban socialism has been propped up by Soviet subsidies,
roughly $3.5 billion last year. Under complex barter arrangements, Moscow has
overpaid for sugar, while providing nearly all of Cuba's oil and three-fourths
of its imports. Now fuel shipments are lagging and a collapsing Soviet state can
no longer afford what Boris Yeltsin describes as foreign charity.

During fat years, Cuba did little to anticipate this eventuality. In the 1960's,
a French journalist, K. S. Karol, asked whether the Russians might someday cut
back on Cuban sugar. Mr. Castro saw no reason why Moscow would not buy Cuban
sugar "when their own sugar used to sell for three times the price of ours. Of
course, political factors may come in, but so far the Russians have never
resorted to economic blackmail."

Other Cubans with more foresight urged diversification. When the first sugar
agreement with Moscow was signed in January 1964, Nikita Khrushchev promised to
provide a miraculous cane-cutting machine; it proved comically unworkable. The
reality of the sugar pact was tersely expressed by Carlos Franqui, a defecting
veteran of the Sierra Maestra:

"In the old days, the difference between the market price and the price the
United States paid for sugar was called the differential, and what it did was to
guarantee a market for our product. Now we were doing the same thing; we were
tied to the same monoculture and the same single market, only this time with the
Russians."

By then, Mr. Castro had reshaped Cuban politics on the one-party Soviet model,
eliminating the check of independent criticism. Slogans and incantation replaced
debate as Mr. Castro played the world leader, sending armies to Angola and
Ethiopia and backstopping Soviet policy everywhere. Now, with the collapse of
Communism, slogans can no longer conceal Cuba's poverty, isolation and humbling
dependence.

For Cubans, the cruel result is hardship and hunger even if Moscow buys sugar at
reduced prices. Some U.S. cold warriors remain eager to meddle in Cuban affairs
in an effort to topple Mr. Castro. But the Cuban dictator has painted himself
into his own corner. Fidel Castro's reign deserves to end in home-grown failure,
not martyrdom.

LOAD-DATE: September 8, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              180 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 8, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

THE NEW SEASON: THE ANNOTATED CALENDAR

BYLINE: By DAVID RICHARDS

SECTION: Section 2; Page 46; Column 1; Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 3208 words


Here is a selective guide to cultural events in New York and beyond in the
months ahead. Programs may change. Dates and locations for some events have not
been made final; other events are sold out. Unless indicated, all dates listed
are openings, all addresses are in Manhattan, and all telephone numbers have a
212 area code. Addresses for locations in New York City cited more than once are
on Page 49.

September

"CORIOLANUS" The rabble brings down a proud Roman warrior. Tuesday-Nov. 10,
Shakespeare Theater at the Folger, Washington. (202-546-4000)

"BON APPETIT" Lee Hoiby has set two comic monologues to music Ruth Draper's 1926
"Italian Lesson," in which a Park Avenue matron rhapsodizes about Dante, and
"Bon Appetit," Julia Child's recipe for a fancy French chocolate cake. Jean
Stapleton sings them both. (In repertory with "Cabaret Verboten.") Sept. 16-Nov.
3, CSC Repertory.

"UNIDENTIFIED HUMAN REMAINS AND THE TRUE NATURE OF LOVE" Seven young people set
out in quest of meaningful relationships while a serial killer terrorizes the
city. Brad Fraser's play comes from Canada by way of Chicago. Currently
previewing. Opens Sept. 19, Orpheum Theater, 126 Second Ave. (477-2477)

"ON BORROWED TIME" An old man and his grandson chase Mr. Brink (otherwise known
as Death) up an apple tree in Paul Osborn's fantasy, a big hit in the 1930's.
The cast includes Teresa Wright, Conrad Bain, Nathan Lane and George C. Scott,
who will play the old man and direct the revival. Sept. 20-Jan. 5, Circle in the
Square.

"THE TIME OF YOUR LIFE" The Romanian director Liviu Ciulei brings his eye to
bear on William Saroyan's 1939 play about the gentle oddballs for whom Nick's
Saloon, Restaurant and Entertainment Palace in San Francisco is home sweet home.
Sept. 20-Oct. 27, Arena Stage, Washington. (202-488-3300)

"BABYLON GARDENS" Timothy Mason's play depicts a successful young urban couple
(Timothy Hutton and Mary-Louise Parker) trying to cope with the daily
disintegration of their neighborhood. Sept. 25-Nov. 3, Circle Repertory Co.

"THE MISANTHROPE" Alceste hates mankind, but he's crazy for Celimene, which puts
Moliere's hero in a fix. Sept. 27-Oct. 20, York Theater, Church of the Heavenly
Rest, 2 E. 90th St. (534-5366)

"RADIANT CITY" Theodora Skipitares's multimedia work brings life-sized puppets,
rear-view projections, kinetic sculpture and live music to bear on the history
of New York City and life of Robert Moses. Sept. 27-Oct. 27, American Place
Theater.

"MARCH OF THE FALSETTOS" and "FALSETTOLAND" William Finn's musicals, presented
as a double bill for the first time, look at the loves and losses of a man
called Marvin in the age of AIDS. Sept. 28-Nov. 2, Hartford Stage Company.
(203-527-5151)

"INVITATIONS TO HEAVEN (QUESTIONS OF A JEWISH CHILD)" Using hand and rod
puppets, Eric Bass and the Sandglass Theater take the audience from a
turn-of-the-century wedding in Poland to the pearly gates, with stops in
between. Sept. 30-Oct. 5, Brooklyn Academy of Music, Lepercq Space.

October

"BEGGARS IN THE HOUSE OF PLENTY" John Patrick Shanley's dark comedy has to do
with the turbulence in an Irish family. Oct. 1-Nov. 3, Stage II, Manhattan
Theater Club, City Center.

"OUR LADY OF THE TORTILLA" Luis Santeiro's comedy focuses on Cuban-Americans in
New Jersey and what looks to be a miracle in their very own kitchen. In Spanish
and English. Oct. 2-Nov. 3, Intar Hispanic-American Arts Center, 420 W. 42d St.
(869-3530)

"ON THE VERGE OR THE GEOGRAPHY OF YEARNING" Eric Overmyer's comic parable about
Victorian time travelers colliding with the 1950's opens the Yale Repertory
Theater season in a revival directed by Stan Wojewodski Jr. Oct. 3-Nov. 2. Yale
Repertory Theater, New Haven. (203-432-1234)

"ANDRE HELLER'S WONDERHAUS" In the abandoned Wonderhaus Theater, old-time
variety artists from around the world gather for the birthday of Olga, a
70-year-old dwarf. Devised by the Austrian multimedia artist Andre Heller, with
designs by Mr. Heller and Erte, the production features the clowns and
illusionists of another age in a last hurrah. Previews begin Sept. 28. Opens
Oct. 6, Broadhurst Theater.

"A PIECE OF MY HEART" Six women volunteers who served in Vietnam return home
disillusioned, in Shirley Lauro's play. Oct. 8-Nov. 24, Manhattan Theater Club.

"A TEMPEST" As Aime Cesaire has adapted it, Shakespeare's island fantasy becomes
a chronicle of colonialism. Begins Oct. 8, Ubu Repertory Theater, 15 W. 28th St.
(679-7540)

"THE HOMECOMING" A son brings home his new bride to meet the family, and the
family finds her very much to its liking in Harold Pinter's drama about sex,
power and gamesmanship. Lindsay Crouse is the bride and Roy Dotrice is the
welcoming father in the Roundabout Theater Company's revival, which inaugurates
the company's new Broadway home. Oct. 9-Nov. 24, Criterion Center.

"BEAU JEST" In James Sherman's comedy, a young woman hires an actor to play her
fictitious boyfriend in order to placate her anxious parents. Previews Oct. 2.
Opens Oct. 10, Lamb's Theater, 130 W. 44th St. (563-4370)

"RETURN TO THE FORBIDDEN PLANET" Bob Carlton's sci-fi musical, still running in
London, aced out "Miss Saigon" for the 1990 Olivier Award, the British
equivalent of the Tony. Shakespeare's "Tempest," the 1956 cult film "Forbidden
Planet," an evil scientist and pop music from the 1950's and 60's have gone into
the mix. Previews Sept. 27. Opens Oct. 10, Variety Arts Theater, 110-112 Third
Ave., at 14th St. (Telecharge 239-6200)

"CABARET VERBOTEN" A night out at a Weimar cabaret, with songs and political
satire by Bertolt Brecht, Karl Valentin and Kurt Weill, among others. Oct.
15-Nov. 24. (In repertory with "Bon Appetit.") CSC Repertory.

"1991 A PERFORMANCE CHRONICLE (THE REDISCOVERY OF AMERICA BY THE WARRIOR FOR
GRINGOSTROIKA)" The premiere of the second part of "1992 A Performance Trilogy,"
by the Mexican performance "activist" Guillermo Gomez-Pena, explores United
States-Mexico relations. Oct. 15-20, Brooklyn Academy of Music, Lepercq Space.

"FUTZ" It's back to the 60's with a revival of Rochelle Owens's play, directed
by Tom O'Horgan. Oct. 18-Nov. 3, La Mama, Annex Theater.

"DANCING AT LUGHNASA" Donal Donnelly portrays the uncle of five unmarried
nieces, who are barely making do in Donegal, Ireland, in 1936. Patrick Mason
directs the play, written by Brian Friel and mounted by Dublin's famed Abbey
Theater. Previews Oct. 11. Opens Oct. 24, Plymouth Theater, 236 W. 45th St.
(Telecharge 239-6200)

"FROM THE MISSISSIPPI DELTA" Endesha Ida Mae Holland recalls some strong-minded
Mississippi women who inspired her during her youth in the 1940's. Begins Oct.
29. Circle in the Square Downtown.

"THE BABY DANCE" A wealthy couple, unable to conceive a child, make a deal to
adopt the unborn child of a poor, but fertile couple. And the dance begins.
Linda Purl and Stephanie Zimbalist star in Jane Anderson's play. Previews Sept.
27. Opens in October. Lucille Lortel Theater, 121 Christopher St. (924-8782
after Sept. 15, or Ticket Master 307-4100)

November

"RAGS" The 1986 musical flop by Joseph Stein, Charles Strouse and Stephen
Schwartz gets a new, intimate production by a group that worked wonders last
season with "I Can Get It for You Wholesale," another musical that didn't fare
so well the first time around. Begins Nov. 2, American Jewish Theater.

"PERICLES" In the continuing Shakespeare marathon, this brings the total to 19.
Campbell Scott stars and Michael Greif directs. Begins Nov. 5, Public Theater.

"PARK YOUR CAR IN HARVARD YARD" Jason Robards is a retired high school teacher,
and Judith Ivey is his undereducated Irish housekeeper in Israel Horovitz's
two-character play, directed by Zoe Caldwell. Previews Oct. 30. Opens Nov. 7,
Music Box Theater, 239 W. 45th St. (Telecharge 239-6200)

"TUBES" The three performance artists known as Blue Man Group do wild things
with music, kettledrums and paint. Previews Oct. 25. Opens Nov. 7, Astor Place
Theater, 434 Lafayette St. (254-4370)

"NICK AND NORA" Barry Bostwick and Joanna Gleason play the celebrated sleuths,
Nick and Nora Charles, in this new musical suggested by Dashiell Hammett's
hard-boiled detective novel "The Thin Man." Music by Charles Strouse; lyrics by
Richard Maltby Jr., and book by Arthur Laurents, who also directs. Previews Oct.
8. Opens Nov. 10, Marriott Marquis, 211 W. 45th St. (382-0100)

"BLUEBEARD" Everett Quinton revives the Charles Ludlam farce about the marrying
man. Previews Oct. 31. Opens Nov. 14, The Ridiculous Theatrical Company, Charles
Ludlam Theater, 1 Sheridan Sq. (After Oct. 15 691-2271)

"ADVENTURES IN THE SKIN TRADE" A young Welsh rogue sets out to seek his fortune
in London and encounters oddballs at every turn in the road in this adaptation
(by John Tillinger and James Hammerstein 2d) of the Dylan Thomas short stories.
Nov. 12-Dec. 22. Long Wharf Theater, New Haven. (203-787-4282)

"A WONDERFUL LIFE" The 1947 movie "It's a Wonderful Life" becomes a musical with
book and lyrics by Sheldon Harnick and music by Joe Raposo. Nov. 15-Jan. 5.
Arena Stage, Washington. (202-488-3300)

"THE CRUCIBLE" Tony Randall's longstanding plan to establish the National Actors
Theater, a classical rep company, comes to pass. Martin Sheen will star in the
inaugural production, "The Crucible," Arthur Miller's drama about witchcraft and
McCarthyism. Begins Nov. 20, at the Belasco Theater, 115 W. 44th St. (239-6280)

"PETER PAN" Cathy Rigby, the daring gymnast and highest-flying of all the Peter
Pans, returns in the musical evergreen. Nov. 26-Jan. 5, Minskoff Theater.

December

"MARVIN'S ROOM" A very funny, very moving comedy about a woman with leukemia,
her estranged sister, her bedridden father and 50 or so other problems. Scott
McPherson's play will be directed by David Petrarca. Previews Nov. 15. Opens
Dec. 8, Playwrights Horizons.

"A LIFE IN THE THEATER" F. Murray Abraham stars in a revival of David Mamet's
love letter to the profession. Begins Dec. 15, Jewish Repertory Theater, 344 E.
14th St. (505-2667)

"A CHRISTMAS CAROL" The British actor Patrick Stewart ("Star Trek The Next
Generation") takes all the roles in this one-man version of the Charles Dickens
holiday classic. That means, he's Tiny Tim and Ebenezer Scrooge. Dec. 17-29,
Eugene O'Neill, 230 W. 49th St. (398-8383)

"BELLA, BELLE OF BYELORUSSIA" Jeffrey Essmann and Michael John LaChiusa, the
zany writer and zany composer, address life today, as it unfolds in the glorious
Soviet Union. Begins Dec. 31. WPA Theater.

"THE HOLY TERROR" The British playwright Simon Gray ("The Common Pursuit,"
"Quartermaine's Terms") charts the downfall of a maverick London publisher whose
life has not exactly been exemplary. Daniel Gerroll plays the rotter.

"THE O'CASEY PROJECT" The director Harold Prince joins forces with the Irish
Repertory Theater to bring Sean O'Casey's autobiographies to the stage. Eugene
Lee, who designed Mr. Prince's environmental production of "Candide," is charged
with evoking turn-of-the-century Dublin and London. Begins late Dec., Criterion
Center, Bway at 45th St. (255-0270)

January

"THE VISIT" Jane Alexander plays the world's richest woman, who comes back to
the town of her birth seeking vengeance on the man who wronged her in her youth.
Ed Sherin directs Friedrich Durrenmatt's mordant drama. Jan. 1-Feb. 16,
Roundabout Theater Company, Criterion Center.

"BOOK OF JOB" Elizabeth Swados turns the biblical patriarch into a slapstick
clown for today. Jan. 5-Feb. 1, Under One Roof Theater Company at One Dream
Theater, 232 W. Bway. (219-1160)

"AN IMAGINARY LIFE" Peter Parnell's play focuses on a playwright who finds that
the way to deal with the difficulties of his life is to rewrite the critical
scenes. Jan. 7-Feb. 9, Stage II, Manhattan Theater Club.

"THREE SISTERS" Oh, to be in Moscow. Emily Mann directs Chekhov's classic. Jan.
7-26, McCarter Theater, Princeton, N.J. (609-683-8000)

"TWO SHAKESPEAREAN ACTORS" In this corner, the great 19th-century American actor
Edwin Forrest. In that corner, the great 19th-century English actor William
Macready. Their rivalry was fierce. Victor Garber and Brian Bedford will play
the leads in Richard Nelson's play. Previews Dec. 17. Opens Jan. 16, Cort
Theater, 138 W. 48th St. (Telecharge 239-6200)

"SEARCH AND DESTROY" Howard Korder's pitch-black comedy recounts one man's
journey across America, land of the violent and the drugged, in search of a
motion picture career. Jan. 31-April 26, Circle in the Square.

February

"THE END OF THE DAY" The hero of this comedy-drama by Jon Robin Baitz ("The
Substance of Fire") is an expatriate Englishman who wants to wriggle free of his
ex-wife's family and his Beverly Hills psychiatric practice. But nobody will let
him. Begins Feb. 7, Playwrights Horizons.

"MARRIAGE PLAY" A middle-aged couple, married for 25 years, may be breaking up
in Edward Albee's drama, which gets its American premiere in a joint production
with the Alley Theater of Houston, directed by the author. Feb. 11-March 1,
McCarter Theater, Princeton, N.J. (609-683-8000)

"PRIVATE LIVES" After a London engagement and an 11-city American road tour,
Joan Collins -- femme fatale, TV star, perfumist -- arrives on Broadway in a
revival of Noel Coward's comedy about a couple that can't live together and
can't live apart. Arvin Brown directs. Feb. 11-April 5, Broadhurst Theater.

"A SMALL FAMILY BUSINESS" When Jack McCracken takes over the family furniture
business, he vows it will be run with scrupulous honesty. By the end of Alan
Ayckbourn's 1987 comedy, the corruption is all-pervasive. Feb. 18-April 5,
Manhattan Theater Club.

"CRAZY FOR YOU" The book for George and Ira Gershwin's 1930 musical has been
rewritten by Ken Ludwig ("Lend Me a Tenor"), but the fabulous songs are still
the same, and a few new ones, just out of the Gershwin trunk, have been thrown
in for good measure. Previews Jan. 31. Opens Feb. 19, Shubert Theater, 225 W.
44th St. (Telecharge 239-6200)

"ABYSSINIA" Abyssinia Jackson, born in an Oklahoma cotton field and blessed with
the gift of healing, learns to rise above life's tragedies in the gospel music
by Ted Kociolek and James Racheff. Opens Feb. 23.

"DOG LOGIC" The caretaker of a pet cemetery (Christopher Walken) does battle
with the dark forces of real estate in Thomas Strelich's comedy. American Place
Theater.

"THE MOST HAPPY FELLA" In an intimate production mounted by the Goodspeed Opera
House, Frank Loesser's 1956 musical comes back to Broadway. Spiro Malas stars as
a prosperous but aging Italian farmer in California's Napa Valley, and Sophie
Hayden is the mail-order bride who expects to marry a much younger man. The
gorgeous score has been arranged for two pianos but sounds no less gorgeous for
that.

March

"COMMENCEMENT EXERCISES" With masterpieces scavenged from the great museums, Al
and Angel want to buy their way into the one remaining safe haven in a world
ravaged by civil war. Bob Falls directs Steve Tesich's latest play. March
6-April 11, Goodman Theater, Chicago. (312-443-3800)

"HAMLET" Stephen Lang tries his hand at the English-speaking theater's most
challenging role, in a production directed by Don Scardino. March 11-April 26,
Roundabout Theater Company at the Criterion Center.

" 'TIS PITY SHE'S A WHORE" Giovanni really loves Annabella, his sister, in John
Ford's lurid masterpiece, directed by JoAnne Akalaitis. Begins March 17, Public
Theater.

"CONVERSATIONS WITH MY FATHER" Herb Gardner's new play details the traumas and
triumphs of the Goldbergs, a Jewish immigrant family on the Lower East Side,
from the 1930's to the 1970's, and draws on the writer's own experiences. Judd
Hirsch stars. Previews March 3. Opens March 22, Royale Theater, 242 W. 45th St.
(Telecharge 239-6200)

"GUYS AND DOLLS" Can you still say "dolls" these days? You can, if you're
talking about this 1950 musical by Frank Loesser, Jo Swerling and Abe Burrows --
one of Broadway's classics. Jerry Zaks directs the revival.

"JAKE'S WOMEN" Jake is a writer. He's having trouble with the women in his life,
whom we get to see in two incarnations -- as Jake imagines them and as they
really are. Alan Alda is the star of Neil Simon's Pirandello esque comedy, which
has been rewritten since the abortive 1990 San Diego tryout. Gene Saks, as
usual, directs, at the Neil Simon Theater, 250 W. 52d St. (757-8646)

"MAN OF LA MANCHA" Raul Julia headlines what is billed as the 25th-anniversary
production of the Mitch Leigh/Joe Darion/Dale Wasserman musical about a man with
an impossible dream.

"A STREETCAR NAMED DESIRE" Alec Baldwin gets to wear the torn T-shirt and
Jessica Lange blanches in the revival of Tennessee Williams's 1947 masterpiece.
Gregory Mosher directs the production, his first since stepping down as artistic
director of Lincoln Center Theater. Barrymore Theater, 243 W. 47th St.
(Telecharge 239-6200, after Jan. '92)

April

"REDWOOD CURTAIN" A Vietnam vet (David Morse from TV's "St. Elsewhere") has
taken refuge in the redwood forest in California, where he is tracked down by an
Amerasian girl. She may -- or may not -- be his daughter. Lanford Wilson's
latest play is directed by his longtime collaborator Marshall W. Mason and
produced by the Circle Repertory Company. Begins April 2 on Broadway.

"TWO TRAINS RUNNING" August Wilson's latest play, directed by Lloyd Richards,
looks at the denizens of a Pittsburgh restaurant in 1969. The title comes from
the playwright's observation that "there are always and only two trains running.
There is life and there is death. Each of us rides them both." Previews April 7.
Opens April 13, Walter Kerr Theater, 219 W. 48th St. (Telecharge 239-6200)

"METRO" A runaway success in Warsaw, this Polish musical is described as a cross
between "A Chorus Line" and "Hair." It features a cast of 38 Polish actors
(performing in English) and, apparently, is all about getting into a show.
Previews March 31. Opens April 16, Minskoff Theater.

"CAMBODIA AGONISTES" Ernest Abuba's musical theater piece, set in New York's
Chinatown and Khmer Rouge-controlled Kampuchea, revolves around a Cambodian
garment worker who is psychosomatically blind. April 21-May 16. Pan Asian
Repertory. Playhouse 46 at St. Clement's, 423 W. 46th St. (245-2660)

"FIVE GUYS NAMED MOE" Cameron Mackintosh, producer extraordinaire of stage
epics, changes his stripes with this intimate revue honoring the American
jazzman and alto-saxophonist Louis Jordan. Where else can you hear "There Ain't
Nobody Here but Us Chickens" and join the cast in a conga line?

"JELLY'S LAST JAM" Jelly Roll Morton -- the man, the music, the piano. The
director George C. Wolfe (book), Susan Birkenhead (lyrics) and Luther Henderson
(composer) pay tribute in a new musical.

May

"FLAUBERT'S LATEST" The writer in Peter Parnell's comedy wants to complete a
work that Gustav Flaubert never got around to finishing. On the other hand, he's
in love. Begins May 1, Playwrights Horizons.

June

"ANNA KARENINA" Tolstoy's novel as an intimate, romantic musical? That's what
they're claiming. The book and lyrics are by Peter Kellogg and the music is by
Dan Levine. June 5-Aug. 30. Circle in the Square.

LOAD-DATE: September 8, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: September 10, 1991, Tuesday

CORRECTION:

A listing for the October play "Beau Jest" at the Lamb's Theater in the
annotated calendar of the Arts and Leisure section on Sunday misstated the
telephone number for ticket information, because of misinformation supplied by
the play's producer. The correct number is (212) 496-5710.


GRAPHIC: Photos; Linda Purl, top, and Stephanie Zimbalist in "The Baby Dance,"
opening in October (T. Charles Erickson/"The Baby Dance"); Paul J. Medford, top,
and Omar Okai in "Five Guys Named Moe," Broadway-bound in April (Michael LePoer
Trench/"Five Guys Named Moe")

TYPE: List; Schedule

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              181 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 9, 1991, Monday, Late Edition - Final

India's Communists Reel in Soviet Upheaval

BYLINE: By EDWARD A. GARGAN,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 7; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 682 words

DATELINE: NEW DELHI, Sept. 7


With his seemingly endless shelves of primly aligned works of Lenin, Harkishan
Singh Surjeet brandishes with considerable pride, if evident historical
dissonance, his membership in India's largest Communist Party.

"When I came out of prison in 1934 I joined the Communist Party," he said,
sitting beneath portraits of Ho Chi Minh, the founder of Vietnam's Communist
Party. "At that time there were only a small number of people. Now there are
many more of us, as you can see. We are committed to an ideal."

The last few weeks of history in the Soviet Union, the birthplace of the
Communist ideal in Leninist theory and practice, have thundered down upon India,
a country long wedded to notions of socialist development and eternal friendship
with the Soviet people. The events to the north have especially shattered
India's Communists, Mr. Surjeet's party in particular.

India has since independence in 1947 relied on the comfort and assistance of the
Soviet Union, whether polemically in international forums or more substantively
through oil supplies, easy terms for weapons or as an outlet for manufactured
goods.

That relationship perhaps prompted Prime Minister P.V. Narasimha Rao's caution
in the moments after first reports of the Soviet coup. The overthrow of Mikhail
S. Gorbachev, he said, should serve as a warning to nations that try to reform
too fast. And while declaring that it was watching developments, the Indian
Government abstained from the swelling international condemnation of the putsch.

But it was in the office hallways of the Communist Party India (Marxist), as Mr.
Surjeet's party is formally known, that the Soviet President's ouster was
greeted with undisguised glee. As local reporters trooped to his house on
winding Murti Lane, Mr. Surjeet, who is considered the party's senior leader and
sits on its Politburo, told them that the coup was a "positive development,"
that Mr. Gorbachev had derailed the socialist system and that the coup leaders
faced "a difficult situation, but I hope that they will be able to overcome it."

That 72 hours later Mr. Gorbachev was back in the Kremlin and Boris N. Yeltsin,
a bete noire for Indian Communists, was flexing even bigger muscles than the
Soviet President, did nothing to chasten Mr. Surjeet and his fellow believers.

"Yeltsin has come out for capitalism," said the 75-year-old Mr. Surjeet, who
cuts a striking figure with his bushy white beard, loose white shirt, white
pajama pants and white turban. "In the last week, he hasn't said a word about
socialism or a word about imperialism."

Not all of India's Communists embraced the coup with such enthusiasm. A rival of
Mr. Surjeet's party, called simply the Communist Party of India, warily
described the coup as an inevitable reaction to the threat of regional
fragmentation, quickly backtracking when it failed, lauding the "triumph of
democracy." But it is Mr. Surjeet's party that attracts the most adherents to
Marxism-Leninism; it controls the state government of West Bengal, a hotbed of
passionate leftism.

"We feel that this is going to lead to a unipolar world, where the United States
is going to lead in the world," Mr. Surjeet said of the Soviet dislocations.
"For all third-world countries a unipolar world doesn't augur well. You could
count on someone to resist pressure from the United States. Now you can't."

As the party's most senior leader, Mr. Surjeet has been the guiding hand in
shaping its public response to events in Moscow. While the failure of the coup
brought disappointment, it has been the banning of the Communist Party itself,
the evisceration of the soul from Communism's heartland, that has most disturbed
Mr. Surjeet and his colleagues.

But no matter what happens in Moscow, Mr. Surjeet said, both Communism and its
expression in India will triumph. "It is not the science of socialism that has
failed," he said "it is the management of socialism that has failed. Certainly a
setback is there. But if they could beat America in defense and space, why not
in industry? The reason is management."

LOAD-DATE: September 9, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              182 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 10, 1991, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Books of The Times;
Black Dreams of 1950's Turn to Rage

BYLINE: By MICHIKO KAKUTANI

SECTION: Section C; Page 14; Column 1; Cultural Desk; Word and Image Page

LENGTH: 858 words



All-Bright Court
By Connie Porter
224 pages. Houghton Mifflin Company
$19.95

All-Bright Court, as Connie Porter tells us at the beginning of her first novel,
is a housing development -- a series of tenements, really -- built in the shadow
of the steel mills outside Buffalo. Originally built for the Polish, Italian,
German and Russian immigrants who came to start a new life in America, it has
been handed down to the black workers who now man the steel furnaces. It is
1955, and many of the men and their families have migrated here from the South,
seduced by the prospect of homes with gas stoves and indoor plumbing and the
promise of jobs and opportunities, promises that will founder in poverty and
rage by the end of the 60's.

Writing in precise, crystalline prose, Ms. Porter conjures up some two decades
of life in this fictional community with unsparing candor and compassion. Though
her prose is often lyrical, even poetic, she does not shirk from showing the
reader the harsh reality of her characters' daily lives. We learn that iron
waste from the steel plants often falls from the sky like silver rain, that the
men in the plants routinely suffer from burns, infected lungs and broken limbs,
and that they are paid according to how much heat they can stand -- the closer
to the open hearth they work the more they are paid.

Attitudes toward whites are complicated: a mixture of suspicion, resentment and
in some cases a desire not to offend. This is the early 60's, and prejudice is
still pervasive: a black child is denied a paper route that would take him into
a white neighborhood, a black man is handed a mayonnaise jar to drink from
rather than a glass he might share with whites. As for relationships with the
neighbors, a single rule obtains: mind your own business. People are wary of
others who "put their business in the street, told their business in front of
other people," and they struggle to maintain a careful detachment.

"If a woman had a husband who beat her to water every night," writes Ms. Porter,
"and her neighbors heard her screaming, if they heard her running down the
walls, it was nobody's business. The real test would come the next day. If the
woman was seen hanging out clothes, anyone who had heard her cries would quickly
look away, would pretend not to see her. These people lived inches away from one
another, and much of what was done did not have to be told. They did not look
away because they did not want to know. They looked away because they did know,
and looking away was the only way to grant the woman dignity, to go on
believing, to let her go on believing she was a woman."

Though Ms. Porter demonstrates a sociologist's quick observant eye for people's
daily routines -- how they talk, dress, eat, argue -- there is nothing schematic
or didactic about her writing. Indeed, the emotional power of "All-Bright Court"
resides in her finely rendered characters, people who come alive for the reader
as individuals one has known first hand.

The focus of the novel is the Taylor family. Samuel Taylor and his wife, Mary
Kate, have just arrived in New York State fresh from Tupelo, Miss. To them,
All-Bright Court is "the dream they dreamed down South," an alternative to the
dead-end world of sharecropping that their families and friends seemed doomed
not to escape. Sam gets a job at the local steel plant; Mary Kate soon has her
hands full with five children.

Over the next decade, things in All-Bright Court deteriorate: layoffs and
strikes threaten the family's precarious finances, and in the wake of the
assassination of the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. and local riots, crime and
despair rapidly increase. The Taylors' oldest child, Mikey, however, will get a
chance to leave this world behind: when he scores high on an achievement test,
he is offered a scholarship to an elite private school. It is his point of view,
the point of view of an exile, that informs the book and that frames the stories
of the other residents of All-Bright Court.

Across the way are Moses and Venita, a childless couple whose marriage has
hollowed out with their emptiness and longing; Venita will later adopt a little
girl who has been abandoned by her flighty, impossible mother. A Polish family
arrives and departs after stirring up the neighborhood with noisy, public
displays of emotion, and a Puerto Rican family also comes and goes. A young man
named Henry leaves for Vietnam, only to return disfigured by napalm burns, while
his best friend, Skip, tries to start a haircutting business catering to black
men and women. Another neighborhood boy will turn to robbery and assault as a
means of venting his cynicism and anger.

In depicting these overlapping lives, Ms. Porter emerges as a mesmerizing writer
able to convey the painful frustrations and disappointments of her characters
while at the same time endowing their daily struggles with dignity and meaning.
She has mapped a rich fictional world in "All-Bright Court," and she has also
distinguished herself as a writer blessed with a distinctive and magical voice.
This is a powerful and affecting debut.

LOAD-DATE: September 10, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              183 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 11, 1991, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

THE MEDIA BUSINESS;
Saatchi Effort On Refugees

SECTION: Section D; Page 16; Column 3; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 188 words


A unit of Saatchi & Saatchi P.L.C., London, has accepted an assignment to
persuade Vietnamese "boat people" in Southeast Asian refugee camps to return to
the country that they fled.

The European Commission, the executive body for the 12- nation European
Community, plans to pay about $600,000 to Saatchi & Saatchi Strategy, the
advertising and communications company's government consultancy division.

The unit will produce materials about new economic benefits and employment
opportunities in Vietnam, said Endymion Wilkinson, the head of the commission's
Southeast Asian division.

Leaflets and posters from the effort will begin to be distributed in the refugee
camps within weeks, he added.

About 130,000 Vietnamese refugees are in camps in Hong Kong and six nations in
Southeast Asia. While many wish to emigrate to Europe or the United States, the
majority will not be allowed to do so, Mr. Wilkinson said.

The Saatchi campaign is part of a $12 million program, sponsored by the
commission, most of which is being spent in three provinces in Vietnam.

Saatchi executives could not be reached for comment.

LOAD-DATE: September 11, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              184 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 11, 1991, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Books of The Times;
Expatriates in Romantic Paris, Engage and at Risk

BYLINE: By HERBERT MITGANG

SECTION: Section C; Page 17; Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1046 words



The Translator
By Ward Just
313 pages. A Richard Todd Book/Houghton Mifflin. $21.95.

Paris is a character in Ward Just's enthralling new novel, "The Translator," the
romantic Paris of the mind that serves as a place of liberation for two
expatriates, one from Vietnam-torn America, the other from guilt-ridden Germany.
Read purely as a story of a couple who find each other and then are tripped by
circumstances or as an allegory for the state of the divided world, Mr. Just's
11th novel again proves his growing mastery of fiction with something urgent to
say. All his characters, as the warring French existentialists used to say, are
engage, against their countries, their families or themselves.

It's rather daring of Mr. Just -- whose previous novels and short stories are
rooted in his background as a journalist in Washington and Vietnam -- to make
his protagonist a German this time out. Sydney, the translator of the title,
learned American English while working for the Occupation forces. His father had
been a staff officer, though not a Nazi, who was executed in the final months of
the war; his widowed mother lives in East Germany. Sydney finds freedom from the
past in Paris, where he works as a translator for a foundation that is secretly
financed by the Central Intelligence Agency during the height of the cold war.

In Paris he marries Angela, an attractive American with a wealthy but distant
father. She is trying to recover after her brother has been killed in Vietnam.
The expatriate couple are happy together, but the tragic part of their existence
centers on caring for their brain-damaged, hospitalized child. Living modestly,
they dream of buying a litle farmhouse in Normandy, where they can provide
greater intimacy for their growing son.

"The Translator" begins quietly enough, with its main characters enjoying the
pleasures of Paris. But admirers of Mr. Just's work sense that he is not going
to let us off this lightly, that the good life may be only a prelude to what
will finally become a larger story of desperation.

As if for the first time, the reader strolls the boulevards and side streets of
the Left Bank, stops for lunch at a favorite bistro and savors the sights and
the city's imagined intellectual excitement, which is mainly provided by other
seeking Americans. It's that postwar time when a new wave of expatriates are
walking in the footsteps of Hemingway and Fitzgerald and discovering their own
moveable feast:

"That's James Jones, the very famous American writer," a social-climbing friend
says to Sydney, gesturing at a burly man in a sidewalk cafe. "He's a denizen.
Jimmy and Irwin Shaw have a killer poker game that I intend to join one of these
days." Rising to leave, Sydney's friend walks by Jones's table, touches his arm
and says, "Hi, Jim," and the famous writer nods and replies, "How's it going,"
then returns to his newspaper.

The creative nuances of translation are an important element in the novel. After
Sydney leaves the intelligence foundation and becomes a freelance translator, he
works closely with a kindly German author, who could pass for the late Heinrich
Boll. Mr. Just writes knowingly about both the craft and the symbolism of one
person's interpreting another's work, or perhaps life. The foreshadowing title
of the book he is translating is "Die Katastrophe," or in English, "The
Catastrophe."

Inhabiting a world of alternative words, Sydney ponders the precise meaning of
catastrophe. One of its English meanings is "an event that subverted the natural
order of things," he says, but it also implies "revolution, in the sense of
cataclysm; and perhaps other senses as well." The translator finds that it is
almost as loaded a word in German as it is in English and French, but the tone
of the narrative calls for the most formal English, "an English without slang or
idiom." The reader is free to wonder about Mr. Just's use of translation as a
metaphor: words, like people, cannot cross old borders without antagonism.

In "The Translator," Mr. Just has a lot to say about the nature of the German
personality; as an American author living in France, twice invaded in this
century, he seems bound on a voyage of discovery into Germany's heart of
darkness. His man Sydney thinks aloud:

"The Germans were a unique people who were often misunderstood. Too often it was
said that they were a complicated people with a difficult past, but that was
true. They lived in an operatic world of myth and legend, of giants and dwarfs
and sorcerers, none more so than those who had been left behind. It was the
nature of Germans to be divided against themselves; and those who are divided
against are divided within, and probably that was true of him, too."

The novel has a genuine villain, a loudmouthed Graham Greene-like "Quiet
American," smooth and friendly on the surface but ugly below: a fixer, a
charming hypocrite, an amateur pimp, a self-confident seducer of vulnerable
fellow-Americans, and an operative for the C.I.A. "Welcome to Paris," he says,
when Sydney first encounters him. "I'm Lem Poole, but my friends call me Junko."
Junko dispenses cliches and money, courtesy of "Uncle Sugar."

It is the unsavory Junko who propels the novel toward its thriller conclusion.
Sydney is induced to undertake an assignment in East Germany, which, although
the wall has come down, still has its secret police. It's a way to make some
fast money on an arms deal -- nothing quite illegal, only borderline -- enough
to help acquire that place in Normandy. At the same time, Angela goes back to
Maine to persuade her father to give her the rightful share of her mother's
valuables. Sydney goes east, Angela goes west, and the story, well, read the
ending for yourself.

Ward Just stretches his talents in "The Translator." Here and there, dated
events are reported a little too fully for fiction -- the old reporter cannot
let go -- and there is one sentence that tries much too hard: "In the grammar of
their life the honeymoon was an embarrassing solecism, a misplaced modifier or
dangling participle remembered forever with a raised eyebrow and a comical
shudder." Otherwise, the writing is clean and thoughtful, the work of a superior
American novelist.

LOAD-DATE: September 11, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Ward Just (Jerry Bauer/Houghton Mifflin)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              185 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 12, 1991, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Hollywood Called Hypocritical by Actor Who Died of AIDS

BYLINE: By BERNARD WEINRAUB,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section C; Page 15; Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1134 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES, Sept. 11


The publication of an anguished indictment of the film industry as indifferent
and hypocritical toward people with AIDS, written by the actor Brad Davis, who
died of the disease on Sunday, has touched a raw nerve in a community that
prides itself on openness and tolerance.

Mr. Davis, who starred in "Midnight Express" and other films and plays, wrote
his thoughts about Hollywood and AIDS as he drafted a proposal for a book to
discuss the six years in which he carried the HIV virus. Mr. Davis kept his
illness a secret from everyone but his wife, Susan Bluestein, a casting
director, and a handful of friends, largely out of fear that it would shatter
his career if Hollywood knew about it.

Portions of Mr. Davis's reflections were published in The Los Angeles Times
today, after his wife got in touch with the paper. Ms. Bluestein, who could not
be reached for comment today, was quoted in the paper as saying that Mr. Davis
wanted to have his story told. What emerges is a bleak portrait of an actor
desperate to hide his condition and "remain anonymous at all costs."

'One More Pariah in Hollywood'

"I make my money in an industry that professes to care very much about the fight
against AIDS -- that gives umpteen benefits and charity affairs with proceeds
going to research and care," wrote Mr. Davis, who began work on his proposal in
the last months of his illness. "But in actual fact, if an actor is even rumored
to have HIV he gets no support on an individual basis. He does not work."

Mr. Davis expressed the fear that "somehow the gossip mill would get hold of me
and that would be that: I'd be one more pariah in Hollywood who would never get
a job."

Ironically, Mr. Davis's reflections have been made public at a moment when the
movie industry is, essentially, celebrating its own contribution and commitment
to AIDS. On Sunday, virtually the entire movie establishment is planning to show
up at the Universal Amphitheater in Universal City to honor, among others, Bette
Midler, the actress, and Sidney Sheinberg, president of MCA, for their
involvement with the AIDS issue. Recently, the leading players in the industry
appeared at a highly publicized fund-raising event given by a show business
lawyer, Alan Hergott, for the National Gay and Lesbian Task Force. At the time,
Mr. Hergott called it a "breakthrough."

But Mr. Davis's comments are, some Hollywood film makers say, a reflection of
the industry's ambivalence and confusion, even fear, about dealing with AIDS
and, for that matter, with homosexuality.

'It's Too Close'

"AIDS is a pariah disease, it's too close to many people in this town, it's too
frightening," said Bruce Davison, the award-winning actor who appeared in
"Longtime Companion," one of the few films about AIDS. "It's easier, for
example, to make films about Vietnam when it's not the 60's or 70's. Someday,
when they find a cure for the disease they'll make a movie about AIDS. It'll
have a certain nobility then."

Mr. Davison said Mr. Davis's concerns about working were valid. "It's the same
as Rock Hudson," he said. "I remember going to the doctor's office to get a
physical and there was Rock Hudson. He was trembling. He was frightened. Now I
know that he was terrified that he'd be found out and he wouldn't have a job."

Mr. Davis, in his notes, indicated uncertainty about how he contracted AIDS. "I
was a total drug addict -- an alcoholic and I.V. drug user -- a user of just
about any kind of drug I could get," he wrote. "And I was sexually very
promiscuous. I've never known any addicts who weren't."

Certainly, the bleak subject of AIDS is considered financially risky, especially
in the aftermath of the summer flop "Dying Young," with Julia Roberts, which
dealt with a young man dying of cancer. (On the other hand, "Love Story" and
"Terms of Endearment," in which major characters died young, proved to be
financially successful.)

Economic Distress Cited

"Look, the economy is depressed, people are struggling financially, it's a hard
time in the industry," said Craig Zadan, producer of "Footloose" and other
films, who is planning to co-produce with Oliver Stone a film about Harvey Milk,
the gay San Francisco politician who was assassinated. "People want to escape.
It's not a good time to come in with a film about death."

Mike Medavoy, chairman of Tri-Star Pictures, said: "There's always a pause when
you make a film about someone dying. You're afraid to be maudlin or false. It's
just a very difficult subject to do well. Even films like 'Love Story' and
'Terms of Endearment' had a very hard time getting made."

But others say dealing with AIDS is especially delicate and complex in an
industry where there are numerous gay actors and directors who are not only
silent about their sexuality but who also try to hide it. "Hollywood is scared
to put money on AIDS films because it's a stigmatized disease and a lot of
people here are in the closet who just don't want to be associated with the
subject," said Zelda Rubinstein, the actress from "Poltergeist" who was an an
early supporter of AIDS education and support. "It frightens a lot of people
here."

Several people in the industry agreed that Mr. Davis was right to worry about
working. "There's so much competition, there're fewer and fewer projects, if you
have any excuse to hire one person over another, you do it," said Mr. Zadan. "I
don't think it's an issue of prejudice. All of these decisions are subjective.
The slightest thing can influence you."

TV More Flexible

Mr. Medavoy observed: "An actor's health is not a a question that I would
consider, unless he had a serious heart condition and we had insurance problems.
If a director wants to hire an actor, and he's a good actor, I'm not going to
ask what his health is."

Even film executives acknowledge that television has been somewhat more flexible
and open about AIDS and gay people than the film industry. Several prime-time
series, including "L.A. Law," "Doctor, Doctor" and "Thirtysomething," have
included gay characters, and there have been some moving television dramas about
AIDS, including "An Early Frost" and "Our Sons." "Longtime Companion" will be
shown on PBS on Sept. 29.

A leader in Hollywood efforts to combat AIDS, Helen Gorman Kushnick, who is Jay
Leno's manager and who lost a 3-year-old son to AIDS because of a tainted blood
transfusion, said: "If everybody takes the position that Brad Davis did -- and
believe me, I'm not judging him -- then people with AIDS will remain a minority.
If people choose to speak out, they become the majority. People have got to
speak out. I've had breast cancer. And I've had nothing but support. I didn't
keep it a secret. And NBC just hired me to be executive producer of the
'Tonight' show next year."

NAME: Brad Davis

LOAD-DATE: September 12, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Brad Davis (Warner Brothers)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              186 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 13, 1991, Friday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1113 words



INTERNATIONAL A3-13

Israel's request for loan guarantees covering $10 billion should not be acted
upon by Congress yet, President Bush said, threatening to use his veto to block
any early Congressional action on the matter. Page A1

The Middle East hostage drama continued to show signs of progress, but Israeli
negotiators cautioned that, despite encouraging events, the process would take
time. A8

Hostage issue: test for Iran's President A8

President Gorbachev sent messages to the European Community and the head of the
Group of Seven industrial democracies seeking food aid on a scale dwarfing
previous Western committments. A1

Soviets promise detailed aid request A12

Tokyo is cautious on Soviet dispute A12

North Korea tries to block any effects of failed Soviet coup A13

Many Soviet textbooks are outdated, reflecting the Communist Party's view of
world history and other subjects. But some teachers are presenting more
elaborate views, and students seem comfortable thinking and saying whatever they
wish. A12

U.S. policy toward Cuba may not change that much, despite Moscow's plans to
withdraw its troops. The Administration says it does not want to make Cuba a
sour point in Soviet- American relations or risk antagonizing its Latin American
allies. A13

Castro's setback means a red letter day in Miami A13

President Chamorro of Nicaragua has vetoed legislation intended to roll back the
property giveaway arranged by the Sandinista Front before it handed over power
last year. The move puts her at loggerheads with the coaltion that brought her
to power. A3

The fighting in Croatia took a dramatic turn, after army-backed Serb guerrillas
effectively cut off access between Zagreb, the republic's capital, and its
Dalmatian coast, once a popular tourist destination. A6

The third party in Britain takes heart from its gains A5

Brixham Journal: For fisherman, a cruel economy A4

One Aquino's painful stand on bases A3

Vietnamese leaders to visit China A11

NATIONAL A14-21

Clarence Thomas faced a tough day of questioning from exasperated Democrats on
the Senate Judiciary Committee, with the committee chairman, Joseph Biden,
calling one of the responses of the Supreme Court nominee "the most unartful
dodge I have heard." A1

News analysis: Clarence Thomas has emphasized during his confirmation hearing
that in becoming a judge he "shed the baggage of ideology." In a way, the
members of the Senate Judiciary Committe have been trying to determine who is
the man that remains after all the shedding. A19

Bork as analyst: past loser views today's game A19

A ban on abortion counseling in federally financed clinics would be overturned
and Medicaid would be allowed to pay for abortions for poor victims of rape and
incest under a bill passed by the Senate. A1

The travels of House members included nearly 4,000 trips in 1989 and 1990 that
were paid for by corporations or trade groups, according to a report by a
consumer advocacy group. A16

Delay on nominee for C.I.A. is rejected A17

Ex-C.I.A. official denies 10 charges A17

12-year term for assassin of Chilean envoy A16

The personal computer industry is turning its focus away from promoting new
machines to selling improved versions of existing hardware and software because
most businesses likely to use computers already have them. D1

The number of non-white students in the nation's classrooms has increased so
dramatically that by 1995 one-third of American public school students will be
from minority groups. A14

Crash inquiry focuses on an aircraft problem A16

Shuttle on mission to study pollution's effects on atmosphere A20

State takes over fiscally troubled Boston suburb A21

Swaggart found liable of defaming minister A14

Philadelphia Journal: Public art tackles graffiti A14

REGIONAL B1-5

Voters nominated candidates in the New York City primaries whose victories in
November will expand black and Hispanic representation on the newly-invigorated
City Council from 25 to 40 percent of the members. A1

Races hot, voters cool, amid sense of change B4

New voices to mold power balance in New York City Council B5

Limits on hairspray emissions and those of other consumer products that
contribute to smog are being proposed by New York State. The limits would
probably force manufacturers to raise the price of the products. A1

Obtaining a building permit in New York City is such a complicated process that
a whole industry has been spawned to deal with it: These people, who number from
300 to 400, are known as expediters. A1

A 26-year-old police officer was fatally wounded in a Bronx apartment courtyard
when a suspect he was chasing suddenly whirled, opened fire with a high-powered
pistol and cut him down. B1

Fireman critically hurt in blaze; squatter held on arson charge B3

A celebrated murder case was revived when a woman accused her former husband of
arranging the unsolved 1983 killing of a millionaire consultant. The case had
stalled amid hints of international arms and drug deals. B1

Stanley M. Friedman, once one of New York City's most powerful politicians,
moved closer to freedom when a state appeals court ruled that he did not have to
serve a separate state sentence for his 1988 bribery conviction. B1

News analysis: The startling vote by the Board of Education to let students
receive condoms without any say by their parents highlights how important the
issue had become for Mayor Dinkins as he tries to hold his fragmenting power
base together. B1

Aide to Cuomo warns of need to control press B3

Young Jews and blacks meet in Crown Heights B3

BUSINESS DIGEST D1

Weekend

A book fair that features books, too C1

Highs and lows of Great Adventure C1

Theater: On Stage, and Off C2

Film: At the Movies C6

"Sex, Drugs, Rock & Roll" C1

Music: Kurt Masur bows as Philharmonic music director C3

Dance: Critic's Choice C3

Art: In review C5

The faces of death C18

Drawings inspired by James Joyce C22

Restaurants C14

Word and Image: On Freud and anti-Semitism C23

Law Page A23

For Noriega jury: many are called, none are chosen

Obituaries D20

Efraim Racker, discovered traits in cancer cells

Sports B6-11

Baseball: Red Sox step all over Yankees B7

Columns: Rhoden on Lawrence Taylor B7

Lipsyte on Tyson B11

Football: Don't panic, but Giants have problems B7

Hockey: Rangers lose Mallette B7

Editorials/Letters/Op-Ed

Editorials A24

Cuba III

The hostage glacier moves

What's Grandparents' Day?

School bells ring, nervously

LOAD-DATE: September 13, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              187 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 13, 1991, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Hanoi Leaders to Visit China as Ties Revive

BYLINE: By NICHOLAS D. KRISTOF,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 11; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 416 words

DATELINE: BEIJING, Sept. 12


China and Vietnam announced today that Vietnamese leaders would visit China this
year, in a meeting that is expected to lead to a normalization of relations
between the two neighbors.

While they have a territorial dispute and have been at odds since a brief border
war in 1979, the two countries have been drawn together lately by the collapse
of Communism elsewhere around the world. Relations between Hanoi and Beijing
have been improving rapidly, and the warming is likely to improve the prospects
for a peaceful settlement of the Cambodian war.

The joint statement issued today, during a visit by the Vietnamese Foreign
Minister, Nguyen Manh Cam, did not specify which leaders would visit China. But
Vietnamese officials have suggested that the delegation will be led by Du Muoi,
the Communist Party leader, and will mark the full normalization of relations.

While the two countries never cut diplomatic ties, relations have been frosty
for more than a dozen years. Air and rail links between China and Vietnam are
suspended, and trade is partly restricted by the Chinese side, although
smuggling is rampant and Chinese consumer goods are found throughout the
Vietnamese markets.

In earlier years, China gave considerable assistance to the Communist Government
in North Vietnam, and nearly 1,100 Chinese died in the Vietnam War, according to
a recently published Chinese book.

Vietnam also offered assistance to China in one crucial matter: the embalmers
who had prepared Ho Chi Minh's body for exhibit flew to Beijing in 1976 and took
charge of the effort to preserve Mao Zedong's body, after an earlier Chinese
effort produced unsightly results.

But relations worsened because they supported different factions in Cambodia.
Vietnam ousted the Chinese-backed Khmer Rouge forces, and in 1979 China invaded
Vietnam border areas as a punishment.

"Both sides agreed that a relationship of good-neighborliness and friendship
should be restored between China and Vietnam," the statement said.

It continued, "Both sides expressed their readiness to take practical steps to
restore the exchanges and cooperation between the two countries in the economic,
trade, scientific, technological, transportation, cultural and other fields with
a view to gradually normalizing Chinese-Vietnamese relations."

There was no public mention of the territorial dispute of the Spratly Islands in
the South China Sea. Vietnam and China clashed in 1988 over their rival claims
to the islands.

LOAD-DATE: November 5, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              188 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 13, 1991, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Sketches of the 5 Astronauts Aboard the Shuttle Discovery

SECTION: Section A; Page 20; Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 578 words



John O. Creighton: Mission Commander

Captain Creighton, a 48-year-old Navy pilot, made his first trip into space six
years ago as the pilot of the shuttle Discovery.

Before becoming an astronaut in 1979, Captain Creighton did two tours of duty in
Vietnam aboard the aircraft carrier Ranger. He later attended the Naval Test
Pilot School and did two tours of duty aboard the carrier Enterprise.

He received a bachelor of science degree from the United States Naval Academy
and a master of science in administration of science and technology from George
Washington University in Washington, D.C. He is married to the former Terry
Sanford and is from Seattle.

Kenneth S. Reightler Jr.: Pilot<HE>

Commander Reightler, a Navy pilot, is making his first trip into space. NASA
chose him as an astronaut in 1987. Since then, he has served in numerous
positions, including monitoring the weather for shuttle launches and landings.

After graduating from the Naval Academy in 1973, he served as a pilot at bases
in the United States, Sicily and Iceland. He later attended the Naval Test Pilot
School and served as a test pilot and instructor.

Commander Reightler, 40, earned a bachelor of science degree in aerospace
engineering from the Naval Academy and master of science degrees in aeronautical
engineering from the Naval Postgraduate School and in systems management from
the University of Southern California. He and his wife, Maureen, have two
daughters. He is from Virginia Beach.

Charles D. Gemar: Mission Specialist<HE>

This will be the second shuttle mission for Major Gemar. He has logged 117 hours
in space.

Major Gemar, who is nicknamed Sam, enlisted in the Army in 1973. He received a
bachelor of science in engineering from the United States Military Academy and
received his infantry officer basic training at Fort Benning, Ga. After being
selected as an astronaut in 1985, he tested computer programs for the shuttle.
He and his wife, Charlene, have one son. He is 36 and is from Scotland, S.D..

James F. Buchli: Mission Specialist<HE>

Colonel Buchli, a veteran of three shuttle flights, has logged 362 hours in
space.

Before becoming an astronaut in 1979, he served as a platoon and company
commander in Vietnam. He did his Naval flight training in 1969 and served as a
pilot in various fighter attack squadrons in Hawaii, Japan and Thailand.

Colonel Buchli, 46, graduated with a bachelor of science in aeronautical
engineering from the Naval Academy and a master of science in aeronautical
engineering systems from the University of West Florida. He and his wife, Jean,
have one son and one daughter. He was born in New Rockford, N.D., and is now
from Fargo, N.D., where his parents live.

Mark N. Brown: Mission Specialist<HE>

Colonel Brown, an Air Force pilot, will be making his second space flight.

After receiving his pilot wings in 1974, he was assigned to the 87th fighter
interceptor squadron at Sawyer Air Force base in Michigan. He was employed at
the Johnson Space Center as an engineer before he qualified to become an
astronaut in 1985.

Colonel Brown, 40, completed his bachelor of science in aeronautical and
astronautical engineering at Purdue University in West Lafayette, Ind., and his
master of science in astronautical engineering at the Air Force Institute of
Technology. He and his wife, Lynne, have two daughters. He considers Valparaiso,
Ind., his hometown.


NAME: John O. Creighton; Kenneth S. Reightler Jr.; Charles D. Gemar; James F.
Buchli; Mark N. Brown

LOAD-DATE: November 5, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              189 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 13, 1991, Friday, Late Edition - Final

On Stage, and Off

BYLINE: By Alex Witchel

SECTION: Section C; Page 2; Column 2; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1080 words



Strings Strike Back

If you've recently walked past "Grand Hotel: The Musical" at the Martin Beck
Theater, you were probably urged to think pink, which is making the show's
producers see red. Members of Local 802, the musicians' union, have been handing
out pink fliers entitled, "Grand Hotel: The Ripoff." They are angry about the
producers' decision last week to lay off the show's entire string section, a
total of eight musicians, and replace them with a synthesizer. The move is
saving the Tommy Tune show a much-needed $10,000 a week in expenses. But the
musicians call the decision a "ripoff." John Glasel, the president of Local 802,
says: "What they're doing is consumer fraud. They have debased a show that won
Tony Awards and are charging $60 a ticket for it. The public has a right to know
that they're getting an el cheapo product."

Some pretty serious charges, to be sure, and they are not being taken lightly,
either by the show's producers or by the League of American Theaters and
Producers, the organization of Broadway producers. They say that they've played
by the rules and that the musicians are sore losers.

The house minimum for the Beck -- the minimum number of musicians the union will
allow -- is 16, and the layoffs reduced the orchestra to 16 from 24, so the
contract has not been violated. But the musicians cite their union's bylaws,
which state musicians can't be replaced with a synthesizer. They took the
producers to a union arbitration and lost because the orchestra has not been cut
below the minimum. Undeterred, the musicians started the leaflet campaign. Mr.
Glasel says: "The producers could find other ways to save money. They could ask
for waivers of royalties from the creators." Does he know for a fact that they
haven't? Well, no, but he says, "I assume it hasn't been done."

Marvin Krauss, the general manager and a co-producer of "Grand Hotel," says its
creators are all in a royalty pool that automatically rations the profits
according to the weekly gross, insuring that no one's profits can hurt the
show's health. More to the point, he says, is that "the musicians' union is
trying to abrogate the contract because they didn't like the outcome of the
arbitration."

Mr. Glasel sent a letter about the leaflets to all Broadway musicians last week,
in which he says, "Patrons are generally sympathetic and some have asked for
their money back." Absolutely false, says Mr. Krauss. "No one has asked for
their money back," he says. "Not a single peso."

O.K. Disputes between producers and unions are nothing new. But what about the
larger question, of whether live musicians might ever be an endangered species
on Broadway? Probably not, say producers who maintain that the only reason this
issue has got so much attention is a matter of money; when synthesizers are used
in place of live musicians at other shows, union members must still be put on
the payroll, because the producer must honor that house miminum.

Maury Yeston, a co-composer of "Grand Hotel" who is also a Yale musicologist,
says: "While I'm enormously sympathetic to the musicians who are not working,
the fact is that the use of the synthesizer is part of the growing pains in the
continuing evolution of music. The quality of sampling, the process of
electronically duplicating the live sound, is so good now that it's hard to tell
which you're hearing. Of course, in a show like 'Fiddler on the Roof,' it would
be a perversion to reproduce the solo violin which is the color of the whole
show. But the road company of 'Grand Hotel' has been using the synthesizer
instead of the strings and we haven't heard any complaints."

'Mad Forest'



Caryl Churchill fans, take note: New York Theater Workshop will present the
American premiere of her play "Mad Forest" at the Perry Street Theater from Nov.
22 through Dec. 29. Miss Churchill wrote the piece in 1989 after accompanying
students from the Central School of Drama in Britain to Bucharest, Romania,
where they all stayed with drama students and their families to "develop the
piece," says the theater's artistic director, James C. Nicola. He says that the
play begins before the 1989 revolution and follows one family through it and its
aftermath, "the kind of poisonous atmosphere of finger-pointing internalized by
people and not so easily overthrown as a government." "Mad Forest" was produced
last fall at the Royal Court Theater in London, where it was directed by Mark
Wing-Davey, who will also direct it here with an American cast. Information:
(212) 302-NYTW.

The Bar of the Show

The Broadway opening that's generating the most excitement in the theater this
week isn't a play. It's a bar. Look for the Edwin Forrest Bar to open next door
to the Eugene O'Neill Theater where the new Cameron Mackintosh revue, "Five Guys
Named Moe," is to open on April 8. Because the show calls for action in the bar
area during intermission, Jujamcyn Theaters, which owns the O'Neill, has
arranged to lease the space next door in the Hotel Consulate that was most
recently occupied by the restaurant Columbus on Broadway. Paul Libin, the
producing director of Jujamcyn, says that both the O'Neill and the Consulate
were originally named the Edwin Forrest and joined by two entrances at the
theater's rear. He says that they will be reopened, and that after each show,
the Forrest, as the bar will be known, will be open to the public. If business
is good, Mr. Libin says, they might serve lunch and supper, too.

From Walls to the Boards

A rap writer and graffiti painter named Seth Zvi Rosenfeld? It's true, and he
grew up to be a playwright. The 29-year-old writer's new play, "Servy-N-Bernice
4Ever," starts performances at the Provincetown Playhouse on Oct. 5 under the
direction of Terry Kinney, a co-founder of the Steppenwolf Theater Company. D.
B. Sweeney co-stars with Lisa Gay Hamilton, Cynthia Nixon and Eric King in what
is described as an interracial love story with a twist.

Mr. Rosenfeld has written a screen adaptation of his first play, "The Writing on
the Wall," which was developed at Ensemble Studio Theater, for New Line Cinema.
Joey Vasquez ("Hangin' With the Homeboys") will direct.

Another new play with a race-related theme is "Distant Fires," by Kevin Heelan,
which will begin previews on Oct. 11 at the Atlantic Theater Company, directed
by Clark Gregg. The play is about two laborers, one black, one white, who are
competing for the same union post.


LOAD-DATE: November 5, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH



GRAPHIC: Peter Weller of "Robocop" fame is ready for a real challenge: he has
just joined the board of directors at Second Stage, and will star in its
production of David Rabe's "Sticks and Bones" next spring. Gary Sinise of the
Steppenwolf Theater Company will direct Mr. Rabe's 1972 satire about the
disintegration of an American family after their son returns from the war in
Vietnam. (Bill Treusch Associates)
Photo: "'Robocop' to Do Rabe"

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              190 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 13, 1991, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Review/Film;
Extracting Love From a Cruel Joke

BYLINE: By VINCENT CANBY

SECTION: Section C; Page 13; Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 648 words


As her first film since her astonishingly fine debut as the director and
co-writer of the independently produced (and independent-minded) "True Love,"
Nancy Savoca has made "Dogfight." It was not a great choice.

"Dogfight" is a wan love story about Birdlace (River Phoenix), a baby-faced
marine, and Rose (Lili Taylor), the sweet spunky girl he finds in San Francisco
the night before he ships out for -- are you ready? -- "a little country near
India, called Vietnam."

Since the time is 1963, one might reasonably expect that Birdlace could assume
that Rose had heard of Vietnam. Rose is not supposed to be stupid. She's a
would-be folk singer who says of folk singers, "They're the ones who make things
happen."

Further, since a screen card specifically sets the time as November 1963, the
movie promises to make portentous connections between the young lovers and the
events in a Texas city whose identity, in the spirit of Bob Comfort's coy
screenplay, should not be revealed.

The dogfight of the title refers not to aerial combat but to a particularly
cruel joke that Birdlace and his pals arrange as a lark for their last night
Stateside. Each of the marines chips in $50 to throw a party, the high point of
which is an ugly-girl contest. The marine whose date is judged to be the worst
dog gets the pot.

One fellow finds a rather traditional American Indian squaw. Another brings a
transvestite and still another a hooker without her false teeth. Birdlace finds
Rose in a lunchroom run by her mother, who is played for no particular reason by
Holly Near, a singer of folk songs in real life but not in this film.

Rose is a little overweight, yet she's hardly a dog as these marines use the
term. The most curious thing about her is that she dresses like, and slightly
resembles, Nancy Walker when Ms. Walker played Judy Garland's best friend in
"Girl Crazy," though "Girl Crazy" was made in 1943, not 1963.

After thoroughly humiliating Rose at the party, Birdlace attempts to atone by
taking her out to a fancy restaurant, walking around the city with her and
finally going home with her. All the way. "Dogfight" ends with a beautifully
staged and acted sequence that, if the rest of the movie were better, would be
irresistible.

The extraordinary thing about "True Love," written by Ms. Savoca and her
husband, Richard Guay, was the way in which it managed to reveal the secret
lives of ordinary people without either sending up the characters or idealizing
them. The authenticity of gesture and language and locale created a kind of
meta-reality not seen since the early television work of Paddy Chayevsky.

"Dogfight" -- which opens today at the Loews Fine Arts -- seems to have no clear
idea of what these ordinary people are really like. The film wants to be honest
(and in its cruelties, it is), but the operative sensibility is that of a sitcom
world. The characters aren't necessarily idealized, but they are flat and
uninteresting. The material is lugubrious. The only seemingly spontaneous moment
comes at the very end, which is too late.

The performances are neither good nor bad. The actors do what is required.
That's all.

                                    .  .  .

"Dogfight," which has been rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or
adult guardian), has a lot of vulgar language.

Dogfight

Directed by Nancy Savoca; written by Bob Comfort; director of photography, Bobby
Bukowski; edited by John Tintori; production designer, Lester W. Cohen; produced
by Peter Newman and Richard Guay; released by Warner Brothers. At Loews Fine
Arts, 58th Street, west of Fifth Avenue, Manhattan. Running time: 94 minutes.
This film is rated R.

Birdlace . . . River Phoenix
Rose . . . Lili Taylor
Berzin . . . Richard Panebianco
Okie . . . Anthony Clark
Benjamin . . . Mitchell Whitfield
Rose Sr. . . . Holly Near
Marcie . . . E. G. Daily

LOAD-DATE: November 5, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Lili Taylor and River Phoenix (Warner Brothers)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              191 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 15, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

When an Author's Words Are Sold by the Pound

BYLINE: By Michael Norman;  Michael Norman, a former reporter for The New York
Times, is an associate professor of journalism at New York University.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 24; Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1055 words


Like most writers, I have always championed thrift. Writers live by thrift,
after all, cutting losses and conserving profits to survive the inevitable bouts
of indigence and bankruptcy that mark a life of letters. And we practice thrift
in our work, as well; good writing is always the product of language that has
been pared down, sentences that are lean, taut, economical. Not long ago,
however, I experienced an extraordinary tergiversation. Now I'm an ally of
excess, a proponent of redundancy. It all began the day I received a short
letter from my publisher.

"Dear Mr. Norman," the letter began. "Your book, 'These Good Men,' has been
scheduled for remaindering."

After 20 months in print, there are, it seems, some 12,000 copies of the
clothbound edition of my first work still sitting in a warehouse in Westminster,
Md., and the time has come, as it does for far too many books these days, for
"These Good Men" to surrender its place on the publisher's shelf and take a path
that will, for some copies, likely lead to the steel jaws of a shredding
machine.

The work, in another form, will probably stay in print for some time. A
paperback edition of the book, which is about the surviving Marines I served
with in the Vietnam War and what happened to them in the years since they
returned home, was published in May. The publisher of that edition, Pocket
Books, says it intends to keep the book on its back list for several years. But
there is something sui generis about the first edition of one's first book,
something that makes an author lose all sense of reason, perspective, economy.

I want those 12,000 cloth copies to stay right where they are: in a warm, dry
warehouse waiting for readers to call for them, even if those calls never come.
The thought of just one copy crunched to pulp makes me blister.

I remember the book when it was nothing more than a bright flicker on the
psyche, pure ambition. I was a newspaperman chafing against deadlines and style
sheets when an editor at Crown Publishers called me to lunch and said something
over coffee that set me on a search for the old Marine Corps comrades I had not
seen since 1968, our year at war.

That lunch took place on a cold, wet winter day in 1983. "These Good Men" was
published on a cold, wet winter day in 1990. Seven years from provocation to
print, almost nine years from a sweet dream to the pulp machine.

I set to work in 1984 under the musty eaves of my attic on an old metal Olympia
portable with a threadbare ribbon. My desk was a hollow-core door that straddled
two small blue filing cabinets. Eventually, I traveled halfway around the world,
then back and forth across the country several times, doing research. It cost my
advance -- and then some. I wrote at night and on my days off. By 1986, I had
less than a hundred miserable and disjointed pages. Then came the next best
thing to the muse -- a grant. The Florence and John Schumann Foundation awarded
me enough money to quit the paper and write the book full time. I was sure I'd
be done in a year. It took three.

One morning in March 1989, I typed the last page of endnotes and
acknowledgments, tucked the manuscript neatly into a gray box and set the box on
a coffee table by a couch. Then I sat down and wept.

My sorrow was atavistic, which is to say that something primitive and, at that
moment, inexpressible had seized me and set me sobbing, something no doubt
passed down from the first writer ever published and best expressed by the
screenwriter Syd Field, quoting Jean Renoir: "True art is in the doing of it."
The selling of it is something else and has nothing to do with language or
literature.

The selling of it involves profit ratios and print runs and promotion and
advertising budgets and cover designs and jacket copy and begging for blurbs.
The selling of it begins the day the manuscript in the gray box is carried into
New York and handed to a person called an editor, someone nowadays likely more
conversant with Moody's and Standard & Poor's than with Strunk and White. The
selling of it continues with 10-city tours -- or hollow promises of such -- and
long telephone interviews at odd hours to catch air time in places such as
Pierre, S.D. Along the way nothing goes as expected. Editors quit, agents are
fired. Sales rise, then fall. Returns begin. At a marketing meeting at the end
of spring the publisher's salesmen are more keen on a book about barbecues than
memoirs about men and war. In time the selling of it ends, usually with a short
letter: "Dear Mr. Norman: Your book, 'These Good Men,' has been scheduled for .
. ."

Very soon now, a remainder company will buy my book from Crown, not by subject
but by the pound. "These Good Men" will be sold anonymously, part of a huge lot
of many titles bid on by weight. It may in turn end up in a bookstore, a
supermarket or a garden shop. Perhaps a reader will find it on a street vendor's
table in Manhattan or under a huge tent in Alabama, where Southern discounters
sell books so inexpensively that, according to Elizabeth Bogner of the American
Booksellers Association, "people buy them regardless of what the titles are and
even when the books aren't in English; it's the white-elephant mentality."

I remember the moment I first held "These Good Men." It was the fall of 1989 and
I was on assignment from The New York Times Magazine in Pasadena, Calif. The
magazine had put me on a tight per diem and I was staying in a shabby motel. The
desk clerk called my room to say an overnight package had arrived. I sat down in
the main lobby next to a plate of stale doughnuts and a pot of viscous morning
coffee and opened the envelope and . . . there . . . was one of the first copies
off the press. Everything was wrong with that book -- the subtitle was
incorrect, the running header was missing its ruler line, the opening page had a
major typo -- but it was my first copy and I could not stop myself from stroking
it.

Now, it is quite possible that some copies -- those that even the white
elephants won't buy -- will be mangled to pulp.

Then again, fate can have a poetry all its own. Perhaps the pulp will go to make
a piece of cheap furniture -- a desk, say, on which a talented hand might set a
piece of paper, pick up a pencil and write the words, "Chapter One."

LOAD-DATE: September 15, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              192 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 15, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

An Inescapable Need to Blame

BYLINE: By Roger Rosenblatt;  Roger Rosenblatt is the author of "Children of
War" and the editor at large of Life magazine.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 1; Column 3; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1863 words



THE SWEET HEREAFTER
By Russell Banks.
257 pp. New York.
HarperCollins Publishers.
$20.

You are likely not to have forgotten that heartbreaking accident in East
Coldenham, N.Y., in November 1989, when a sudden blast of wind collapsed a wall
of an elementary school, killing nine young children. Such a memory is evoked by
Russell Banks in "The Sweet Hereafter" -- not only the circumstance of the
accidental death of children, but also the tormenting helplessness of
townspeople who must try to reach a rational understanding of an inexplicable
calamity. In this novel the effort to rationalize takes the form of assigning
blame, which brings the townspeople as much pain as do the deaths of the
children.

This effort to rationalize through blame, which is the modern effort in all
things, is Russell Banks's theme. It is a theme hard to find in a novel these
days. The assignment of blame makes disorderly occurrences orderly, sets them
within our control again. Blame is especially useful in situations in which
there is no apparent villain -- those moments that prove, despite our
advancement of learning, how susceptible we are to high winds and wet roads.

Dolores Driscoll has been the school bus driver in the upstate New York town of
Sam Dent since 1968. She and her husband, Abbott, who has had to use a
wheelchair since his stroke several years ago, have lived in no other place. In
July and August, Sam Dent belongs to the summer people. The remainder of the
time it is populated by ordinary people who drive pickup trucks, keep neat
woodpiles and live in houses with "flapping plastic over the windows and sagging
porches." The local roads, with their "boarded-up roadside diners and
dilapidated motels," run among dark mountains. Dolores knows the roads of Sam
Dent, "which is one of the reasons I was given this job in 1968 and rehired
every year since -- the other being my considerable ability as a driver, pure
and simple, and my reliability and punctuality."

Those assets are called into question after one snowy morning when, with the
straight part of the road shooting before her and her bus filled with children
talking quietly among themselves, Dolores sees a dog move into the road, or
thinks she does. She swerves right and jams the brakes, and the bus rolls
downhill into an icy pond. Fourteen of the children die.

From that terrible moment the lives of the people of Sam Dent are never the
same. "For us," says Billy Ansel, a former hero of the Vietnam War who now runs
the town garage -- and whose children die in the accident -- "there was life,
true life, real life, no matter how bad it had seemed, before the accident, and
nothing that came after the accident resembled it in any important way. . . .
For us, it was as if we, too, had died when the bus went over the embankment and
tumbled down into the frozen water-filled sandpit, and now we were lodged
temporarily in a kind of purgatory, waiting to be moved to wherever the other
dead ones had gone." The absence of the town's children draws couples apart,
drives people to drink and loneliness, makes enemies of friends and creates a
void that is soon filled by the need to blame.

Someone, something, has to be held accountable for the deaths of the children.
Dolores? The bus? The seat belts? The snowfall? The roads of the state of New
York?

Into the void strides Mitchell Stephens, a lawyer from New York City who
specializes in accidents. To Mitchell, all accidents are the result of
negligence, and he goes around Sam Dent trying to find where the responsibility
lies. His job, his mission, is, he says, "to represent anger." For a while he
cannot find any anger in Sam Dent. Then he half discovers, half creates a client
in Nichole Burnell, a teen-age girl who was partly paralyzed in the crash, and
who agrees to pin the blame on Dolores for speeding. Nichole's motive is
personal, entirely unrelated to Dolores or to the facts of the accident.

At first the townspeople want nothing to do with her lawsuit. Then they grow
excited about the idea, not for the money to be gained or as a concession to the
modern litigious disease but because a lawsuit is a blaming instrument. However
inaccurately or inadequately, it proclaims in a public arena that an outrageous,
impossible event has been understood, that it has been put in a recognizable
box, that it is tamed, not mystifying, not out of human control. In a way,
modernity is defined by the extent to which life has been brought under human
control.

Not only Mitchell Stephens -- who is not a bad guy, merely a champion of his age
-- but the whole town of Sam Dent wants the bus accident brought under human
control. Even Dolores wants that. When she learns that she has been blamed for
the children's deaths, she is actually relieved: "I felt as if a great weight
that I had been lugging around for eight or nine months, since the day of the
accident, had been lifted from me," she says. It is less important to her that
she has been wrongly accused than that she can at last name her anguish.

But the truth of the situation -- the true story of the bus accident and of the
wider experience it represents -- is that its cause is bewilderingly out of
human control, just as much of modern experience is bewilderingly out of our
control. At the very least the essentials, life and death, are out of our
control. Not that this is really a secret; we know how helpless we can be. Yet
the knowledge is resisted because it is antimodern, superstitious, a suggestion
that there are certain unconquerable forces working against progress.

See the way earthquakes and hurricanes are depicted in the news. The accounts
are always made in terms of the number of dead, the number of injured, the
dollar amounts of the damage. To quantify is to command the event, to make the
disaster less natural. Let it never be reported that a terrible fist came out of
nowhere, knocked the stuffing out of us for as long as it pleased and left us
naked in the streets.

If we are not in control of our catastrophes, after all, we can only sit back
and scrutinize divine justice. We can ask Job's question or ponder the suffering
of the innocent or think in circles about God's plots and errors. That, too, is
an effort to rationalize, but it is not as satisfying as the assignment of
blame, which is reassuring and affirms free will.

What Russell Banks is saying, I think, is that our deeper satisfaction lies
elsewhere: that the force of things unrationalized is the source not only of the
terror but of the beauty in our lives. Instead of being humbled by the
inexplicable, we can be saved by accepting it. By accepting the inexplicable we
are thrown toward one another. We may even learn to sympathize with one another
for the susceptibility to suffering we have in common.

Mr. Banks is too able a writer to state such things outright. But in the final
scene of his novel the town rises to an acceptance of the catastrophe on its own
mysterious terms.

Everyone is gathered in the grandstand to watch the last event of the annual Sam
Dent Country Fair, the demolition derby. One of the entrants is Boomer, a
station wagon once owned by Dolores Driscoll. The crowd cheers wildly every time
Boomer takes a hit; the car is being punished as a stand-in for Dolores. Yet it
continues running. One by one all the other cars and trucks drop out of the
competition, but Boomer, smashed on every side, survives.

Suddenly the crowd starts chanting "Boo-mer! Boo-mer!" In the end the station
wagon is the only vehicle left in the arena; it wins simply by going on. And the
crowd rejoices. The townspeople, though they can never say why, are happy.

In "The Lives of a Cell," Lewis Thomas wrote, "All of the life of the earth
dies, all the time, in the same volume as the new life that dazzles us each
morning, each spring." I don't know if that is a scientific observation or a
religious one, but it is a great consolation in any case. Fourteen of the
children in Sam Dent die, but within eight or nine months, the gestation period
of Dolores Driscoll's grief, other children will be born. Things will never be
the same after the accident, but they will always be the same, too, and
eventually the abiding love of the people for one another will crack through the
isolation of winter and create life, true life, real life again.

That also is not to be rationalized or controlled. It is the way things are in
the world, and in Russell Banks's cold and merciful eye.

WHEN CHILDREN DIE

When the thing that you only imagined actually happens, you quickly discover
that you can barely speak of it. . . . People who have lost their children --
and I'm talking here about the people of Sam Dent and am including myself --
twist themselves into all kinds of weird shapes in order to deny what has
happened. Not just because of the pain of losing a person they have loved -- we
lose parents and mates and friends, and no matter how painful, it's not the same
-- but because what has happened is so wickedly unnatural, so profoundly against
the necessary order of things, that we cannot accept it. It's almost beyond
belief or comprehension that the children should die before the adults. It flies
in the face of biology, it contradicts history, it denies cause and effect, it
violates basic physics, even. It's the final contrary. A town that loses its
children loses its meaning. -- From "The Sweet Hereafter."



THE VOICES OF SURVIVORS

"I wanted to write a novel in which the community was the hero, rather than any
single individual. I wanted to explore how a community is both disrupted and
unified by a tragedy." Speaking by telephone from his home in the Adirondacks,
Russell Banks explained that "The Sweet Hereafter," which traces the profound
effects on a small town in upstate New York of the death of a number of its
children in an accident, was inspired in part by several recent tragedies,
including an incident in Texas in which a school bus plunged into a flooded
quarry.

"I was struck, in following that story," he said, "by the voices of the
survivors and of the parents, by their struggle to make some sense of this awful
event. I was reminded that the death of someone close is significant beyond
telling. It alters, perhaps forever, the life of a family in profuse ways."
While fiction cannot dissipate the pain of loss, he said, it does "dramatize the
weight of such moments, lending significance to the struggles of ordinary people
to deal with them."

Mr. Banks, who teaches in the creative writing program at Princeton University,
has gained a reputation for writing with rigor and originality about
working-class life in such novels as "Affliction" and "Continental Drift." "I
grew up in a working-class family," he said. "I have a less obstructed path as a
writer to get to the center of their lives. Part of the challenge of what I
write is uncovering the resiliency of that kind of life, and part is in
demonstrating that even the quietest lives can be as complex and rich, as
joyous, conflicted and anguished, as other, seemingly more dramatic lives." --
RICHARD NICHOLLS

LOAD-DATE: September 15, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Russell Banks. (Nathan Arb) (pg. 29)

Drawing (pg. 1)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              193 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 15, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

FILM VIEW;
'Dogfight' Wears Camouflage

BYLINE: By Caryn James

SECTION: Section 2; Page 13; Column 1; Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 953 words


There are some uneasy moments early in "Dogfight," as the camera searches for
ugly women. The director Nancy Savoca rushes into dangerous territory with a
story that is a minefield of potential insults: marines, on their last night
before heading out to Vietnam, stage a contest to see who can pick up the least
appealing date.

The camera assumes the marines' point of view as they wander through San
Francisco in 1963, when "hippie" still meant a woman whose hips were too big. To
these men, ugly is a woman with a beehive hairdo, cat's-eye glasses and a very
prominent nose. Ugly is a squat, round-faced American Indian with no makeup and
unfashionable long braids. And in one memorable case, ugly is a woman with too
much makeup and too few teeth. There seems to be something here to offend
everyone, from yahoo marines to fat ladies to people with improper dental care.

But "Dogfight" turns out to be quite a subversive little film. This intelligent,
affecting movie undermines its own macho premise, tosses out conventional images
of beauty and turns at least one movie cliche upside down. As in "True Love,"
her shrewd, 1989 comedy about an Italian-American wedding, Ms. Savoca, reinvents
an old story and creates astonishing sympathy for characters who are making
wrongheaded decisions as fast as they can.

The screenwriter, a former marine named Bob Comfort, has said that "Dogfight" is
"sort of a goodbye" to friends killed in Vietnam. But what appears on screen is
the rather different tale of a gentle-spirited young marine named Birdlace
(River Phoenix), who is not strong or mature enough to break away from the pack.
And "Dogfight" is, even more, the story of the woman he picks up, a shy, frumpy,
slightly overweight teen-ager named Rose, touchingly played by Lili Taylor.

When Birdlace sees Rose in her lumpy waitress uniform, practicing the guitar in
her mother's coffee shop, he thinks he has found his best shot at a winning dog.
Even then, Ms. Savoca makes it clear that Rose is not ugly, just average. Her
unattractiveness has more to do with the self-effacing way she holds her head
down, creating a conspicuous double chin, than it does with her ordinary
features. Sometimes her unattractiveness appears on her face, when she holds her
mouth open and looks not very smart. Part of it is simply the flipped-up 1960's
hairdo that seems to belong in a museum.

But if Rose is not ugly, she is not an ugly duckling waiting to turn into a
swan, either. She is not the conventional Hollywood Plain Jane, the
stereotypical secretary with glasses and her hair in a bun, who can turn herself
into a sexpot in a second.

The character's matter-of-fact plainess becomes most striking in an eloquent but
apparently minor scene whose importance sneaks up on the viewer. Rose accepts
Birdlace's invitation to the dogfight party and, unaware that he wants her to be
ugly, goes off to try to make herself pretty. As she tries on one dress after
another, it is not her imagination that makes one look too fussy, another too
plain and nothing just right. Rose clumsily puts on blue eye shadow and tosses
more clothes on the bed until she is nearly in tears of frustration.

This is a scene that subverts every Hollywood transformation sequence, from
Janet Gaynor being made over in "A Star Is Born" in 1937 to Julia Roberts
shopping on Rodeo Drive in last year's "Pretty Woman." It is the reverse image
of Natalie Wood dancing in front of her mirror, lip-synching "I Feel Pretty" in
"West Side Story" (1961). Rose, it seems, will never feel pretty, and her eager,
frustrated attempt to look good for Birdlace is heartbreaking.

When Rose joins Birdlace on the street, he tries to talk her out of the party;
she doesn't look doggy enough anymore. She appears to be what she is, a nervous
young woman who has tried extremely hard to look her best, wearing a frilly
yellow party dress and a fussy barrette in her hair.

Though the film starts with Birdlace and his buddies, with this
nontransformation scene Ms. Savoca deftly turns the film over to Rose. Ms.
Taylor conveys Rose's loneliness and insecurity in a performance that is free of
vanity. Some actresses would have drawn attention to the fact that they were
"playing plain" and would look gorgeous in the next picture. But Ms. Taylor, who
was such a forceful and vibrant personality as Jojo, the reluctant bride in
"Mystic Pizza" (1988), hides herself in the character.

Rose's insecurity is so strongly evoked that it is even possible to understand
why, after she learns she has been entered in an ugly-contest, she accepts
Birdlace's apology and agrees to go out with him on a real date. The film tries
to suggest some hidden empathy between Birdlace and Rose. In fact, her decision
makes sense only because we have seen how desperately lonely she is.

Rose's attitude so infuses the movie that Birdlace's friendship with the other
marines and his need to brag about his mythical conquest of a beautiful older
woman, have the aura of a strange tribal ritual. But that ritual is obviously of
deep importance to them.

"Dogfight" turns wrong at the close. Its natural dramatic end comes about 10
minutes before the movie finishes with an unfathomable epilogue. And the period
setting makes the ugliness issue less volatile than it deserves to be. It is too
easy to say that these "dogs" are victims of yesterday's fashion and of
prehistoric, unenlightened males.

"Dogfight" is, finally, not about being a marine or being ugly -- its ostensible
dramatic subjects. It is about being a woman and being plain. But if Ms. Savoca
had said she intended to make a movie about an insecure, ordinary woman, who
would have listened?

LOAD-DATE: September 15, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Lili Taylor as Rose, the shy, frumpy, overweight teen-ager in
"Dogfight"--touchingly played (Warner Brothers) (pg. 13); The director Nancy
Savoca--in dangerous territory (Warner Brothers) (pg. 19)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              194 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 15, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

FILM;
Sean Penn, Human Tempest, Settles Into the Auteur's Life

BYLINE: By BRUCE WEBER

SECTION: Section 2; Page 13; Column 1; Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 2409 words


Sean Penn exhales cigarette smoke and coughs. "I have no argument with anybody
who doesn't agree with punching out anybody," he says. "But then don't punch out
the man who punches you."

Mr. Penn, widely known as both a human tempest and an actor of sizable gifts, is
in New York to publicize a new movie he has written and directed, "The Indian
Runner," which opens on Friday, but he's responding, of course, to the most
common and longstanding inquiries about him. How does he explain his reputation
as Hollywood's most hostile star, its biggest spoiled brat, its loosest cannon?
How does he justify the behavior -- the nasty intolerance of fans who approach
him in public, the vile and occasionally violent outbursts against paparazzi --
that has led him to be skewered mercilessly in the press?

"If that's the case, O.K.," Mr. Penn continues. "Don't engage in violence for
your rights. If a fascist dictator takes over, then passive resistance is the
only course. But if violence has a place, then you can't say, 'He's punching out
a photographer.' I got into fights with people who violated my liberties."

As an argument, it is a little facile but perhaps understandable, especially for
a man who was once married to the most famous woman in the world and whose
private life was thus exposed to the cruel tenacity of the tabloids.

Still, there is that one line about the fascist dictator -- a reference to
Saddam Hussein's invasion of Kuwait -- a blithe, implicit escalation of one
man's trouble to the level of international crisis. It isn't self-aggrandizing,
exactly; it seems a bit overheated, or maybe just naive.

Indeed, a talk with Mr. Penn over the course of a long, boozy dinner is a little
like a perfervid, late-night discourse in a dorm room. Self-confident, frank and
adamantly unapologetic, he is 31 years old but looks younger, striking,
particularly in profile. His voice has the nasal quality one associates with the
stoned. Listening to him, one hears an earnest and even intelligent quest to
derive meaning out of gut instinct. To his credit, he doesn't expect to be
understood on the basis of a single, formally arranged encounter. He calls his
public tantrums "the most inane moments of my life" and bitterly resents their
being made to stand for the whole man. But one aches to rope him in. Inevitably
he follows his logic into recklessness.

"When people say, 'Well, this is the game,' " he says, referring to the
relentless fox-and-hounds he played with photographers during his hectic,
three-and-a-half-year marriage to Madonna, "I say, 'O.K., I own a magazine. I'm
going to hire somebody who's going to follow you everywhere you go. He's going
to follow you home. He's going to be over there at that table when you're here,
at a restaurant, with your wife. And then there's the added thing of flashes in
the eyes, the goading, the provoking. And this goes on for a month. And you go
to the courts, there's nothing you can do. Would you ultimately kill him?' I
would."

Mr. Penn is skirting the limelight these days -- no problem, he says, without
Madonna -- if not the press. He has given a number of interviews on behalf of
"The Indian Runner," his first produced screenplay and effort at directing. The
film, about brothers painfully at odds (the title refers to its central
metaphor), stars David Morse and Viggo Mortensen. Mr. Penn isn't in the film
himself, and one of the surprises to have emerged from his recent public
statements is the confession that acting turns him so unhappily in on himself
that he isn't likely to return to it.

If Mr. Penn steers clear of the screen, many filmgoers will feel that as a loss.
His performances in a dozen or so movies over the last decade -- among them Jeff
Spicoli, the stoned-out surfer-teen in "Fast Times at Ridgemont High"; the
paranoid cocaine smuggler Daulton Lee in "The Falcon and the Snowman"; Brad
Whitewood, the alienated son of a rural gangster in "At Close Range," and
Meserve, an Army sergeant in Vietnam who directs his men to a brutal rape and
murder in "Casualties of War" -- have shown an estimable range and drawn nearly
uniform critical praise.

If his work has moved in any direction, it is toward a sense of menace.
"Watchful control and a sense of lake-filled silence behind a thin, rustling
curtain of words are the hallmarks of Penn's acting style," the critic James
Wolcott wrote in 1986. Three years later, Vincent Canby wrote in The New York
Times, "As the possibly psychotic Meserve, Sean Penn is perfectly cast." The
fierce, almost preternatural intensity that many critics have noted in Mr.
Penn's work of late is certainly synchronous with the actor's own angry persona.

"I can't break down how much of my experience with the twilight zone that is
celebrity has to do with my feelings about acting," he says. "Mostly I think
it's the process itself, which I have equated in my head with a set of works.
You got your spoon, you got your surgical tie-off, you got your Bunsen burner,
and you get down to business. That's what I looked at acting as, a set of works,
not a craft. I was more of an addict than a positive practitioner."

"The Indian Runner" could easily be seen as self-examining, though not
autobiographical. It's clearly a movie made by someone who is interested in the
mayhem that can plague a man. "I live on the idea that we've got to have
compassion for the mass murderer because he is us and we are him," Mr. Penn
says, and the notion resonates in the film, if not as explicitly as all that.

A period piece set in Nebraska in the late 60's, based on the lyrics of the
Bruce Springsteen song "Highway Patrolman," the story concerns the relationship
of the Roberts brothers after the loss of the family farm. Joe (Mr. Morse) has
become a locally admired cop; his younger brother, Frank (Mr. Mortensen), always
the troublemaker, has gone off to Vietnam. As the film opens, on the day of
Frank's return, Joe has to kill a man in the line of duty. Told largely from
Joe's conscience-stricken point of view, the film nonetheless centers on Frank's
struggle with incorrigibility, his vain attempt to live according to his
brother's wishes for him.

"I could see where someone would be coming from if they said I was Frank," Mr.
Penn says. "But I think it would be an easy cliche. I don't feel like I have a
closer relationship with any one character more than another."

About his shift to writing and directing Mr. Penn is more specific. His
perspective on his experience as a movie maker, if not as a celebrity, is clear.
He sees the job as empowering in a way that acting was not.

"If somebody says, 'Well, you were good, but the movie wasn't,' then there's no
gratification, not to me," Mr. Penn says. Directing, he adds, feeds his sense of
responsibility for the whole, and almost as an illustration, he admits that his
script was overwritten, which is surprising because the film's dialogue is
generally spare. "It's a lot about the actors," he says. "A lot of times, when
we were rehearsing, I could put lines through stuff, because I could see what I
wanted without it.

"Casting the actors, casting the crew -- that's making a movie right there," he
continues. "If you got a weak link, it's your problem because you hired him."

As far as the actors, at least, his choices could not be described as safe.
There are no marquee names, except for Charles Bronson, who is notably cast
against type as Joe and Frank's father, a defeated old man.

Mr. Penn says he offered Mr. Bronson the role strictly because of what he knew
about the hardships of the actor's private life -- Mr. Bronson's longtime
support of his late wife, Jill Ireland, in her battle with cancer. On the face
of it, that's rather creative thinking, and one can't help speculate that for an
explosive character like Mr. Penn, the task of directing -- with the pragmatism
required to reproduce a vision on a fixed budget ($9 million in this case) -- is
a helpful harness. As he talks about it, his smarts show.

Asked about one unusual shot, for instance, when an unmoored camera follows a
bottle of Scotch as Joe and his wife push it back and forth across the kitchen
table, Mr. Penn says: "As a director, one thing you can be for your actors is an
audience, and to be a real attentive one. Then if you go off the actor and onto
a bottle, or whatever it is, you've got to give the bottle equal time. Now it's
your image. And why are you drawn to it? Maybe you feel like the audience needs
a drink. The character just killed a man, you know."

During the filming, which took place entirely on location in Nebraska, Mr. Penn
says his aim was to come to work each morning with a "bottom line" sense of what
he wanted to achieve in the day's shooting. "But what happens is, you get there
and it's been a year since I wrote the scene, and six months that I've been
thinking about what color the walls of the set should be painted, where the
light comes in the window. The actors have been thinking about that scene. And
if you've cast it right, they have good ideas. All of a sudden you say, 'Oh, I
had the camera here, and it should be over there, slowly moving.' If something
wonderful's going on, I want to see it. That's storytelling."

In its rural setting, its depiction of people for whom palpable hardship is a
daily companion, the film is about a world that is clearly at a distance from
Mr. Penn's own upbringing, first in the San Fernando Valley suburbs of Los
Angeles, later in Malibu. He is from a Hollywood family -- his father, Leo Penn,
has been a director for television and movies; his mother is the actress Eileen
Ryan.

"Twenty years ago, Malibu was an incredibly rural community," he says. "You had
show-business people, but on our street we had auto mechanics, every economic
level. So in a way there's nothing in my movie that couldn't have happened
there." He pauses and laughs, unable to sustain the comparison. "Except that you
had the outlet of the beach, so if you felt like one of the characters, you'd go
down there, look at the ocean and you feel better." Anyway, he goes on,
"Alienation isn't married to the home."

It seems rather more likely that his attraction to the world in "The Indian
Runner" was born after he moved out of his parents' house. He studied acting for
two years in Los Angeles, and then at 19, he just picked up and drove to New
York. Almost immediately he landed a role in a play called "Heartland," which
led to his being cast in the film "Taps" in 1981.

"I had money in my pocket for the first time, so I went back to California," he
says. "But I never stayed put in L.A. for long. Between movies, I've probably
driven back and forth across America 15 or 20 times. I used to be just a
vagabond, just driving. Stay in little motels. Go see places that you heard
about in your favorite books, your favorite songs. Take pictures. And, I guess,
look for women."

He traces his public troubles to 1984, when he decided not to do publicity
interviews for "Racing With the Moon," a coming-of-age film set during World War
II. "I liked the movie; it was a sweet movie," Mr. Penn says. "But I was working
on 'Falcon and the Snowman,' and I just didn't have anything to say." Studio
executives groused, however, and the press picked up on it. "I wasn't even a
famous actor at the time, but it became this thing. 'Ah -- now we've got a label
for him. He's the guy who doesn't support his movies.' And then I got married to
her."

Mr. Penn is a new father; his daughter, Dylan Frances Penn, is 5 months old. Her
mother is the actress Robin Wright, who was Mr. Penn's co-star in the 1990 film
"State of Grace." The two are not married. Mr. Penn spent much of the summer
with mother and daughter in Ireland, where Ms. Wright was filming "Playboys"
with Albert Finney. Since he just returned, it seems reasonable that the family
finds its way into many crevices of the conversation. A number of times, it
becomes his reference point in trying to explain himself.

"People are born wanting to love," he says. "I got this little girl. I was in a
hotel lobby, and I had her in my arms, and there was another baby crying and she
saw it. She looks at this other baby crying, and all of a sudden her lower lip
starts to tremble and she just starts crying, because she was seeing somebody
else in some kind of pain she recognized. That's what we're meant to be, I
think."

It is the kind of speech that makes it natural to ask Mr. Penn if he thinks he's
mellowed. "Not so," he says, and then he proves it.

"Once you get out there in the world, you see how politically and culturally
repressed people are, particularly in this country," he begins. "They're angry.
And there's nothing, I think, that can make a person angrier than anger.

"What should be done with a guy like Jeff Dahmer? What should be done with
Charles Manson? O.K., I'm a father now. My girlfriend and I are driving down the
road; let's say a car wipes us off the face of the earth. The child goes into
foster care, this beautiful perfect child, and the foster father rapes her every
day. She goes to another foster home. Foster mother beats her up and whores her.
And at 17 years old, she gets a semiautomatic weapon and opens up on a
schoolyard and kills a bunch of kids. Are you going to give her the death
penalty? Hey, at what point after you're born do they give you the test for
sensitivity?

"In our culture, antisocial behavior is not judged on a relative scale.
Antisocial behavior is antisocial behavior -- that's a problem person. Never do
we say, 'We have a problem environment for a person who is different than I am.'
But that's what compassion's for."

The speech is made conversationally. It isn't the volume but the righteous
indignation that's been turned up -- Where's the compassion? -- and it's easy to
see why Mr. Penn so often gets himself in trouble. Eventually he reveals his
personal villains, along with his demons: George Bush is "a murderer for killing
hundreds of thousands of people in Panama and Iraq"; the Pope is a "monster" for
"condemning the use of condoms when there's a sexual plague killing people"; the
photographers who once hounded him are "bad people, people who still live with
their mothers; they're overweight and don't know who they are and have no sense
of decency at all. Now, I got compassion for them, but compassionately speaking,
I say, 'Die.' "

NAME: Sean Penn

LOAD-DATE: September 15, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Sean Penn, who directed "The Indian Runner"--"I got into fights
with people who violated my liberties." (Richard Wright) (pg. 13); Sean Penn
directing "The Indian Runner"--"Casting the actors, casting the crew, that's
making a movie right there," he says. "If you got a weak link, it's your problem
because you hired him." (Michael Tighe/Westmount Communications Film) (pg. 21)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              195 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 15, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

With Government Growing, More Spending Won't End Deficit

SECTION: Section 4; Page 16; Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 365 words


To the Editor:

Tom Wicker proposes in "Investing in America" (column, Aug. 18) massive
Government spending on infrastructure and the return of more Federal money to
states and localities in the name of pump priming. Mr. Wicker seems to have
fallen for the misguided claim that the 1980's witnessed some sort of rollback
in the size of government. Nothing could be further from the truth.

Before he advances his spend, spend, spend philosophy any more, he might want to
note that Government spending increased faster under Ronald Reagan than under
Jimmy Carter. For all Mr. Reagan's laissez-faire rhetoric, he failed to tame our
Government run amok; he simply replaced stupid tax-and-spend policies with
stupid borrow-and-spend policies. Our Government now consumes more than
one-quarter of everything produced in this country.

Mr. Wicker suggests we ignore the "vastly overrated" budget deficit. This would
be criminally impossible. As long as we pile up massive deficits, our economy
will never become competitive and we will never control inflation. What is our
national debt -- $3 trillion, $4 trillion? Why not $10 trillion? The numbers are
surreal. What is very real is the more than $300 billion we must spend each year
to service this mountain of red ink.

Nicholas Leman, author of "The Promised Land," hardly a conservative Republican,
reckons that an effective antipoverty program for our inner cities would require
$50 billion a year. This is one-sixth of what we spend on interest on the debt.

Indeed, this mountain of debt, which raises interest rates and inflation and
sucks investment from the productive sectors of the economy, is a primary reason
behind the lower growth rate of the 1980's relative to the 1960's. Also in the
1980's we did not get bogged down in an inflationary Vietnam War.

Finally, why does Mr. Wicker assume that uncontrollable spending and
overdependence on an ever-expanding Government are permanent features of the
American condition? They need not be. We might consider whether or not we wish
to remain, as Alexis de Tocqueville warned we might, in a state of "perpetual
childhood."

H. ANDREW SCHWEDEL
New York, Aug. 25, 1991

LOAD-DATE: September 15, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              196 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 15, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

Hidden Corners of Lower Manhattan

BYLINE: By DAVID W. DUNLAP;  DAVID W. DUNLAP, a reporter for the Real Estate
section of The Times, is the author of "On Broadway: A Journey Uptown Over Time"
(Rizzoli International, 1990).

SECTION: Section 5; Page 15; Column 1; Travel Desk

LENGTH: 2557 words


AFTER you've rubbed your eyes once or twice and shaken off the notion that it's
impossible, the delightfully incongruous truth becomes clear. A bow-backed,
Federal-style town house from the early 19th century -- perhaps the work of
Pierre L'Enfant, who planned the city of Washington -- still stands in
Manhattan's financial district.

You won't find the Robert Dickey House in most guide books. It is not an
official landmark. What was once a garden was long ago covered by an ugly
one-story addition. Perched precariously near the yawning entrance to the
Brooklyn-Battery Tunnel, its Flemish-bond bricks painted battleship gray, the
house almost disappears into the background.

As such, it is a trophy for anyone rambling through lower Manhattan in search of
little-known remnants from the past, architectural and historical odds and ends
tucked among the bulky skyscrapers of the financial empire. What follows is a
walking tour of such buildings; places that few people have heard of back home,
even if home is New York City.

Trinity Church and St. Paul's Chapel are not central to this itinerary. Neither
are Federal Hall or City Hall, the Stock Exchange or Merchants Exchange, the
Custom House or India House, the Chamber of Commerce or "Cathedral of Commerce,"
as the Woolworth Building was called. (A visit to the lobby will instantly tell
you why.) These and other worthy destinations at the southern tip of Manhattan
all are covered in depth in several excellent guidebooks.

For the sake of orientation, and perhaps a cup of coffee or a bite to eat, the
tour begins and ends at two tourist landmarks: Battery Park City and the South
Street Seaport.

At Battery Park City, the freshly minted commercial and residential complex
built on 92 acres of landfill, visitors can begin the day with a stroll on the
esplanade along the Hudson River. From there, it is a short journey over the
Liberty Street pedestrian bridge back to the beginnings of this century, when
the area was a vital Greek and Syrian quarter. Still functioning is St. Nicholas
Greek Orthodox Church (155 Cedar Street), which looks almost Aegean in its
whitewashed plainness. The sanctuary occupies the ground floor of a little
19th-century building with a cross-topped bell gable on its roof.

An even more captivating reminder of the ethnic past is the former St. George's
Chapel (103 Washington Street). Built in 1929, this Syrian Maronite Catholic
church is now Moran's Inn restaurant. Its white terra-cotta Gothic facade is
embellished by buttresses, crockets, an arch of grape vines and a vividly
painted relief of St. George slaying the dragon.

Around the corner is an extraordinary triplet of Georgian row houses, 94-96
Greenwich Street, built by Augustine H. Lawrence in 1798-99. The very existence
of a cohesive 18th-century group is astonishing enough, but the corner house --
once home to a merchant and alderman named Jonathan Lawrence -- is also in
remarkably good condition above the loud storefronts on the first floor. Nine
windows overlooking Rector Street have elegant splayed lintels with double
keystones. Above them, the outline of the original steeply pitched roof can be
discerned.

The Dickey House (67 Greenwich Street) was part of New York's Gold Coast when it
was built in 1810. Robert Dickey, a wealthy merchant and property owner, lived
there and later rented it to members of the prominent Bayard and Low families.
Its design has been attributed to L'Enfant, who also worked on St. Paul's
Chapel, seven blocks to the north. The fine brickwork and fluted keystones on
Greenwich Street are noteworthy but its most striking feature is the bow-shaped
bay on Trinity Place that once overlooked a garden, courtyard, coach house and
stable.

The climb up Exchange Place toward Broadway is a reminder that New York's Main
Street was developed on a ridge that was once a trail for the Weckquaesgeek
people, on their way to the harbor. Indeed, Broadway served as a gateway to the
harbor well into this century. One of New York's most magnificent -- and least
appreciated -- public spaces is the steamship ticket office within the former
Cunard Building (25 Broadway), designed by Benjamin Wistar Morris and finished
in 1921. It is now used as a post office but even unsympathetic modern
installations do not diminish the glory of the 68-foot-high rotunda and almost
fragrantly colorful murals of explorers and mythical sea creatures by Ezra
Winter.

An observant visitor to the Citibank branch in the former International
Mercantile Marine Building (1 Broadway), will notice map murals and a marble
compass in the floor, testifying to its former role as a passenger ticket
office.

Another spot where the past asserts itself subtly is the Bowling Green, the
oblong park whose delicate iron fence was installed in 1771. Crownlike finials
on the posts were torn off five years later by a revolutionary mob that also
dismantled a statue of King George III in the center of the green. The vandalism
has gone unrepaired for 215 years. Overlooking the park are the former United
States Custom House and former Standard Oil Building.

A new addition to the past is New York Unearthed, an archeological gallery and
conservation laboratory tucked in back of 17 State Street. A full-scale,
three-dimensional cross section of the strata beneath the pavement shows the
artifacts -- bones and bottles and china -- that have been found at each
successive layer of human habitation.

Next door is the 198-year-old James Watson House (7 State Street), now part of
the Shrine of St. Elizabeth Ann Seton, who once lived at No. 8. What makes the
Watson house particularly lovely is the two-story-high porch, framed by slender
Ionic columns, added in 1806.

Past the burned-out Staten Island Ferry Terminal and the Vietnam Veterans Plaza,
a visitor can find more Ionic columns, these of cast-iron, at the Herrick &
Wakeman Building (24 Water Street) of 1862-63, which also boasts a profusion of
garlands and swags. It adjoins three commercial buildings built in 1828 by
Edward Remsen and Obadiah Holmes. The best preserved is 28 Water Street, which
still has its sloping roof, stone sills and lintels and Flemish-bond brickwork.
Elsewhere in the Fraunces Tavern Block Historic District is 62 Pearl Street,
built in 1827 by the merchant Asher P. Hamlin, which is notable for its arched
windows and rooftop dormers.

The Fraunces Tavern Museum (54 Pearl Street) includes a recreation of the Long
Room in which Washington took leave of his officers, as well as galleries filled
with early American paintings, prints, utensils, furnishings, documents and
decorative art. Downstairs is still a restaurant.

Across from Fraunces Tavern are the subterranean foundations of Governor
Lovelace's Tavern, which stood from 1670 to 1706 and served temporarily as City
Hall. The foundations, along with an 18th-century cistern, are visible through
thick glass plates in the plaza of 85 Broad Street.

A particularly handsome type of building rose in this area after the Great Fire
of 1835, which destroyed much of lower Manhattan: four- and five-story
structures with Greek Revival bases -- stark granite piers and massive granite
lintels -- and brick facades punctuated by star-shaped tie rods. Some fine
examples are 3-5 Coenties Slip, 81 Pearl Street and 95-99 Pearl Street.

Make a U-turn at India House on Hanover Square. You are now looking down Stone
Street and far into the past. The crooked Dutch road, laid out in the early 17th
century, is lined with stark little commercial buildings from the 1800's. It
feels no less dense than its surroundings for being small scale. This kind of
classic downtown vista was largely obliterated by postwar devolopment.

If Stone Street is sober, South William Street is gay. The delicate, almost
lacy, Tudor-Gothic Lehman Brothers Annex (9 South William Street) was built in
1928 to designs by William Neil Smith. That same architect was also responsible
for the half-timbering of 21 South William Street.  Between them stands the
neo-Flemish 13-15 South William Street, which got its crow-step gables in a 1903
renovation.

Another striking vista is that along tiny Marketfield Street, where metal
shutters still overhang the sidewalk. Farther along is the former Lee-Higginson
Bank (37 Broad Street), built in 1928-29 and designed by Cross & Cross. Now a
Conway clothing store, its surprising interior has trunklike Doric columns with
mosaic-filled flutes and a vast mural by Griffith Bailey Coale, "A Pageantry of
the History of Commerce by Sea."

Follow Broad Street north, past the New York Stock Exchange, and look down Wall
Street for the classic view of Trinity Church, on Broadway. Past the Federal
Hall National Memorial and Chase Manhattan Plaza is the the 97-year-old Wallace
Building (56-58 Pine Street), designed by Oswald Wirz. The base of this splendid
Romanesque Revival tower has spiky, foliate, terra-cotta swirls that turn into
bearded faces, next to snarling sea creatures that wriggle among the arches.

In contrast to this effusiveness is the spare, glass-filled, proto-modern
composition of the former Roosevelt & Son Store (90 Maiden Lane), which was
given a cast-iron facade in the early 1870's by James Alfred Roosevelt, Teddy's
uncle. Another intriguing cast-iron composition is 63 Nassau Street, from the
1860's, which has three-story-high columns and busts of Benjamin Franklin.

The John Street Methodist Church (44 John Street) is famous in its own right,
but what may not be as well known is the Wesley Chapel Museum in the basement,
which offers an engaging history both of Methodism and of the congregation,
which has worshipped on this site since 1768 and in this building since 1841.

And do not miss the former A.T.&T. Headquarters (195 Broadway), designed by
William Welles Bosworth and constructed in stages from 1912 to 1924. Its lobby,
a hushed hypostle hall, is a forest of gleaming Doric columns.

Across City Hall Park are several robust 19th-century office towers. The
33-story Park Row Building (19 Park Row), designed by R. H. Roberston, was the
tallest in the world when it was completed in 1899. Temple Court (5 Beekman
Street), is a Queen Anne composition framed by sentinel-like towers topped with
steeples. It was built in two stages from 1881 to 1890, to designs by Silliman &
Farnsworth and James M. Farnsworth.

One of New York's most exuberant towers, the Potter Building (139 Nassau
Street), is almost hallucinatory in its Victorian encrustation. The deep window
bays are framed by corbels, pediments and brick pilasters with capitals that
seem to erupt in ornament. It was designed by Nathan G. Starkweather and
completed in 1886.  Next door is the former New York Times Building (41 Park
Row), a gray Romanesque Revival tower designed by George B. Post and expanded by
Robert Maynicke, where this newspaper had its offices from 1889 through 1904,
when it moved to Times Square.

The Times building, now used by Pace University, is a vestige of the newspaper
district known as Printing House Square. Another is the cast-iron Bennett
Building (93-99 Nassau Street), which was built in 1872 by James Gordon Bennett,
publisher of The New York Herald, on the block where that newspaper then had its
offices. The Bennett Building, which appears to have been swarmed by herds of
brackets, was designed by Arthur D. Gilman.

Another exceptional cast-iron building, 114-116 Fulton Street, can be admired on
the way to the seaport. It has five floors of three-quarter-round columns with
feathery Corinthian capitals, making an interesting comparison with the
column-girdled A.T.&T. building in the distance.

There are so many shops and restaurants in the South Street Seaport Historic
District that it can be easy to overlook the less insistent and less picturesque
remnants of the past. But be sure to explore the blocks north of Beekman Street,
where numerous architectural treasures can be found, although many are derelict.
Look for such telltale signs of the early 19th century as the fluted double
keystones at the Armstrong & Smith Ship Chandlery (229 Water Street), built in
180, or the steeply peaked roofs at 108, 109, 112 and 113 South Street, a row of
narrow brick commercial buildings completed in 1819.

The seaport's newest building is the recently completed home of the 157-year-old
Seamen's Church Institute (237-243 Water Street), designed by James Stewart
Polshek & Partners. While most of the center is closed to the public, one can
walk through the two-story-high lobby where there is a Sir Galahad figurehead, a
bell from the liner Normandie, and models of the original floating chapel and
Henry Hudson's Half Moon. The chapel, which is also open to the public, is an
exceptionally cool and tranquil space, offering a welcome moment of serenity at
the tour's end.



VISITING AND READING
Hours

Following are the hours for those sites on the itinerary to which the public is
admitted:

St. Nicholas Greek Orthodox Church. Scheduled to reopen this month after a major
renovation. Services at 10 A.M. and 3 P.M. on Wednesday, 9 A.M. and 2 P.M. on
Sunday. The church is to be open at other hours but these have not yet been set.

Bowling Green Station (Cunard ticket office). Open 8 A.M. to 6 P.M. weekdays
(open to 8 P.M. Thursday).

Citibank (International Mercantile Marine ticket office). Open weekdays 8:30
A.M. to 3 P.M.

New York Unearthed, administered by the South Street Seaport Museum. Open noon
to 6 P.M., Monday to Saturday. Admission is free.

Shrine of St. Elizabeth Ann Seton-Our Lady of the Rosary Chapel. Open weekdays 7
A.M to about 5:30 P.M., Saturday 8 A.M. to about 3:30 P.M. and Sunday 9 A.M. to
about 3:30 P.M.

Fraunces Tavern Museum. Open weekdays 10 A.M. to 4 P.M. Admission is $2.50.

Conway (Lee-Higginson Bank). Open weekdays 7:30 A.M. to 7 P.M., and Saturday 10
A.M. to 5 P.M.

John Street Methodist Church-Wesley Chapel Museum. Open weekdays 11:30 A.M. to 3
P.M. Admission is free.

Seamen's Church Institute. Open weekdays 8:30 A.M. to 4:30 P.M.

Guidebooks

The best single contemporary guide to lower Manhattan is "Forging a Metropolis,"
by Andrew S. Dolkart, published in 1990 by the Whitney Museum of American Art,
which costs $6. Other excellent, and wider-ranging works, all in paperback
(publishing dates are for latest editions), are the "AIA Guide to New York
City," by Elliot Willensky and Norval White, published in 1988 by Harcourt Brace
Jovanovich, $21.95; "Blue Guide New York," by Carol von Pressentin Wright,
published this year by W. W. Norton, $19.95, and "New York, A Guide to the
Metropolis" by Gerard R. Wolfe, published in 1988 by McGraw-Hill, $14.95.

The best source for New York books is the New York Bound Bookshop, in the lobby
of the Associated Press Building at 50 Rockefeller Plaza. Some bookstores
downtown are Doubleday, in the Fulton Market at the South Street Seaport; Barnes
& Noble, 38 Park Row and 170 Broadway; Rizzoli, in the World Financial Center at
Battery Park City; South Street Seaport Museum Book and Chart Store, 209 Water
Street, and Strand Book Store, 159 John Street. "Forging a Metropolis" is also
available at the Whitney Museum of American Art's downtown branch, 33 Maiden
Lane, which is open weekdays 11 A.M. to 6 P.M. -- D. W. D.

LOAD-DATE: September 15, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: September 15, 1991, Sunday

CORRECTION:

Two articles on page 15 of the Travel section today carry incorrect
continuation-page numbers. The article headed "Hidden Corners of Lower
Manhattan" continues on page 24; the one headed "New York Hotels, New and
Renewed" continues on page 22.


GRAPHIC: Photos: The Potter Building, left, and Temple Court's spires, right.
Detail, Moran's Inn, formerly St. George's Chapel. (Photographs by Kit Kittle
for The New York Times)(pg. 15); The World Trade Center towers above the Winter
Garden in Battery Park City. (Fred R. Conrad/The New York Times)(pg. 22)

Map of Manhattan showing recommended walking route

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              197 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 15, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Sports of The Times;
The Ali Connection To Tyson

BYLINE: By DAVE ANDERSON

SECTION: Section 8; Page 1; Column 1; Sports Desk

LENGTH: 725 words


IN the commotion over Mike Tyson's approaching heavyweight title fight while
Tyson is under indictment on a rape charge, one school of thought is based on
the Ali Argument.

According to the logic course in this school of thought, if boxing organizations
stripped Muhammad Ali of the heayvweight title in 1967 for refusing to take the
oath of induction into the armed services during the Vietnam War, why should
Tyson be permitted to earn $15 million before his Jan. 27 trial begins?

It's a school of twisted thought. Its logic should be based on the Ali Appeal.

Boxing buffs usually rely on their memory of knockouts and split decisions, not
Supreme Court decisions. But for anyone with a sense of human history, the
primary reason why Tyson is entitled to challenge Evander Holyfield on Nov. 8 is
that Ali's conviction and pending five-year prison term were overturned by the
Supreme Court in 1971 in an 8-0 decision.

For the Nevada Athletic Commission or anyone else to order Tyson to hibernate
until after his trial would be just as wrong as what was done to Ali.

This is not a defense of what Tyson did or did not do in Room 606 of the
Canterbury Hotel in Indianapolis on July 19. This is a defense of his right to
continue his career until he's found innocent or guilty.

Muhammad Ali's case should have chiseled that right into history. But too many
people either have forgotten it or never knew it.

Ali is loved and cherished now, an American folk hero whose mumblings with
Parkinson's syndrome provoke understandable sympathy for what he endured as a
gladiator. He is revered for having defied the Selective Service System during
what has been labeled an unpopular war. But in 1967 he was not a folk hero. He
was not revered.

Just as Tyson is detested now by some for his swaggering street-thug life style,
Ali may have been even more detested then.

Long before Ali refused to step forward to take the oath of induction, he had as
many critics as followers. He was black. He bragged that he was "the greatest."
He had converted to the Black Muslim religion. To add to his audacity, when
classified 1-A in the draft at a time when many Americans still thought the
Vietnam War was justified, he shrugged and said, "I ain't got no quarrel with
them Vietcong."

What kind of American was that? Even more annoying to some, what kind of
heavyweight champion was that?

Within hours after Ali refused induction in Houston on April 28, 1967, the New
York State Athletic Commission, then boxing's most respected governing body,
stripped him of the heavyweight title he won in 1964 and had retained nine
times. Other states and boxing organizations also vacated the title. All this
before Ali was convicted of draft evasion on June 20, 1967.

After a three-and-a-half-year exile while his conviction was being appealed, Ali
was granted a license to fight Jerry Quarry in Atlanta on Oct. 26, 1970, a bout
that ended in the third round with Quarry badly cut. New York then relicensed
Ali to oppose Oscar Bonavena on Dec. 7 at Madison Square Garden, a 15th-round
knockout.

More than three months after Ali's first loss in a unanimous 15-round decision
to Joe Frazier on March 8, 1971, at the Garden, the Supreme Court ruled that Ali
had been improperly drafted. In an unsigned opinion, the court declared that the
Justice Department was "simply wrong as a matter of law in advising" that Ali's
conscientious objections to war were neither sincere nor based on religious
tenets. Ali didn't gloat. He didn't even sue.

"They only did what they thought was right at the time," Ali said, alluding to
the 1967 rulings. "I did what I thought was right. I can't condemn them for
doing what they think was right."

In today's litigious society, Ali would have probably been advised by lawyers to
sue everybody involved for millions for having been unjustly deprived of what
might well have been his best years as a boxer.

"The shame is that we never saw Muhammad at his best," his longtime trainer,
Angelo Dundee, has often said. "He would have been at his peak sometime during
the three and a half years he was exiled."

Muhammad Ali was cleared. Mike Tyson may or may not be cleared. But whatever the
outcome of his trial, Mike Tyson has a right to continue his career now. The Ali
Appeal attests to that.

LOAD-DATE: April 1, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Mike Tyson (Associated Press)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              198 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 15, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

From the Stage of 'Miss Saigon' to Acting Like a Kid

BYLINE: By ELSA BRENNER

SECTION: Section 12WC; Page 1; Column 2; Westchester Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1016 words

DATELINE: MOUNT VERNON


WHEN Philipp Lee Carabuena finishes work at night, he often has to face throngs
of fans at the stage door clamoring for his autograph. Most evenings, he obliges
and signs their playbills with a special gold pen used only for that purpose.
Some nights, he is too tired and, like most children his age, only wants to go
home to bed.

As an actor in the Broadway hit "Miss Saigon," the 4 1/2-year-old maintains a
schedule that would daunt many adults. His workday begins with an evening
commute from his home here, arriving at his dressing room at the Broadway
Theater in Manhattan no later than 7:30 P.M.

Over the next several hours, he becomes part of a story that takes place in
Vietnam and portrays the pain, violence and anguish that accompany war.

For most preschool children, the lines between pretend and reality are often
difficult to discern. Make-believe monsters hide under beds and lurk behind
corners. Dolls sometimes are just toys, but sometimes they are real babies. And
toy trains zipping around a track on the bedroom floor, in a child's
imagination, can become Metroliners thundering across the countryside.

But for Lee, as he is called by his family and friends, learning to understand
the difference between what is real and what is make-believe is not simply a
matter of child's play. It is part of his job. The youngster is cast in the role
of Tam, the 2 1/2-year-old son of a Vietnamese prostitute and an American
soldier.

'No, I'm Never Scared'

Asked if he was ever frightened by what happens on stage, Lee emphatically said,
"No, I'm never scared," and then added, "Well, maybe the first time. But now I
know it's just pretend."

Near the end of the late-20th-century "Madama Butterfly" story, Tam's mother,
forsaken by her American lover, shoots herself. But Lee explained that a man
offstage makes the noise, and that no one is really shooting a gun or getting
hurt.

Yet, when questioned about which part of the play he likes best, the young actor
answered, "When John picks me up. I will be safe then, because I'm going to
America."

Lee, one of two boys who alternate playing the part of Tam, was cast in the
role, in part, because of his small stature. He is 37 inches tall and weighs 26
pounds.

His mother, Marites Amper Carabuena, said that her son, although short for his
age by American standards, is average for a child of Filipino descent.

Mrs. Carabuena, an administrative secretary who stopped working to adjust her
schedule to her son's, was raised in Manila. Lee's father, Glenn, a biochemist
who works for Technicon in Tarrytown, is also of Filipino descent but was born
and raised in Brooklyn. The family, which also includes two other children,
3-year-old Melanie and 5-month-old Steven, lives with Mr. Carabuena's parents in
a five-bedroom home on a tree-lined street of large Tudor-style homes here.

Although pleased with his son's success -- Lee was picked from about 75 other
applicants at an open audition -- Mr. Carabuena said he had reservations about
his child's pursuing acting as a career.

"It is a very demanding profession," Mr. Carabuena said. "Broadway is fun and
exciting, but we look at it, as far as Lee is concerned, as something for now.
He just got a good break. I don't intend, though, to push my son into this for
the long run."

"I've read a lot about what happens to kid stars," Mr. Carabuena said, "and I
don't want that to happen to Lee. I want him to know there are so many other
options out there."

When Lee is not at work, he spends most of his time playing with his best friend
next door.

"As far as I know," Mr. Carabuena said, "when they're together, they don't talk
about Lee's part in 'Miss Saigon.' They're much more interested in playing and
being kids, which is as it should be."

At work, Lee's closest companion is his stage chaperone, Beatrice Dickman Swarm,
an early childhood specialist who works with the children on the set.

Always Close By

Mrs. Swarm stays with Lee from the time he enters his dressing room until the
show is over for the night. She is always close by on the set and often sits
directly behind him in a curtained area, whispering to him and reminding him
when to run out on stage. The producer pays for her services, which are required
by Actors' Equity for children younger than 16.

In the beginning, she said, she had to shove Lee onstage, especially in the
scene when the character Thuy says, "This child cannot live."

Because of the vulgarities and questions about death and sex in the play, Mrs.
Swarm said, she worked with Lee to reinforce the idea of pretend. "First," she
said, "we got acquainted with the leads, so we knew them in real life."

The adult actors, out of costume, spent time with the young actor, often getting
down on the floor and playing games with him. Before they put on their costumes,
Mrs. Swarm said that she told Lee, "They're going to be scary now."

Waving a Magic Wand

"I tell him that I'm going to wave a magic wand and turn him into Tam. That
way," she said, "Lee gets the idea that this is just a story."

Mrs. Swarm said that Lee's size was not the only criterion for his getting the
part of Tam. "He is very bright, and he can think and reason. But most of all,"
she said, "his little eyes twinkle so."

The child, who has become an Actors' Equity member, earns $933 a week for four
performances. He is under a three-month renewable contract and will be replaced
by another boy when he grows too tall to portray the 2 1/2-year-old Tam, Mrs.
Carabuena said. His earnings, she added, are being put in a college trust fund.

To compensate for his late-night hours, Lee sleeps until about 11 A.M. He eats
his main meal of the day when he rises, with breakfast often consisting of
chicken adobo and steamed vegetables, or his favorite food, hot dogs.

His mother described him as "quite literary for his age," preferring to read
"The Little Engine That Could" and Dr. Seuss's "Fox in Socks" to watching
television.

"Also, he doesn't like video games," Mrs. Carabuena said. "Lee says he's too
young for that."

LOAD-DATE: September 15, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Philip Lee Carabuena, an actor in "Miss Saigon," at his home in
Mount Vernon. (Elsa Brenner)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              199 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 15, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

FORUM;
Lift the Trade Embargo on Vietnam

BYLINE: By THOMAS J. SCHWARZ and EUGENE A. MATTHEWS;  Thomas J. Schwarz is a
partner at Skadden Arps Slate Meagher & Flom. Eugene A. Matthews, president of
Ashta International, an investment and consulting firm, lives in Hanoi.

SECTION: Section 3; Page 11; Column 2; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 646 words


If the 16-year-old ban on trade with Hanoi continues, the United States will
lose Vietnam all over again. But this time, the defeat will be economic and the
winner will be our economic rival, Japan.

In the next decade, Vietnam has the potential to outpace other nations in
economic growth. With a population of 70 million, it offers a larger market for
American goods than Romania, Czechoslovakia and Hungary combined. Nearly 60
percent of the population is under the age of 21.

Despite what is called the "American" war, Americans and American products in
Vietnam are looked upon with friendliness and favor -- even in Hanoi. Teen-agers
in Hanoi dance to American rock music in cafes owned by the Government; children
in Hanoi wear T-shirts imprinted with "United States of America"; their faces
light up when they realize an American is in their midst. The tastes of the
nearly 42 million consumers under 21 also include such traditional American
brands as Juicy Fruit gum and Kodak film.

Asian merchants and manufacturers recognize Vietnam's potential. Aside from the
billions of dollars of oil reserves mapped by American companies before the ban
and now being exploited by non-American companies, trade in other areas has
boomed. Japan is Vietnam's second-leading trading partner, after the Soviet
Union. Trade with Japan reached $853 million in 1990, and with Moscow's economic
and political difficulties, Japan can be expected to loom much larger in
Vietnam's future. JVC, National and Sanyo television sets and tape recorders are
being assembled in Vietnam. Toyota, Mitsubishi and Honda have finalized plans to
build factories there.

To encourage foreign investment, Vietnam has adopted one of the most liberal
foreign investment codes of any developing country. Foreigners can own and
manage 100 percent of their enterprises in Vietnam or they can form joint
ventures with private companies or individuals there. Generous tax write-offs
are available to foreign investors; the Government has eliminated subsidies to
state-run businesses, abolished price controls and is openly discussing a stock
market.

American opposition to our trade embargo -- both in the business community and
among Vietnam veterans -- is widepread. Many blue chip companies, as well as
Wall Street investment houses and law firms, have joined the United States-
Vietnam Trade Council. The Senate Foreign Relations Committee voted 12 to 1 in
June to support a measure that would lift the trade embargo. The measure's chief
sponsor is a Republican.

The Bush Administration has not established relations with Vietnam for many
reasons, including Vietnam's presence in Cambodia. Given progress on the issue
of Americans missing in action, however, the Administration's resistance to
stronger economic ties can only be explained by a determination to keep
punishing Vietnam for having humiliated the United States in the war.

Recently, under pressure to stop changing its demands on Vietnam, the
Administration outlined its "road map" for what Vietnam must do to improve
relations with the United States. But as a guide for American businesses, it is
essentially a dead end. It essentially would allow American companies to do
nothing more than sign contracts that would not become binding for an indefinite
period -- six months after peace in Cambodia. By then, the agreements could well
have been rendered meaningless.

The White House is scheduled to decide this month whether to renew the
Vietnamese trade embargo. But even if it were lifted tomorrow, most American
companies would be at least a year away from making investments.

For our benefit and Vietnam's, the United States should let its free-market
values triumph in Vietnam, as they have around the world, and it should allow
United States companies to participate in the next great Asian economic success
story.

LOAD-DATE: September 15, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Eugene A. Matthews (Jack Manning/The New York Times); Thomas J.
Schwarz.

Drawing

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              200 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 16, 1991, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Top Official For Schools Is Resigning

BYLINE: By NICK RAVO

SECTION: Section B; Page 1; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 810 words


The head of school construction in New York City, whose appointment three years
ago was hailed as a promising step toward reducing building costs and delays,
has resigned without warning out of anger over $750 million in budget cuts,
school officials said yesterday.

They said the resignation of the official, Charles E. Williams, a retired
general in the Army Corps of Engineers, was a blow to the city's efforts to
remodel schools and to build new ones.

The School Construction Authority had got off to a "great start under his
aggressive leadership," the Schools Chancellor, Joseph A. Fernandez, said in a
statement in which he expressed regret at Mr. Williams's decision. Mr. Williams
was the authority's first president and chief executive.

Big Program Under Way

The authority was established in 1988 to award and supervise construction
contracts -- a role previously performed by the Board of Education -- after
civic groups and prosecutors complained about shoddy work and overcharges on
construction projects. Mr. Williams was appointed soon afterward.

The authority had been moving ahead with a $4.3 billion plan to build 50 new
schools and 30 annexes and to remodel 70 other schools over five years. It had
awarded more than $1.5 billion in construction contracts under Mr. Williams.

The resignation, which was submitted on Friday and takes effect Oct. 15,
appeared to take school officials by surprise. James Vlasto, the spokesman for
Mr. Fernandez, said there had been no discussions about a successor. "The
resignation came in so suddenly," he said.

The authority's financing was originally patched together from New York City
general obligation bonds and Municipal Assistance Corporation funds. But last
December the Dinkins administration, facing about a $3 billion budget shortfall,
asked the board to scale back its ambitious plan for school construction and
renovation by more than 20 percent over three and a half years, resulting in the
$750 million reduction in the authority's budget.

That was too much for Mr. Williams to bear, said Meyer S. Frucher, a trustee at
the authority.

"He was unhappy about the cuts," Mr. Frucher said. "The project was cut
substantially. We're all upset about the cuts."

Mr. Williams could not be reached for comment yesterday.

Mayor David N. Dinkins said through a spokesman, Jeff Maclin, that Mr.
Williams's resignation was "regrettable."

29 Years in Army

An Alabama native, Mr. Williams, 52 years old, learned construction from his
father, a subcontractor. He graduated from the Tuskegee Institute in Alabama
and, in the middle of his military career, received a master's degree in
business administration from Atlanta University.

Mr. Williams, a retired two-star general, spent 29 years in the Army Corps of
Engineers, at first as a helicopter pilot in Vietnam ferrying engineers under
enemy fire to repair roads or install wells. Later he directed huge projects in
Europe and the United States, including the construction in the mid-1980's of a
$1.3 billion, 3,000-acre addition to Fort Drum near Watertown, N.Y. He was
commander the North Atlantic Division of the Army Corps of Engineers from 1986
to 1988.

In appointing Mr. Williams, many school officials had said that his Army
experience would help him negotiate the bureaucracy that had delayed school
improvement projects in the past.

To accomplish that goal, the authority, in one of its first major policy
changes, assigned a single manager to supervise on-site work, a practice widely
used by private developers. The project manager was given the authority to
approve or deny job modifications sought by contractors after work had begun. In
the past, delays created by disputes over these modifications had slowed school
construction and increased costs.

Exempted From Rules

To reduce pre-construction time, the State Legislature also permitted the
authority to forgo land-use reviews and a host of other pre-construction steps.
It also let the authority eliminate undesirable contractors from the bidding
pool.

More significantly, the Legislature exempted the authority for five years from
the Wicks Law, which requires municipal agencies to hire separate contractors
for plumbing, electricity and heating instead of having a general contractor in
charge of the work. Opponents of the Wicks Law say it has led to inefficient
construction management..

The authority also adopted a policy that required contractors to receive full
payment within 30 days of the completion of a specific segment of a project.
Previously, some payments were withheld for a year or more, discouraging
qualified companies from seeking school work.

Mr. Frucher said he did not believe that Mr. Williams's departure would leave
the authority in disarray. "He has a deep staff," he said. "We'll miss him, but
we will carry on."

NAME: Charles E. Williams

LOAD-DATE: September 16, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Charles E. Williams, the head of the School Construction
Authority, resigned without warning, school officials said yesterday. (The New
York Times)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              201 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 17, 1991, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Veteran Found Guilty Of Deserting the Guard

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section B; Page 6; Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 93 words

DATELINE: INDIANAPOLIS, Sept. 16


A decorated Vietnam combat veteran who said he was haunted by memories of that
war was convicted Sunday of deserting his National Guard unit during the buildup
of the Persian Gulf war, and was given a dishonorable discharge from the
military.

In the Indiana National Guard court-martial, Capt. Daniel A. Nightingale, 40
years old, of North Manchester, Ind., had also faced a 200-day jail term and a
$200 fine, but he received neither.

The court-martial was initiated last January when Captain Nightingale failed to
report for a weekend drill.

LOAD-DATE: September 17, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              202 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 17, 1991, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Friends Say North Won't Fade Away

BYLINE: By B. DRUMMOND AYRES Jr.,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 19; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 790 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 16


Oliver North is a man who likes to talk -- sometimes he is paid as much as
$25,000 to do so -- but he was unusually close-mouthed today when asked about
his plans.

"I hope to take my kids to lunch," he curtly told inquiring reporters as he left
the Federal courthouse here after the Iran-contra charges against him were
dropped.

Friends of the 47-year-old retired Marine Corps lieutenant colonel say they have
no firm idea what might be in his future, or whether he has thought the matter
through, given the surprising suddenness of today's court proceedings. But they
are certain about one thing when it comes to Ollie North.

Whatever he becomes involved in, they say, he will put his whole heart into it,
and it will have something to do with conservative causes and an old marine's
view of duty, honor and country.

'A Great Conservative

Those are the things that have concerned him most of his adult life, the friends
say, from the days when he was a hard-charging rifle platoon leader in Vietnam,
winning a silver star, through his days as an up-and-coming military adviser to
the National Security Council, where he specialized in undercover operations,
including the Iran-contra operation.

"He is a great conservative, a great asset to conservative causes, and he will
not sit on the sidelines after today," said Howard Phillips, the head of the
Conservative Caucus. "He may or may not get into elective politics. I'm not sure
he's leaning as much in that direction as some people think he is, especially
given his strong feeling about a stable family life. But he won't just sit
around and rest on the results of today's court action."

In fact, Mr. North is already involved in several conservative causes, pressing
them with a fervor that would have put him over the top long ago, were those
causes the halls of Montezuma or the shores of Tripoli.

He is the president of the recently formed Freedom Alliance, a Washington-based
nonprofit foundation that is dedicated to promoting individual liberty and a
strong military, as well as traditional morality, free enterprise, close-knit
families and sound schools.

Audiences Are Similar

He travels the country making speeches about those issues, mostly to audiences
filled with Republicans, businessmen and retired military people.

He also campaigns for political candidates whose credentials are to his liking.

Sometimes he arrives for public appearances with a security escort, and
frequently the news media are excluded. His speeches usually contain gloating
attacks on what is left of Communism, acidic assaults on liberals, the press and
the Washington establishment and loud cheerleading for Old Glory and motherhood.

At some point he manages to work in an assertion of innocence so far as his
Iran-contra ordeal is concerned, adding that he would never have been brought to
bar in an America that was not badly veering off to the left. Finally, he closes
with the Marine motto: "Semper Fidelis."

Most of the time Mr. North gets a standing ovation at the end of his talk. Then
the autograph-seekers begin to troop forward.

Up to $25,000 a Speech

For someone who spent much of his life in uniform, a business where making money
is neither a goal nor an issue, Mr. North has exhibited a knack for the dollar
since he retired from the Marines in 1988 to concentrate on his Iran-contra
defense.

He gets a hefty fee for many of his speeches -- now and again up to $25,000,
associates say -- and he is chief executive officer of Guardian Technologies
International, a Washington-area company that manufacturers protective equipment
for police officers. In one Guardian brochure, Mr. North, who has reportedly had
threats upon his life, says, "I rely every day on the security of a GTI vest."

Still, Mr. North's close acquaintances do not believe he will spend the rest of
his life mainly building a fortune, however successful he is at making money.

"Ollie is seen by conservatives as a symbol of somebody who has been unfairly
attacked by a system gone wrong and who has survived and even overcome," said L.
Brent Bozell 3d, an old Washington friend who runs the Media Research Center, a
group that monitors press performance, particularly coverage of conservative
causes.

"The fact that he has prevailed in the end makes him a potential leader, and he
has to know that," Mr. Bozell added. "He's the kind of person who keeps plans to
himself until he's ready to announce, so I don't think anybody really knows at
this point where or what he'll lead or what he really wants to get involved in.

"It could be politics. It could be working with kids. It could be he wants to
catch his breath. But sooner or later, he'll be out there."

NAME: Oliver L. North

LOAD-DATE: September 17, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Oliver L. North talking to reporters as he left the Federal
courthouse yesterday in Washington after the Iran-contra charges against him
were dropped. (Jose R.Lopez/The New York Times)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              203 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 17, 1991, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Patterns

BYLINE: By Woody Hochswender

SECTION: Section B; Page 7; Column 5; Style Desk; Fashion Page

LENGTH: 606 words


Portents for the Fall

While retailers have been busy holding their fall fashion parties, store
executives are also tracking the fall best sellers, if any.

Plaids are selling (surprise!), executives said. Long jackets, with
fingertip-length hems, are also doing well, according to some executives, as are
solid colors (you need them to offset all the plaids).

Other fast-moving items and looks:

*Slim pants, or stirrup pants, to go under the longer jackets.

*Dressed-up denim, like the beaded jeans jackets and skirts from Lizwear by Liz
Claiborne.

*Anything with zippers, a continuing trend.

*Flippy short skirts, often pleated, in all fabrics, colors and price ranges.

"The No. 1 item, in every division, across the board, was short pleated skirts,"
said Mara Urshel, a senior vice president and general merchandise manager for
Saks Fifth Avenue, with 47 stores nationwide.

This season you can be sure there will be a zippered leather jacket and a tartan
pleated skirt in your fashion future.

Modern fashion promotion has done much toward standardizing fashion and removing
its air of mystery. But it also has raised the general level of taste. And for
apparel makers, who have been suffering for several seasons, who needs mystery?

Of Plaids and 'Cycles

Style note: Several thousand motorcycle types converged on West Street in
TriBeCa on Sunday for a Vietnam veterans' demonstration. Not one was wearing
Chanel.

Another random note: MTV's "House of Style" does the plaid thing and the
motorcycle thing in its upcoming edition, which goes on the air tomorrow at 10
P.M. But the segment on Cindy Crawford being photographed by Helmut Newton is
guaranteed strangeness, especially coming on the same show with a piece on how
to decorate your dorm room.

And finally: the bandana-head look for men seems to have gotten out of control
lately. Handkerchiefs are everywhere. But then it all makes sense: the Grateful
Dead are in town through Wednesday.

Donna Karan for Men

In the past, women have not been especially successful at designing men's
clothing. But Donna Karan is giving it a shot.

Ms. Karan's first complete men's wear collection opens at Barneys New York next
week, with a cocktail party on Monday evening and an appearance by the designer
on Tuesday from 5 to 8 P.M.

The store is installing Donna Karan windows that are said to be as elaborate as
its Christmas windows. Each represents a different facet of the "Donna Karan New
York life style,": an art opening, a psychic, a billiard parlor complete with
pool sharks.

Showplaces

Liza Bruce, the British designer, will be among those holding fashion shows this
season in New York. Several British designers have defected from London in
recent seasons, including Katharine Hamnett, John Galliano (Paris) and Rifat
Ozbek (Milan, Italy).

Ms. Bruce is the first to come to New York. She will be showing at the Hotel
Macklowe, on West 44th Street off Broadway, the industry's attempt at a central
fashion venue, joining such American designers as Bob Mackie, Mary McFadden,
Michael Kors and Steven Stolman.

The other new location for fashion presentations this season is Industria
Superstudio, on Washington Street (between 12th and Jane Streets) in Greenwich
Village. So far, Isani has confirmed plans to show there.

Since Carolyne Roehm decided last week to close her business, there has already
been intense competition for her time slots in the fashion schedule, according
to Ruth Finley, the publisher of The Fashion Calendar. Unseemly but very New
York -- like people scanning the obituaries to find an apartment.

LOAD-DATE: September 17, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              204 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 17, 1991, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

The Talk Of Hollywood;
With 'Kevin's Gate' and 'Billygate,' Filmdom's Love of Gossip Blooms

BYLINE: By BERNARD WEINRAUB,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section C; Page 11; Column 2; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1331 words

DATELINE: HOLLYWOOD, Sept. 16


Cameras were rolling today on Riverside Drive in New York City on "Billy
Bathgate" as the Walt Disney Company films a new ending for its adaptation of
the E. L. Doctorow novel about a poor Bronx teen-ager who catches the eye of the
Prohibition-era gangster Dutch Shultz.

The film, starring Dustin Hoffman, was scheduled to be released around July 4,
but was delayed amid rumors of unhappiness and temper tantrums by Disney
executives, a difficult star and a story line that withered. The movie, which
may cost as much as $40 million, is now scheduled to be released on Nov. 1, and
few people outside of Disney have seen it, except for Robert Benton, the
director, Tom Stoppard, the screenwriter, and several others.

Because the highly successful Walt Disney Company has had its travails in the
last year -- the costly "Dick Tracy" was disappointing, as well as "Rocketeer"
and "V. I. Warshawski" -- the "Billy Bathgate" story has stirred the kind of
talk that Disney competitors relish. It is, in fact, the kind of film that
people in the industry love gossiping about.

One man involved in the film said privately that "Billy Bathgate" was the worst
experience of his life. But another said it was not at all uncommon for films to
reshoot endings and "Billy Bathgate" might surprise everyone. "Who knows, it may
be a good film," he said hopefully.

At Disney and elsewhere, executives still speak with awe about Kevin Costner's
"Dances With Wolves," using it as a possible example for "Billy Bathgate."

One film industry executive said: "When that film was being made, everyone
laughed at it. It was called 'Kevin's Gate' " -- a reference to the colossal
flop "Heaven's Gate" -- "We thought it would be a disaster. A western about
Indians with subtitles. By a first-time director. And more than two hours. And
look what happened. The point is, no one knows what to expect from a movie
anymore."

In the AIDS Shadow

Sunday night was Hollywood's largest response to the AIDS epidemic, a $1 million
fund raiser at the Universal Amphitheater that honored, among others, Bette
Midler and gathered the support of the most powerful players in the television
and film comunities. But the benefit for AIDS Project Los Angeles was shadowed,
unexpectedly, by the death last week of the actor Brad Davis, who kept his
six-year battle with AIDS secret out of concern that he would not find work. Mr.
Davis's comments, written in the final months of his illness and released after
his death, termed Hollywood hypocritical about the disease.

Mr. Davis's widow, Susan Blue stein, sent a letter to the event, read by the
actor Bruce Davison, saying, "Whatever the rules are in Hollywood today, they
must be changed so that people like Brad can come forward before they die." She
urged Hollywood leaders to "lift the veil of secrecy" that kept people with the
HIV virus in despair about informing agents and casting directors about their
plight.

In response, Barry Diller, chairman of Fox Inc., and Sidney Sheinberg, president
of MCA Inc., together pledged $125,000 to help start up an AIDS organization
within the entertainment industry.

If the entertainment was glittering -- with such stars as Robin Williams, Tyne
Daly, Carol Channing, Sarah Brightman and Melissa Manchester -- it was Lainie
Kazan, the Commitments and Jennifer Holliday who brought down the house. As well
as Bette Midler, who spoke passionately about the devastation caused by AIDS,
and sang the finale, "Friends," with the entire cast.

But even Ms. Midler seemed downbeat about Hollywood's response to AIDS. "I
didn't start running for the hills like a lot of people did," she said,
referring to the mid-80's when Hollywood responded tepidly and nervously to the
epidemic that has ensnared the film community. She said, in a cracking voice,
"Nearly everyone I started out with has died.'

Campaign Stirrings

If the 1992 Presidential campaign stirs somnolence in the rest of the country,
Hollywood, which takes politics and causes very seriously, if not a bit
self-importantly, is quickly gearing up for the election. Because candidates
troop out here for the money, Hollywood donors are courted and treated with
gritted teeth by candidates and their staffs, who endure lavish poolside events
while hearing lectures about poverty or the environment.

The current hot Democratic Presidential property in town is Senator Bob Kerrey
of Nebraska, who is expected to announce his candidacy and plans to visit
Hollywood in the next few weeks. Senator Kerrey, a rugged Vietnam war veteran
who has had a longtime public affair with Debra Winger, is deemed the almost
archetypal Hollywood candidate, and he's visited here repeatedly.

Several key staff aides in the Gary Hart Presidential campaign are about to sign
on with Senator Kerrey, and his national finance chairman is Bob Burkett, senior
vice president of the Interscope Company, a film production outfit owned by Ted
Field, an heir of the Marshall Field company. Mr. Burkett worked on the Joseph
Biden campaign in 1988.

"Kerrey's the one in the liberal Hollywood community," said one influential
public relations executive who spoke on condition of anonymity. "He's spent a
lot of time out here. Frankly, he's young, he's attractive, he's a war hero, he
slept with a movie star and he's got a good hair cut."

Several supporters of Jesse Jackson's 1988 Presidential campaign are leaning
toward Senator Tom Harkin of Iowa, who announced his candidacy on Sunday, while
Senator Bill Bradley, who has no plans to run, has some major supporters in
Michael Eisner, the chairman of Disney, and Michael Ovitz, the head of the
Creative Artists Agency.

With the decision by Gov. L. Douglas Wilder of Virginia to enter the
Presidential race, invitations went out today for a champagne reception for him
next month given by, among others, Danny Glover, the actor.

The Republican side is, obviously, less fluid. The major Bush supporters are
Arnold Schwarzenegger, Tom Selleck and Charlton Heston.

A prime catch, who has not yet declared, is Kevin Costner, who recently visited
with Mr. Bush at the White House, and is believed to be a Republican. Using
typical Hollywood lingo, one Democratic film executive said simply: "We have
hopes about Kevin. He's still in formation."

The Script Ritual

By 8:30 in the morning the tables in Hugo's, perhaps the most popular industry
hangout in town, are usually packed. But it is Monday, and the restaurant, a
former butcher shop on Santa Monica Boulevard, is half empty.

"Like so much else in this town, there's a Hollywood ritual about scripts," said
one prominent screenwriter over his cereal and skimmed milk. "On Monday, that's
when decisions are often made."

The ritual is straightforward, without subtlety. During the week, agents send
their clients' scripts to studios. Each studio generally employs as many as a
dozen or more well-paid scriptreaders or "gatekeepers," who offer a synopsis and
comment for their bosses. But late Friday afternoon, the top agencies send out a
handful of scripts -- either by major writers or with especially commercial
themes, or both -- directly to executives in order to avoid the readers.

By mid-afternoon Saturday, the top scripts are read in Beverly Hills and Bel
Air. By Sunday, phone calls are made around town about "hot scripts." By Monday
morning at 8, studio executives and their staffs are meeting to make decisions.
Breakfast at Hugo's can wait until Tuesday.

"The bidding and negotiations often begin on Sunday so that people can get a
jump on their competition," said the screenwriter. "Monday is the information
cattle call of the week. What did you read? What's good? And most important,
it's the moment for passionate advocacy. It's when people all up and down the
executive hierarchy make the case for buying something or continuing to develop
it. Passion comes when you argue for a script. You don't have to be passionate
at all to say no."

LOAD-DATE: September 17, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Bette Midler singing at the AIDS Project Los Angeles fund raiser
at the Universal Amphitheater in Hollywood. Behind her were, from left, Melissa
Manchester, Carol Channing and Tyne Daly. (Thomas Kelsey/The Los Angeles Times)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              205 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 18, 1991, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

The Pop Life

BYLINE: By Peter Watrous

SECTION: Section C; Page 14; Column 3; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1040 words



No Country Cousin

Country music is widely viewed as an isolated branch of the music business, with
offices in Nashville instead of New York or Los Angeles, separate charts in
Billboard and a publicity system that ignores most mainstream publications. The
separation has always made country music seem, from the outside, a poor relation
of mainstream popular music.

With the recent changeover of the tabulating system on Billboard's main pop
chart, however, it is clear that country music is a powerful force in the United
States.

Its power is underscored by the release last week of the country singer and
songwriter Garth Brooks's "Ropin' the Wind," which racked up advance orders
totaling two million copies, according to his company, Capitol; Guns 'n' Roses'
two albums, "Use Your Illusions I" and "Use Your Illusions II" compiled orders
of 4.3 million. Mr. Brooks's "No Fences," released last year, is still in the
top 20 of Billboard's pop chart. Sources in the industry expect "Ropin' the
Wind" to enter the pop charts next week in the No. 1 position, beating out
Metallica and Natalie Cole.

"I've been doing this since 1956, and I haven't seen anything like this since
Elvis," said Jimmy Bowen, the president of Capitol Nashville. "We shipped two
million copies of the record, and by Friday we had re-orders for 650,000 copies.
K-Mart sold half of their initial order in the first day. This will be the
biggest country record ever."

"If it weren't for the Guns 'n' Roses project, the record would have been the
story of the year," said Lew Garrett, vice president of sales for the Camelot
record chain. "We've already sold 60,000 copies out of the 100,000 that we
ordered, and we've reordered another 25,000. The best analogy is Metallica,
whose recent CD we ordered 100,000 of as well. Brooks is a pop mainstream
artist, unquestionably a monster act. Though his core following is in the
Southwest, he's just as big in Canton, Ohio, as he is in Hattiesburg, Miss. But
country music is just exploding everywhere."

"I'm thankful for the success, but I don't have a clue why it's happening," said
Mr. Garth, who is 29 years old. "I think it's being aided from the pop side by
people looking for lyrics. When I write, I report real life, which pop music
doesn't really do anymore. Real life is more uplifting, but it can be real
negative. Country music isn't afraid to tackle Vietnam, or wife beating. My
guess is that we'll be hearing a whole lot of songs about the Persian Gulf
soon."

All this activity in country music, underscored by its success in Billboard's
charts, is said to have upper-level management at several companies preparing to
set up offices in Nashville.

"Giant is coming in here," Mr. Bowen said. "Elektra seems to be very serious.
But it makes so much sense. You have this huge baby-boom audience that has grown
up on top-40 radio, and they're all looking for music with lyrics, and we're
that. And the younger generation, unless it comes from the inner city, isn't
interested in rap or dance music. Garth's biggest demographic is 18 to 25, so
younger people are hooking on to country music. Next week Garth will probably
have three albums in the top 50, and two in the top 15."

Obscure Noise



At CBGB's in Manhattan on Saturday night, a handful of New York's best obscure
bands will be grinding out some noise, including Steve Fitch's Empty Body,
Circle X, Borgetomagus, Rudolph Grey, Timber, David Linton's Electric Outhouse,
the Unsane and more. Some of them play freely improvised music, others use noise
in a pop context and others take their cues from the No Wave movement in New
York in the early 1980's. They're all loud, and aggressive, and they are all
part of a new compilation from Matador Records, "New York Eye and Ear Control."

"The only unifying esthetic on the record is that I like the band," said Gerard
Cosloy, the co-manager of Matador. "What they have in common is that most of
them don't ever get paid. But really, the bands would be bummed out if they were
lumped together, though some of them play the same circuit, or have shared
members or gear."

Mr. Cosloy started thinking about the compilation about two years ago, when he
was running another record label. "There were a bunch of New York bands I was a
big fan of -- Cop Shoot Cop, Owt, Circle X -- who were making exciting
new-sounding music," he said. "I left the label and came to Matador, and in the
interim some had been signed. It didn't seem realistic to sign them all to
individual record deals, so I figured if I did a compilation it might help the
rest get record deals on their own. And I figure if someone buys a record
because of Cop Shoot Cop and hears David Linton or Steve Fitch, it's
accomplished something. It's really meant to be a fun record, and to show people
that Borgetomagus have just as much right headlining CBGB's or the Knitting
Factory as Cop Shoot Cop."

Music as Meaning



The singer and songwriter Robyn Hitchcock has recently released an album,
"Perspex Island," (A&M) and as usual, it is often elliptical, relying on the
music as much as the words to generate meaning. Mr. Hitchcock has been producing
a string of mostly brilliant albums for a decade now, and his success -- mainly
on the college circuit -- suggests that there's an audience for a nasty and
almost medieval imagination. "Perspex Island" is supposed to be about love, but
it is often hard to tell.

"Well, the words are incidental," said Mr. Hitchock the other day. "There was a
time when I wrote words and set them to music, but it didn't work. Now I use as
few chord changes and words as possible. I found out years ago that you could
never get away from the mike because you were singing a lot and you'd always
share a picture with a microphone."

Mr. Hitchcock's songs often sound like automatic writing, or as if they'd been
glued together from fragments of unassociated writing.

"If I had grown up pre-Bob Dylan I'd be a professor or a poet, or I would have
dabbled in painting," Mr. Hitchcock said. "Or I'd be a comedian. But singing is
more powerful than poetry. Singing is some form of prayer. You paint with words
and music to get to a point of invocation or exorcism."

LOAD-DATE: September 18, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Garth Brooks (Capitol Records)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              206 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 19, 1991, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

BUSINESS PEOPLE;
A Promotion to No. 2 At New Jersey Utility

BYLINE: By JOHN HOLUSHA

SECTION: Section D; Page 3; Column 5; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 315 words


Lawrence R. Codey yesterday was named president and chief operating oficer of
the Public Service Electric and Gas Company, which is the principal subsidiary
of the Public Service Enterprise Group and New Jersey's largest utility. The
president's position has been held by E. James Ferland, who remains chairman and
chief executive of both the utility and the holding company.

Mr. Codey was also elected a director of the parent company.

Mr. Codey said his biggest challenge would be helping manage a regulated utility
at a time when unregulated competitors were emerging in both the electric and
gas fields. "It's an industry problem," he said. "How do you work with a
regulated utility in a semi-deregulated environment?"

He said he would also try to speed up employee programs intended to improve the
quality of customer service.

Mr. Codey, who is 47 years old, was formerly senior vice president for
electricity at the utility. He is succeeded in that position by Robert J.
Dougherty Jr., 40, who had been senior vice president for customer operations.
Thomas W. Crimmins, 48, formerly vice president for nuclear operations, takes
over the Mr. Dougherty's post.

As president of the Newark-based utility, Mr. Codey will be responsible for
electric and gas service and customer operations for more than two million
customers in the northern and central parts of New Jersey.

He joined the company in 1973 as a lawyer and was named corporate rate counsel
two years later. He was elected a vice president in 1983 and was given operating
responsibility as senior vice president for gas in 1987. He was named to the
electricity position in January 1989.

A native of Montclair, N.J., Mr. Codey graduated from St. Peter's College in
1966 and Seton Hall University's School of Law in 1969. He served with the Army
in Vietnam in 1970 and 1971, reaching the rank of captain.

NAME: Lawrence R. Codey

LOAD-DATE: September 19, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              207 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 20, 1991, Friday, Late Edition - Final

THE GATES HEARINGS;
Excerpts From Senate Hearing on Nominee to Head C.I.A.

BYLINE: Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 18; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 3708 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 19


Following are excerpts from today's hearings by the Senate Select Committee on
Intelligence on the nomination of Robert M. Gates to be Director of Central
Intelligence, with questions by John H. Chafee, Republican of Rhode Island,
Senators Howard M. Metzenbaum, Democrat of Ohio; David L. Boren, Democrat of
Oklahoma; Frank H. Murkowski, Republican of Alaska; John C.Danforth, Republican
of Missouri, and John W. Warner, Republican of Virginia. The transcript was
provided by the Federal News Service.

STATEMENT BY ALAN D. FIERS JR.

For five years, I've waited for this opportunity to speak publicly and
uncumbered about Iran-contra. And I've rehearsed this statement a thousand times
in my mind in a thousand different places. Each time it has a different tone --
sometimes accusative, apologetic, aggressive and disappassionate. Today I'll
make a maximum effort to be dispassionate, and sometimes that's difficult for me
to do as I think some of you know. Always the theme is the same. The decision
points and judgment factors that seem so clear-cut today were far different
during the height of the storm. . . .

Today, in 1991, it's easy to forget the political landscape of a decade ago. In
the late 1970's and early 1980's, we were reeling from a series of defeats,
failures, setbacks: the Bay of Pigs, Vietnam, the Soviet invasion of
Afghanistan, events in Iran, the ascendancy of Soviet-Cuban-backed Communist
governments in Ethiopia, Angola, and Nicaragua, the near collapse in El
Salvador. In the face of these setbacks, by the late 1970's, the consensus upon
which our postwar foreign policy had been based had severely eroded.
Polarization had set in. . . . These events that we will be discussing today
took place in this atmosphere of polarization, distrust, and self-doubt. . . .

All I ask is that both sides of the story be treated equally and fairly. Before
responding to your questions, there are three specific points I would like to
make.

The first concerns me and the C.I.A. Media reporting surrounding my plea of
guilty to two misdemeanor charges of withholding information from Congress have
repeatedly made reference to my having acknowledged C.I.A. involvement in
illegal aid to the contras. This is not correct. . . . .

Let me add another thought. The allegations that C.I.A. turned a blind eye to or
otherwise supported drug smuggling are, to the full extent of my knowledge,
absolutely false and outrageous. Second, lost in the publicity surrounding the
Iran-contra investigation and the legal proceedings is the fact that the
Nicaraguan policy, including the support to the contras, was fully successful.
There is now an elected, democratic government in Nicaragua.

And, finally, I sincerely hope that the C.I.A. bashing will stop. . . .

QUESTIONS BY SENATOR BOREN

Q. The Government's statement of facts in your plea agreement, which you
consented to, states that during the early spring of 1986, Lieut. Col. [Oliver]
North told you that Israel was selling weapons to Iran and, "kicking dollars
into the contra's pot.". Did you ever tell Robert Gates of North's revelation to
you about the diversion?

A. I did not.

Q. Do you have any reason to believe that anyone else told Robert Gates of
North's revelation to you?

A. No. I think that's highly unlikely. At the time that I place that event, Bob
Gates was still the D.D.I., and I have no reason to suspect or to believe that
anyone would have shared that information with him. Indeed, not many knew it. .
. .

A. I did not. I reported that information to two people and to no one else in
the agency.  . . .

Q. Do you know whether Director [William J.] Casey knew about the diversion?

A. Not to my knowledge. Director Casey and I never spoke about it, Clair George
and I never spoke about it, and I do not have first-hand, direct knowledge that
the director knew or did not know about the diversion.

Q. Do you suspect that he might have known?

A. That's a very difficult question. If you knew Bill Casey well -- I suspect
that there are things that were going on that Bill Casey knew that he did not
share with me. And beyond that I really don't want to try to venture a guess --
to put something in his head or not in his head where I really just don't know.
. . . I might add that the conversations with Colonel North, both of them, were
informal. They were on the margins of other conversations, and they were
offhanded comments that Colonel North made to me that these things were
happening. . . .

Q. Thank you. Let's turn to the second matter that was a subject of your plea
agreement. . . . The downing of the Hasenfus plane [in 1986] . . . Do you have
any reason to believe that Mr. Gates was aware that the plane was a part of
North's operation at that time?

A. Not -- I don't have any reason that would make me think that he had the
details, or knew specifically that that plane was part of a North-White House
operation, in specific detail. . . . I think as the committee knows from the
staff debriefs, in several of the meetings that you made reference to, Bob Gates
and I had discussions that touched on the White House operation. . . .

I put no knowledge in Bob Gates's head -- I repeat, I put no knowledge in Bob
Gates's head -- that would call that his response -- into doubt. I never talked
with him in any specific detail about what Oliver North was doing or not doing.
. . .

Q. You've indicated that you don't have a basis for quarreling with Mr. Gates's
description of his knowledge for this committee. You have also indicated that
you began to feel that you should act as a buffer by not telling some people in
the agency all that you knew about certain things, to keep them, as you said, on
the other side of the line, bear that burden yourself. Can you assure us you're
not continuing in any way to try to act as a buffer for Mr. Gates at this point
in time, as you testify today?

A. The short answer is I can give you that assurance. And the longer answer is,
Mr. Chairman, I think those who know me know I'm not a fool. And at this point,
at this stage, with the liabilities that I have, to do that would be foolish
beyond all description. And I can guarantee you that I am not a fool.

Q. Do you have any reason to believe Mr. Gates knew of the decision to withhold
the information -- to, , "keep the spotlight off the administration"?

A. I -- no reason to.

Q. Do you have any understanding that you or any other C.I.A. official was under
any Presidential order not to disclose to the Congress the private contra
resupply or diversion activities in Central America? Now, I want to be clear,
I'm not talking about the finding about the Iran arms sales which we know
contained a Presidential directive that the Congressional committees were not to
be informed about that finding or that sale of arms to Iran.

A. I have no direct knowledge -- no knowledge -- of a Presidential directive.
But I would add to that that Oliver North and I had discussions about that. The
discussions were, essentially, "Alan, there are things you can't know, you
shouldn't know. You testify before Congress, and you can't have them in your
head." . . .


QUESTIONS BY SENATOR MURKOWSKI

Q. . . . Do you have any knowledge that Casey knew?

A. No, I really don't know the extent of Casey's knowledge. I didn't -- I don't
know then, I don't know now. The only conversation that Bill Casey and I ever
had on this -- he said to me one time, late in the game, "Alan, how much do you
know about Ollie's operations?" And I said, "Well, I know some." He said -- and
I said, "but not much." And he said, "Good. Keep it that way." Or something like
that. . . . Actually, I recalled, as I was preparing for this meeting and
dredging the recesses of my mind, one other conversation -- comment of a dying
man. It's in December -- maybe it's in late November. He said to me almost
wistfully, "Alan, Ollie ran one hell of an operation, didn't he?" . . .

I can tell you another conversation I had with Bill Casey. He called me -- I
remember this one also clearly. I was sitting in my office Nov. 26. It was the
day before I was to leave for Thanksgiving. He was already in his house in Palm
Beach. And he called me on the secure line and he said, "Alan?" And I said,
"Yeah?" He said, "Don't worry, everything's going to be O.K.. We haven't done
anything illegal -- you understand that?" And I said -- I never called him
"Bill," and I never called him "director;" I called him "boss." I said, "Yeah,
boss, I understand that." And he said, "Good. Now remember that. We haven't done
anything illegal." And he hung up, and I hung up the telephone.

QUESTIONS BY SENATOR CHAFEE

Q. . . . Let me, as an opener, quote to you what you said about your assessment
of Oliver North before the Iran-contra. And if this is incorrect, you let me
know: I never knew Colonel North to be an absolute liar, but I never took
anything he said at face value, because I knew that he was bombastic and
embellished the record, and threw curves, speedballs and spitballs to get what
he wanted. I have seen Colonel North play fast and loose with the facts, but on
the other hand, there was a lot of fact in what he said, too.

. . . It's been suggested in this committee that when Ollie North at the lunch
with Bill Casey in which Bob Gates dropped by, that Ollie North at the
conclusion made some mention of Swiss bank accounts. And the suggestion is that
anybody who heard the word Swiss bank accounts should immediately have sprung to
attention and conducted an investigation of the subject. Knowing Ollie North,
could this possibly fit in with the way you've categorized some of the comments
that he's made?

A. Yes. I mean, a Swiss bank account, in retrospect you jump on it with all four
paws.  At the time, it's probably something you'd file away. And I thought that
Bob Gates's characterizations of it -- it was interesting, it was
thought-provoking, intriguing, but not something that you stopped and dwelled on
-- probably is a very honest characterization of the way he responded. It's how
I responded to a lot of similar statements, not that one in particular, but
others that I -- I think I've described a few that Ollie made.

QUESTIONS BY SENATOR METZENBAUM

Q. Conceding then, in the world of Iran-contra, in the overall scheme of things,
Robert Gates was probably a minor player. He came late to the party and the
chain of command, and only promoted to Deputy Director in April of '86, long
after the conversation you described with North . . . and Director Casey which
led you to have the epiphany where you realized you would be a buffer for
knowledge about the illegal resupply activity.

My question is, once he was there, can you relate or describe any actions or
comments he made which led you to believe he didn't know about it or was against
it?

A. . . . There was in my mind an unshakeable belief, to this day, that a broad
array of people had an understanding of what was happening -- not the diversion,
not the sales of weapons to Iran, but that a private benefactor support network
for the democratic resistance or the contras in Nicaragua had been established
and was being quarterbacked by Ollie North.

I think, in my own mind -- and this is speculation -- that Bob Gates was in that
broad universe, and I don't think that necessarily is a pejorative, because
there were a lot of people in that universe. As I said, I think to the Tower
Board, members or folks in that universe started with Capitol Hill and went all
the way to Langley and beyond. . . . But within that, I have serious reason to
doubt that Bob Gates had extensive detail. He was late to the game. It was not
something that was talked about openly. At that point it was more understandings
between people. And I think he got glimpses and snatches and insights into it,
enough so that he knew that it was a problem someplace, there were shoals out
there the agency had to stay away from.  And to my -- as best I understand it,
that was his intent. That would be the way I would characterize his operation or
his posture as he phased into the role of D.D.C.I. -- or D.D.I.

Q. Was his intent to stay away from the facts, not to know the facts, is that
what you're saying?

A. Stay away from the problems, to stay away from the shoals that were there. As
to the facts, I don't know what his intent was or wasn't. . . .

Q. You've admitted to misrepresenting to Senate committees and the House
Intelligence Committee about your knowledge of the resupply mission and your
activity in support of it. . . . I know you have said that one of those
superiors who so instructed you was Mr. Clair George, former deputy director of
operations. What was it that Mr. George told you that made you think he was
acting under the directions of his agency?

A. . . . I told Clair George we had to put on the record when the Hasenfus
flight went down. I said, "We have to tell that story, because that will put
that -- that tells what we know, it puts on record what's happened, and it will
get us through the narrows that are ahead, Clair." And Clair said to me, and it
was drafted and the language was there, I dictated it; Clair said, "No, I don't
want to do that." . . .

. . . The statement that would have been more complete but not fully complete
would have gotten, in my view, the agency through the problem was, by Clair
George's instruction, deleted. I don't know whether or not he was acting on
instructions from higher. I never talked with anybody else about it.

Q. Higher would have been who?

A. Higher would have either Gates or Casey; much more likely Casey than Bob
Gates. I have no way of knowing that at all. I didn't ask.

Q. Why do you say much more likely Casey than ----

A. Much more likely Casey. Relationships between Clair and Gates were not close.
They were strained at best. And in a situation like that -- I'll give you a
venue about that that I think is very enlightening in a moment. In situations
such as that, my view is that Clair George would have been much more likely to
go to Bill Casey. . . .

QUESTIONS BY SENATOR DANFORTH

Q. Mr. Fiers, I'd like to ask you about personal relationships within the agency
and the significance of personal relationships within the agency. You said that
Mr. Casey did not adhere to organizational charts and that he would call you
directly and you said that your relationship with him was -- I think your words
were both "personal and professional." And you told the committee staff that it
was similar to a father-son relationship.

A. It had that aspect to it, yes.

Q. Do you know what kind of relationship Mr. Casey had with Bob Gates? Was it a
similar relationship or somewhat different?

A. I don't know the personal side of it; I know the professional side of it. He
had high regard fior Bob Gate's abilities; he thought he was the best manager
for the agency. . . .

Q. Is there a difference between being, to use your words to the committee
staff, chummy -- is there a difference as far as the dealings within the C.I.A.
as to having a chummy relationship and a more sort of businesslike relationship?

A. Yes. The C.I.A. is a family, and the D.O. is particularly a family. And I
can't speak with the same degree of clarity and specificity and knowledge about
the D.I. But I can tell you, the D.O. is like -- is broken down into clans: the
Middle East clan, the Latin American clan, the Far East clan, the
European-Soviet clan. . . .

And it doesn't transcend out that to the same degree. It's a friendship, it's
professional, but the bonds of mutual experience aren't there outside the clan.

QUESTIONS BY SENATOR WARNER

Q. I'm interested in trying to establish this relationship beteen the
operational side and the intelligence side . . . these two basic organizations,
D.O. and D.I., were highly competitive, or is that a weak word to describe it?

A. No I think that's a reasonable word. . . .

Q. And would that provide a basis for, should we say, a tension between George
and Bob Gates because of the inherent competitive nature of those two
organizations?

A. More than that. They were competitors in -- at least in their minds, for the
same job, the D.D.C.I. So that there was -- there is some organizational
competitiveness, and there is a personal competitiveness that was very much at
play in my view.

QUESTIONS BY SENATOR BOREN

Q. . . . Mr. Gates then, as Mr. Casey's deputy, lasted only about eight months,
in contrast, although an eventful eight months it was. For the entire period you
were deputy, Mr. Gates was the Deputy Director for Intelligence, I believe. . .
.

If Mr. Casey knew, and if Mr. George knew, in your opinion, is it possible that
Mr. Gates, as Deputy D.C.I. did not know during this period?

ANSWERS BY JOHN McMAHON

A. I think it's quite probable that he didn't know . . . you must remember that
when Gates came in -- and he came in April '82; I actually left, Mr. Chairman,
March 29, 1986; Gates came in in April '86 -- that when I came to that job I had
about four years of running the D.D.O., so I knew every operation in the agency,
I knew most of the people, certainly all of the senior people, and I knew how
the D.D.O. ticked.

When Bob Gates came to that job, he came out of the D.D.I., which was always
separated from the operational aspects of the agency.  So when he came in, he
had to learn a lot of things. And the Iran-contra was just a very small piece of
what the agency was involved in. And I can see where Bob wasn't brought into the
confidence of what was going on there. . . .

Q. Mr. Gates also testified that he was not aware of Colonel North's operational
role in the private resupply network being operated out of Ilopango Air Base in
El Salvador for much of 1986 until the Hasenfus plane went down in October. Mr.
Fiers has testified that he assumed Mr. Gates was somewhat aware of Mr. North's
role with the private aid to the contras. . . .

Do you think it is possible that Mr. Gates could not specifically have known of
Mr. North's operational role even if he knew about general rumors that Mr. North
was talking with the private benefactors and, as he put it, hand-holding with
them and talking with them about private fund-raising?

A. I would have to revert to my own situation in that case. There was a great
deal of chatter on the streets in Washington that there was the private effort
being engineered out of the N.S.C. and White House to fill the void through
private contributions to help the contras. I think you would have be immune not
to know that that was going on. . . .

But most of the employees, if not all of the employees in C.I.A., didn't want to
know what any American was doing in support of the contras. And I can recall
myself, as well as Bill Casey, testifying in Congress that we didn't want to
know because if we were ever called in a hearing and asked a question, we'd tell
what we knew. And that's why we avoided it. . . .

QUESTIONS BY SENATOR MURKOWSKI

Q. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. McMahon, in your statement, you made a reference
regarding Casey as not wanting to be on his back, or some such thing. It caused
me to wonder just what kind of a loop you were involved in in association with
Mr. Casey as his deputy. I assume that loop was rather informal, and sometimes
you're in the loop and sometimes you're out of the loop?

A. . . . The ground rules that I had with him was I had a copy of his calendar
for the day and I would go sit on the meetings that I thought I ought to be in
on, and I didn't bother with those meetings that I didn't.

Q. How did you know whether you ought to be in or not if he didn't tell you?

A. I guess it probably stems from arrogance because I knew the people in the
D.D.O., something Bob Gates didn't know, and I knew the operations going on in
the agency, something that Bob Gates didn't know,; he didn't have time to get up
to speed on. And maybe I just prevailed upon that background to know what I
wanted to get involved in.

Q. With regard to Mr. Gates' role as head of the Directorate of Intelligence, do
you have any reason to believe that he intentionally slanted intelligence to
suit the views or preconceived notions of the policymakers?

A. No, sir. From two factors; one, if it happened during my tenure I wouldn't
have let it happen. Number two, I know Bob Gates from his own character wouldn't
do it. I can recall a number of issues where Bob Gates disagreed with the
director, and the intelligence disagreed with the Director's pre-ordained
position.

Now, I say pre-ordained because Bill Casey had a policy bent to him. You can't
deny that. But he also had an open mind and if you could give him evidence to
the contrary, he was big enough to accept that. . . .

Q. Can you help explain to us why this is an issue -- why is the perception out
there that Gates seems to be involved in slanting intelligence? . . .

A. . . . They're misperceptions, and I can't sit here and tell you that I did a
job as D.D.C.I. if I tolerated for one iota politicization of any piece of
intelligence. And I do also know that there are 2,000, at least, analysts in the
D.D.I., who would be, headed by Bob Gates, walking out the front door if they
thought that the C.I.A. was going to become a policy tool of any administration,
whether Republican or Democrat. It goes to the very fiber of the intelligence
process. Intelligence has to be impartial and call it what it is, whether the
administrations like it or not.

QUESTIONS By SENATOR WARNER

Q. . . Were there periods when you were working for him that he cut you out of
the chain, went right to the person and the programs about which you knew very
little?

A. Well, that was - he would - I don't feel ever cut out. He would go talk to
who he wanted to. And as I mentioned earlier, I would have his calendar, and I
would go sit in on the meetings that I wanted to sit in on. I knew the people
who were going to those meetings with Bill, so I knew what the subject matter
would be, and I would go sit in. And he never invited me out. . . .

LOAD-DATE: September 20, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Alan D. Fiers Jr., former head of the Central Intelligence
Agency's Latin American operations, shaking hands with Senator Alan Cranston,
left, after he testified yesterday that he never discussed the diversion of
profits to the contras with Robert M. Gates. (Paul Hosefros/The New York Times)

TYPE: Text

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              208 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 20, 1991, Friday, Late Edition - Final

THE GATES HEARINGS;
Text of Gates's 1984 Memo to Casey On 'Straight Talk' About Nicaragua

BYLINE: Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 20; Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1862 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 19


The following is the text of a memorandum from Robert M. Gates, then the
C.I.A.'s deputy director for intelligence, to William J. Casey, the Director of
Central Intelligence, made public today by Senator Howard M. Metzenbaum,
Democrat of Ohio. It was dated Dec. 14, 1984.

1. It is time to talk absolutely straight about Nicaragua. To recap where we
are:

-- Based on all the assessments we have done, the contras, even with American
support, cannot overthrow the Sandinista regime. Whatever small change they had
to do that has been further diminished by the new weaponry being provided by the
Soviets and Cubans.

-- The Soviets and Cubans are turning Nicaragua into an armed camp with military
forces far beyond its defensive needs and in a position to intimidate and coerce
its neighbors.

-- The Nicaraguan regime is steadily moving toward consolidation of a
Marxist-Leninist government and the establishment of a permanent and well armed
ally of the Soviet Union and Cuba on the mainland of the Western Hemisphere. Its
avowed aim is to spread further revolution in the Americas.

-- The FDN [Nicaraguan Democratic Force, the main contra organization] has been
denied American assistance. Without further assistance by February, all the
information we have suggests the contras are going to begin heading into
Honduras. The Hondurans will then be faced with some 12,500 armed fighters (whom
the Hondurans see as closely allied with Alvarez [General Gustavo Alvarez
Martinez, the chief of the Honduran armed forces], thereby potentially
unsettling Honduras itself).

-- Flight of the contras into Honduras will be followed not only by their
families but presumably by a second wave of refugees and others who, seeking
abandonment of American efforts to force the Sandinistas to alter their regime,
will see the handwriting on the wall, determine that their personal futures are
in peril and leave the country. It is altogether conceivable that we could be
looking at an initial refugee wave from Nicaragua over the first year of 150,000
to 200,000 people (the [illegible ] the contras alone could account for 50,000).

-- Failure of the United States to provide further assistance to the resistance
and collapse of the contra movement would force Honduras to accommodate to the
Nicaraguan regime. One result of this would be the complete reopening of the
channels of arms support to the Salvadoran insurgency, thereby reversing the
progress made in recent months.

-- These unsettled political and military circumstances in Central America would
undoubtedly result in renewed capital flight from Honduras and Guatemala and
result in both new hardship and political instability throughout the region.

2. These are strong assertions but our research as well as the reports of our
people on the spot (for example our COS [chief of station] in Honduras) make it
possible to substantiate each of the above points.

3. What is happening in Central America in many ways vividly calls to mind the
old saw that those who forget the past are condemned to repeat it.

-- In 1958-60 we thought that we could reach some sort of an accommodation with
Castro that would encourage him to build a pluralistic government in Cuba. We
have been trying to do the same thing with the Nicaraguans, with the same
success.

-- In Vietnam, our strategy consisted of a series of measures applied very
gradually and over a long period of time. With each step of new U.S. involvement
the gradual approach enabled the enemy to adjust to each new turn of the screw
so that by the end of the war, even in the face of the most severe bombing, the
Vietnamese had developed enormous tolerance. Half measures, half-heartedly
applied, will have the same result in Nicaragua.

-- In 1975, the United States President announced that American assistance to
UNITA in Angola was in the national interest of the United States and strongly
urged the Congress to support military assistance to that group. The Congress
turned it down, thereby not only proving that the United States would not
involve itself in any significant way in the third world to combat Soviet
subversion and activity but, moreover, that the Congress could effectively block
any moves the President did wish to make. The Boland Amendment and the cutoff of
aid to the contras is having the same effect again, showing the Soviets and our
third world friends how little has changed in nine years, even with a President
like Ronald Reagan.

In a variety of places, including Vietnam, negotiations in effect became a cover
for the consolidation and further expansion of Communist control. While they
might observe whatever arrangements were reached for the first weeks or as long
as American attention (particularly media attention) was focused on the
situation, they knew they could outlast our attention span. Usually within a
relatively short period of time they were openly violating whatever agreements
had been achieved.

4. The truth of the matter is that our policy has been to muddle along in
Nicaragua with an essentially half-hearted policy substantially because there is
no agreement within the Administration or with the Congress on our real
objectives. We started out justifying the program on the basis of curtailing the
flow of weapons to El Salvador. Laudable though that objective might have been,
it was attacking a symptom of a larger problem in Central America and not the
problem itself.

3. It seems to me that the only way that we can prevent disaster in Central
America is to acknowledge openly what some have argued privately: that the
existence of a Marxist-Leninist regime in Nicaragua closely allied with the
Soviet Union and Cuba is unacceptable to the United States and that the United
States will do everything in its power short of invasion to put that regime out.
Hopes of causing the regime to reform itself for a more pluralistic government
are essentially silly and hopeless. Moreover, few believe that all those weapons
and the more to come are only for defense purposes. Only when we acknowledge
what the objective is in Central America can we begin to have any kind of
rational discussion on how to achieve it. As long as one maintains the fig leaf
of curtailing the flow of arms to El Salvador, all other efforts can easily be
politically dismissed.

6. Once you accept that ridding the continent of this regime is important to our
national interest and must be our primary objective, the issue then becomes a
stark one. You either acknowledge that you are willing to take all necessary
measures (short of military invasion) to bring down that regime or you admit
that you do not have the will to do anything about the problem and you make the
best deal you can. Casting aside all fictions, it is the latter course we are
on. Even new funding for the contras, particularly in light of the new Soviet
weaponry, is an inadequate answer to this problem. The contras will be able to
sustain an insurgency for a time but the cost and the pain will become very high
and the resistance eventually will wither. Any negotiated agreement simply will
offer a cover for the consolidation of the regime and two or three years from
now we will be in considerably worse shape than we are now.

7. The alternative to our present policy -- which I predict ultimately and
inevitably is leading to the consolidation of the Nicaraguan regime and our
facing a second Cuba in Central America -- is overtly to try to bring down the
regime. This involves a mustering of political force and will, first of all
within the Administration and second with the Congress, that we have not seen on
any foreign policy issue (apart from our defense rearmament) in many years. It
seems to me that this effort would draw upon the following measures:

-- Withdrawal of diplomatic recognition of the regime in Managua and the
recognition of a government in exile.

-- Overt provision to the government in exile of military assistance, funds,
propaganda support and so forth including major efforts to gain additional
support in international community, including real pressure.

-- Economic sanctions against Nicaragua, perhaps even including a quarantine.
These sanctions would affect both exports and imports and would be combined with
internal measures by the resistance to maximize the economic dislocation to the
regime.

-- Politically most difficult of all, the use of air strikes to destroy a
considerable portion of Nicaragua's military buildup (focusing particularly on
the tanks and the helicopters). This would be accompanied by an announcement
that the United States did not intend to invade Nicaragua but that no more arms
deliveries of such weapons would be permitted.

8. These are hard measures. They probably are politically unacceptable. But it
is time to stop fooling ourselves about what is going to happen in Central
America. Putting our heads in the sand will not prevent the events that I
outlined at the beginning of this note. Can the United States stand a second
Cuba in the Western Hemisphere? One need only look at the difficulty that Cuba
has caused this country over the past 25 years to answer that question.

9. The fact is that the Western Hemisphere is the sphere of influence of the
United States. If we have decided totally to abandon the Monroe Doctrine, if in
the 1980's taking strong actions to protect our interests despite the half of
criticism is too difficult, then we ought to save political capital in
Washington, acknowledge our helplessness and stop wasting everybody's time.

10. Without a comprehensive campaign openly aimed at bringing down the regime,
at best we somewhat delay the inevitable. Without U.S. funding for the contras,
the resistance essentially will collapse over the next year or two. While
seeking funding from other countries to the contras could help for a time, it is
essential to recognize that almost as important as the money is the fact of the
United States support both from an economic and political standpoint. Somehow,
knowing that Taiwan, South Korea and Singapore are behind you does not carry the
same weight. Economic sanctions surely would have a significant impact in the
initial months, but unless accompanied by a broad range of other actions this
impact will diminish over time and we will find ourselves with a Nicaragua even
more closely attached to the Soviet Union and Cuba than we have now.

11. All this may be politically out of the question. Probably. But all the cards
ought to be on the table and people should understand the consequences of what
we do and do not do in Nicaragua. Half measures will not even produce half
successes. The course we have been on (even before the funding cut-off) -- as
the last two years suggest -- will result in further strengthening of the regime
and a Communist Nicaragua which, allied with its Soviet and Cuban friends, will
serve as the engine for the destabilization of Central America. Even a well
funded contra movement cannot prevent this; indeed, relying on and supporting
the contras as our only action may actually hasten the ultimate, unfortunate
outcome. -- ROBERT M. GATES

LOAD-DATE: September 20, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Senator Howard M. Metzenbaum, left, released a memo written to
William J. Casey, the Director of Central Intelligence, by Robert M. Gates, who
proposed an extensive American campaign to overthrow the Nicaraguan government
of President Daniel Ortega Saavedra, right.; John McMahon, who was Robert M.
Gates's predecessor as Deputy Director of Central Intelligence, as he prepared
to testify before the Senate Intelligence Committee yesterday in Washington.
(Associated Press)

TYPE: Text

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              209 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 20, 1991, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Review/Film;
Resolving the Painful Love Between 2 Brothers

BYLINE: By JANET MASLIN

SECTION: Section C; Page 6; Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 835 words


"Highway Patrolman," the haunting Bruce Springsteen song that Sean Penn's film
"The Indian Runner" is "inspired by" (to cite the diplomatic wording of the
credits), tells of the troubled love between two brothers. Joe, the police
officer of the title, struggles to reconcile his civic duty with the
responsibility he feels to his kin. Frankie, Joe's violent and unpredictable
brother, does nothing to make this easy. As Mr. Springsteen puts it, narrating
desolately from Joe's standpoint: "I got a brother named Frankie and Frankie
ain't no good."

The succinctness of that is hard to beat. Yet Mr. Penn has tried -- and
succeeded to a surprising degree. Devoting more than two hours to the
embroidering of a five-minute song, he has reached for a ragged emotional
reality that recalls the films of John Cassavetes (one of those to whom "The
Indian Runner" is dedicated), and he has framed even his film's most unruly
episodes with unexpected delicacy. Loose, rambling and sometimes rudderless as
it is, "The Indian Runner" has a fundamental honesty that gives it real
substance.

Flirting constantly with the dangers of pure self-indulgence, Mr. Penn still
manages to keep the improvisatory quality of this painful family drama from
becoming overwhelming. For all its hazy excesses, the film seldom loses sight of
its story's raw essence. That lies in the tensions between quiet, upright Joe
Roberts (David Morse) and the mercurial Vietnam veteran Frankie (Viggo
Mortensen), as well as in the backdrop of economic hardship that has shaped the
lives of their parents (Charles Bronson and Sandy Dennis).

It can also be found in the alternating flashes of viciousness and sweetness
between Frankie and his childlike girlfriend, Dorothy (Patricia Arquette), and
in the fascination with which Joe observes his brother's frightening excesses.
Mr. Penn is able to identify the underlying similarities between these two
brothers, despite their very different behavior, without overstating the case.

As moody and volatile as the problematic Frankie, "The Indian Runner" starts off
with a killing and sustains a threat of possible violence throughout even its
gentlest episodes. That threat is especially evident in the presence of Mr.
Mortensen, a magnetic actor capable of both scary outbursts and eerie, reptilian
calm. (Mr. Penn's own acting style is strongly echoed in this performance.) It
is some measure of Mr. Mortensen's savage, mocking ferocity that in a final
confrontation with Dennis Hopper, who plays a bartender given to in-your-face
philosophizing, Mr. Hopper seems easily the tamer of the two.

In probing the psyche of a wounded, incorrigible loser like Frankie, Mr. Penn is
not surprisingly apt to do some posturing of his own. If this film has heart, it
also has attitude to spare. A man whose son has been killed bursts into an
angry, defiant chorus of "John Henry"; the figure of the title (from a Plains
Indian legend commingling the hunter with his prey) runs through the film in
whiteface; the characters are much more apt to say things like "Hey there" than
"Honey, I'm home." There are also a bearded lady, a few well-wrought montages
that don't truly connect the events they encompass, a graphic childbirth
sequence and an exaggerated element of country corn. "She sure could make a good
apple pie," it is said of someone who has lately died.

Mr. Penn's direction of actors seems to have been most critical at the casting
level; after that, the right people -- and they are the right people -- have
mostly been put in place and studied with great interest by Anthony B.
Richmond's adroit cinematography. Mr. Morse, as Joe, radiates stolidity,
kindness and a trace of repressed yearning; Valeria Golino, as his wife, Maria,
displays a lovely vitality. Ms. Arquette, with a Jean Seberg haircut and a
baby-faced innocence, is a perfect visual counterpoint to the darkly menacing
Mr. Mortensen.

Mr. Bronson and Ms. Dennis are unlikely but strangely effective as the dazed,
determinedly polite parents who have lost their moorings. "He's a very restless
boy, that Frankie," says Mr. Bronson, in what sounds like a prime example of the
film's improvised style, and of its poignant understatement. "That's what got
him into trouble, you know."

"The Indian Runner" is rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult
guardian). It includes strong language, violence and explicit scenes of
childbirth.

The Indian Runner

Directed and written by Sean Penn; inspired by the song "Highway Patrolman" by
Bruce Springsteen; director of photography, Anthony B. Richmond; edited by Jay
Cassidy; music by Jack Nitzsche; production designer, Michael Haller; produced
by Don Phillips; released by the Mount Film Group. Running time: 125 minutes.
This film is rated R.

Joe . . . David Morse
Frank . . . Viggo Mortensen
Maria . . . Valeria Golino
Dorothy . . . Patricia Arquette
Father . . . Charles Bronson
Mother . . . Sandy Dennis
Caesar . . . Dennis Hopper

LOAD-DATE: September 20, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Charles Bronson (Michael Tighe)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              210 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 20, 1991, Friday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

THE GATES HEARINGS;
Memo Shows Gates Sought Big Anti-Sandinista Effort

BYLINE: By ANDREW ROSENTHAL,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 20; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 648 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 19


In a 1984 memorandum, Robert M. Gates, who was then Deputy Director of Central
Intelligence, proposed an extensive American campaign to overthrow the
Nicaraguan Government, including bombing raids on Nicaraguan military targets.

"These are hard measures," Mr. Gates wrote in the memo, which condemned even
President Ronald Reagan's efforts in behalf of the Nicaraguan resistance as
"half measures, half-heartedly applied."

"They are probably politically unacceptable," Mr. Gates said, "but it is time to
stop fooling ourselves about what is going to happen in Central America."

He predicted that Nicaragua would become "another Cuba," fostering Soviet
expansion, and that Washington would have failed again to prevent the spread of
Communism, as he said had happened in Vietnam.

Memo Addressed to Casey

The memo of Dec. 14, 1984, was written to William J. Casey, the Director of
Central Intelligence. It was released today by Senator Howard M. Metzenbaum,
Democrat of Ohio, during the hearings on Mr. Gates's nomination to the post held
by the late Mr. Casey.

Mr. Gates was not asked publicly about the memo today and it was not clear what
his motives were; he may have been intending to be deliberately provocative in
an effort to open the debate on Nicaragua policy that he said was lacking. Mr.
Gates advocated overt actions, not secret ones, and did not recommend
circumventing the Congressional ban on American aid to the contras fighting the
Sandinista government.

But his analysis and his proposals went further than Mr. Casey himself and
underscored Mr. Gates's hard-line views on Soviet expanionism, which some of his
Senate critics say led to his more recent conclusion that the changes in the
Soviet Union were not genuine and lasting.

The memo also strikes at questions raised by some Democratic senators about
whether Mr. Gates, as the senior official in charge of intelligence analysis,
stepped outside that role and crossed the line between providing neutral
analysis and advocating policy positions.

'I am Quite Surprised'

After Mr. Metzenbuam read out portions of the memo at today's hearing, John
McMahon, Mr. Gates's predecessor as Deputy Director for Intelligence, said: "I
am quite surprised by what you read and I don't know what prompted Bob to do
that."

In the memo, Mr. Gates concluded, "The contras, even with American support,
cannot overthrow the Sandinistas."

"The truth of the matter is that our policy has been to muddle along in
Nicaragua with an essentially half-hearted policy because there is no agreement
within the Administration or with the Congress on our real objectives," Mr.
Gates said.

Mr. Gates said Washington should move beyond its then-stated goal of halting the
arms flow to the leftist rebels in El Salvador and work overtly to overthrow the
Nicaraguan Government, doing "everything in its power short of invasion to put
that regime out."

He said this should include four measures:

*Withdrawing United States recognition of the Nicaraguan Government in favor of
a government in exile.

*"Overt provision to the government in exile of military assistance, funds,
propaganda support and so forth."

*Economic sanctions that could include a quarantine, "combined with internal
measures by the resistance to maximize the economic dislocation to the regime,"
an apparent reference to a campaign of sabotage.

*"Politically the most difficult of all, the use of air strikes to destroy a
considerable portion of Nicaragua's military buildup (focusing primarily on the
tanks and the helicopters)."

"If we have decided totally to abandon the Monroe Doctrine, if in the 1980's
taking strong actions to protect our interests despite the hail of criticism is
too difficult," Mr. Gates wrote, "then we ought to save political capital in
Washington, acknowledge our helplessness and stop wasting everybody's time."

LOAD-DATE: September 20, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: September 21, 1991, Saturday

CORRECTION:

Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about a memorandum written by
Robert M. Gates, President Bush's nominee for Director of the Central
Intelligence Agency, with authority solely over the C.I.A.'S staff of analysts;
he was not Deputy Director of Central Intelligence, a position involving
day-to-day responsibility for the C.I.A. and other American intelligence
agencies.


GRAPHIC: Photo: William J. Casey, who received a memo from Robert M. Gates
advocating the use of air strikes to destroy a considerable portion of
Nicaragua's military buildup. (Associated Press)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              211 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 20, 1991, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Why the M.I.A.'s Live On

BYLINE: By Cokie Roberts;  Cokie Roberts is special correspondent for ABC News
and a commentator for National Public Radio.

SECTION: Section A; Page 27; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 637 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


I am the child of an M.I.A. My father, Hale Boggs, disappeared in the line of
duty, summoned not by his country but by a Democratic colleague in Congress. He
was a good man who went to the aid of his party.

At this time, when the families of the missing from Vietnam have again captured
national attention, it seems to me that we are asking the wrong question. While
focusing on whether some M.I.A.'s might still be alive, we fail to understand
why it's crucial to solve the mystery of the missing.

It's a lesson my family had years to learn, but at least we learned it without
suffering the indignities these families have. They are thousands of miles from
where their loved ones are lost, with their Government only occasionally showing
any interest in their cause and the Vietnamese Government proving totally
untrustworthy, first saying all bodies have been located, then suddenly
producing some remains.

My family's experience could not have been more different, but it gives some
small glimmer of how these families must feel.

In October 1972, my father, the majority leader of the House of Representatives,
took off in a Cessna-310 from Anchorage, Alaska, bound for Juneau on a campaign
swing for Representative Nick Begich. The plane never arrived and has never been
found. The Government employed every resource in the search and extended every
courtesy to our family.

President Richard Nixon dispatched a military plane to take us to Alaska where
search coordinators daily, sometimes twice daily, briefed us on the progress of
the search -- or more correctly -- lack of it.

The men in our group took the information, well, manfully. The women -- my
sister, sister-in-law and I -- refused to accept it. (I note with interest that
it's the women relatives of the M.I.A.'s we hear from, insisting that their
missing, or their hostages, be returned.) Though the women pushed, it was my
brother who prevailed on the military to bring in the SR-71 spy plane whose
pictures redrew the map of Alaska but failed to find my father.

In November, Hale Boggs was re-elected though he was missing, but when Congress
convened in January his seat was declared vacant. That served as an end point.
The next day, dignitaries descended on New Orleans for what had all the
appearances of a state funeral. But it could not be a funeral: there was no
body. And we all learned why families have ritually dealt with death throughout
centuries and cultures. As my sister wrote: I no longer laugh/in simple-minded
sophistication/at burial customs./The laying out, the viewing, the/elaborate
preparations/are all signposts/of a reality/new/shocking/ irrefutable.

Before my sister died last year, she insisted on an open coffin.

I know my father is not alive. I know that the most massive search ever
conducted in this country would have found that plane had it not sunk to the
bottom of the sea. But still, I catch myself hesitating before changing the
kitchen wallpaper, fearing that he will come home and think strangers are in the
house. As silly as it seems, I every so often wonder if Daddy is alive in some
remote Alaskan village, unaware of who he is. I virtually memorize stories about
long lost planes suddenly found in Alaska.

So the uncertainty will always nag at the back of my brain. But at least I have
the satisfaction of knowing that my country did everything it could.

It can do at least as much to find its soldiers. They, after all, went into
danger at the nation's demand. And though it's important to know if some
soldiers survived, it is just as important to identify those who died. Their
families are entitled to the peace of certainty; they deserve to mourn without
fear that their mourning somehow implies they have abandoned hope; they are due
the dignity of burying their dead.

LOAD-DATE: September 20, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              212 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 21, 1991, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Democrats Pass Torch As Bearers Seek Light

BYLINE: By ROBIN TONER,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 6; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1302 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES, Sept. 20


After two months of decision making by potential Presidential contenders, the
torch has been passed to a new, eclectic and largely unknown generation of
Democrats.

As the Democratic National Committee begins its fall meeting here today, its
members are surveying, for the first time, a Presidential field that almost no
one could have predicted a year ago, when most of the speculation centered on
names like Gephardt, Bentsen and Cuomo. The new candidates, most of whom will be
speaking to the national committee this weekend, are, by definition,
risk-takers, undeterred by the crushing approval ratings of President Bush.

Critics might suggest that these contenders have nothing to lose, no top
Congressional leadership positions or venerable reputations forged in a lifetime
of national politics. There is no Walter F. Mondale here, offering himself as a
candidate already tested, rooted in the party's establishment and ready to lead.

Four years ago the Democratic field was derided by its critics as the Seven
Dwarfs, but these candidates, as a whole, are at least as unfamiliar to the
voters.

Comfortable as Outsiders

Yet most of them run comfortably as outsiders, from Gov. L. Douglas Wilder of
Virginia, who fires away at the Washington elite of both parties, to Senator Bob
Kerrey of Nebraska, who first ran for elective office just nine years ago and
often seems to be a critic of politics rather than a practitioner.

One of the earliest dynamics of this race seemed to pit Senator Tom Harkin of
Iowa, running as the voice of traditional Democratic liberalism, against Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas, positioning himself as a moderate trying to refashion
the party's message to reclaim the middle class. But this neat construct has
been complicated in recent weeks by the expected entry of Mr. Kerrey, whose
message is still unknown -- his advisers say it will come in his address
announcing his candidacy next week -- but who often tries to cut across
ideological lines.

Compelling Life Story

Mr. Kerrey, a Medal of Honor winner who lost part of his leg in Vietnam, is
expected to rely heavily on his compelling life story and, his allies and fans
say, on his charismatic personality. He is likely to give Mr. Clinton a run for
the mantle of young, fresh, future-oriented Democrat.

Another recent twist in this race is the sudden renewal of interest by the Rev.
Jesse Jackson, who was widely expected to sit this campaign out but who has
recently tried to signal that he is still very much a live option.

While the strategies of the various campaigns are still in the earliest stages,
a few things seem clear: Iowa, whose caucuses make it the scene of the first
nominating contest, will get far less emphasis by the candidates this time,
largely because of the presence of Mr. Harkin, its native son, and Mr. Kerrey, a
neighboring son. New Hampshire, scene of the first primary a week later, will be
a battleground, probably the first real chance the candidates have to
demonstrate their credibility and get winnowed in or winnowed out.

The South will be critical for Mr. Clinton and Mr. Wilder, but Mr. Clinton's
allies say he has learned from the experience of Senator Al Gore of Tennessee,
whose 1988 campaign quickly faltered after a strong showing in the region. "The
experience of Gore showed that you cannot be just a regional candidate," said
Frank Greer, an adviser to Mr. Clinton.

Target: Status Quo

And the early atmospherics of this race are also clear: Almost all the
candidates are likely to run, hard and rough, against the status quo, even when
it includes their own party. "These aren't people who see themselves as being
part of a coalition government" in Washington, said Bill Carrick, a political
consultant who headed Representative Richard A. Gephardt's Presidential campaign
in 1988 and is now advising Mr. Kerrey.

Perhaps seeking virtue in necessity, some Democratic strategists argue that this
could be exactly the kind of candidate they need in 1992, when the Democrats, as
is always the case with the party out of power, have to appeal to the voters'
yearning for change. "I'm not sure this is the right political environment for
the old lions of the party," said Geoffrey Garin, a Democratic poll taker.

The candidates will be testing their themes before an important audience this
weekend: the 413 members of the Democratic National Committee will play critical
roles in the nominating process as automatic delegates to the convention.
Scheduled to speak to the committee are Mr. Clinton, Mr. Harkin, Mr. Jackson,
former Senator Paul E. Tsongas of Massachusetts, former Gov. Edmund G. Brown Jr.
of California, Representative Dave McCurdy of Oklahoma and former Mayor Larry
Agran of Irvine, Calif.

Mr. Harkin, Mr. Agran and Mr. Tsongas have officially declared their
candidacies, while Mr. Brown, Mr. Clinton, Mr. Jackson and Mr. McCurdy are still
exploring campaigns. Mr. Kerrey and Mr. Wilder, who announced his candidacy last
week, both said they would not attend the meeting because of previous
commitments.

Like most Democratic meetings, this one is being marked by a flurry of
speculation about Gov. Mario M. Cuomo of New York, who consistently says he has
no plans to seek the nomination. John Marino, the Democratic state chairman of
New York, said he knew of no change in the Governor's status but also said that
"the Cuomo's, the Bentsen's, the Jackson's have until Thanksgiving" to make up
their minds.

The most full-throated example of the outsider's appeal came today from Mr.
Brown, one of several potential candidates who were courting Democrats in small
caucuses here. "Half the people have pulled out of the political process," he
said, "and the democratic process itself is viewed with profound skepticism."

Mr. Brown said that after his travels around the world, his work with Mother
Teresa in Calcutta and his years away from politics, "I know what ails us is not
just a lack of money" but the need for a deeper awakening from the grass roots.
The message seemed an unusual one to be offering to the Association of State
Democratic Chairs, composed of the most pragmatic of party regulars.

'Party of Change'

Mr. Clinton sounded a softer but similar theme when he argued today, "The
Democratic Party has survived for 200 years by being the party of change."

The current class of present and likely candidates defies the conventions of
politics in other ways: Half the likely field is single, including Mr. Wilder
and Mr. Kerrey, who are divorced, and Mr. Brown, who has never married. And the
intact marriages feature career-oriented wives: Mr. Clinton, Mr. Tsongas and Mr.
Harkin are all married to lawyers.

The candidates also share certain problems, principally that of being unknown to
the vast majority of Americans, according to recent opinion polls. An ABC survey
of 426 adults identifying themselves as Democrats found that the largest number,
32 percent, had no opinion when offered a choice of the likely Democratic field.
That survey, conducted Sept. 13-15, had a margin of sampling error of plus or
minus 5.5 percentage points.

But here again, some Democrats are finding virtue in necessity: "Our whole
field, except for Jesse, have clean slates," argued James Ruvolo, a member of
the Democratic National Committee from Ohio. While some might find anonymity a
hard burden five months before the New Hampshire primary, Mr. Ruvolo said with a
shrug: "I think that's good. Look how our known candidates have done recently."

As the Democrats gathered here today and began to size up their field, many of
them seemed determined to be upbeat. "We're not like you all," Bob Slagle, the
Texas Democratic chairman, told reporters. "We see our cup half full. We think
we have a reasonable chance."

LOAD-DATE: September 21, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: The Democratic National Committee is meeting in Los Angeles this
weekend. Senator Tom Harkin of Iowa, right, a Presidential candidate, helped
rail workers in the city lay electrical cable yesterday. (Associated Press)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              213 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 22, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

STAGE VIEW;
The Last of the One-Man Shows

BYLINE: By FRANK RICH

SECTION: Section 2; Page 1; Column 2; Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 2799 words


When Joseph Papp announced last month that he was appointing JoAnne Akalaitis to
succeed him as artistic director of the New York Shakespeare Festival, he also
announced, almost incidentally, that he would retain the title of "producer." It
remains to be seen whether the post will prove honorary or real, but there has
been nothing symbolic about Mr. Papp's identification with the role of producer
until now. Joseph Papp has been the most important producer in the New York
theater, period, for most of his 35-year-long career. In recent seasons, as the
other most significant producers of his generation stopped producing altogether
(Harold Prince), left New York (Roger Stevens), died (Richard Barr) or reduced
their output to a trickle (David Merrick), Mr. Papp has been the only giant left
on the field.

This is why his illness-induced departure at age 70 has thrown the already
reeling New York theater community into a deeper funk. There is much love for
the man himself, a famously impossible character whose stormy, larger-than-life
personality is the very essence of theater. There is much uncertainty about the
future of the New York Shakespeare Festival, the institution Mr. Papp created in
his own image and built into the most influential theatrical organization in the
United States. But Mr. Papp's semi-retirement also baldly dramatizes the
increasing decline and possible extinction of the theatrical tradition, that of
the impresario, which he represents.

Without producers like Mr. Papp, the theater cannot thrive in New York, on or
Off Broadway. Rather than a lack of theatrical talent, it is the dwindling of
the producers' ranks that is most responsible for the New York theater's current
state of depletion and disarray. On Broadway, where most independent producers
have long since been driven away by skyrocketing costs, the concomitant decline
in production is by now an old story. As Mr. Papp demonstrated, nonprofit
companies Off Broadway need producers, too -- whether they call themselves
artistic directors or not -- to create activity and excitement. But nonprofit
companies are not geared to creating producers, either -- Mr. Papp had no
in-house heir apparent -- and much of a generation of young producing talent has
been lost to the film, television and music industries. Ms. Akalaitis, 54, whose
primary theatrical experience has been as a director, must rise to the role of
producer if the Shakespeare Festival is not to become another casualty of the
New York theatrical malaise.

What is a producer? It is almost easier to say what a producer is not. A
producer is not a playwright or, most of the time, a particularly gifted
director. (Mr. Papp did direct on occasion, but often out of necessity and
never, in my experience, memorably.) A producer does not have to be an
intellectual, a businessman or a manager. No specific training is required.
Magic is, even if it is only pulled off with mirrors and smoke. What a producer
does, usually out of view, is cause plays to be produced and induce people into
attending those plays. A producer is not an artist but makes it possible for
artists to do their best work and find an audience. To accomplish this, a
producer must have the cunning of a master politician, the wiliness of a
snake-oil salesman, the fanatical drive of a megalomaniac and, given the eternal
precariousness of the New York theater, nerves of steel. It doesn't hurt,
either, to have some taste and a consuming passion for the stage.

Mr. Papp is the most spectacular case in point. He has all these attributes and
then some, including an idealism that led him to fight for freedom of expression
throughout his career, from his refusal to cooperate with the House Un-American
Activities Committee through his earliest struggles with Robert Moses to pursue
Shakespeare in Central Park, his 1973 altercation with CBS over the broadcast of
the anti-Vietnam War play "Sticks and Bones" and his recent battles against the
National Endowment for the Arts. To appreciate fully how great a producer Mr.
Papp has been, however, one cannot merely note the familiar laundry list of
landmark shows and fervent causes associated with his name but must understand
that he leaves the New York theater an almost completely different place than he
found it.

The Past Is Prologue
How the Power Changed Hands

In 1956, when Mr. Papp, still supporting himself by working as a stage manager
at CBS, presented his first free Shakespeare production at the East River Park
Amphitheater, Broadway was the be-all and end-all of American theater. It was a
vintage time for Broadway, too -- since arguably the greatest American musical,
"My Fair Lady," the greatest American play, "Long Day's Journey Into Night," and
the most revolutionary modern play from abroad, "Waiting for Godot," all opened
in Broadway houses in 1956. But a decade later, Mr. Papp, having turned
Shakespeare in the Park into an institution, opened his indoor theater complex,
the Public, and with his very first production, "Hair," started a complete
reversal of the power equation of the New York theater.

When "Hair" moved to Broadway, it helped prove that a nonprofit company's
theatrical experiments could be the commercial theater's lifeblood, especially
at a time when the Broadway theater had fewer and fewer ideas of its own and was
increasingly out of touch with the new audience that "Hair" representatively
tapped into. By the time "A Chorus Line" moved to Broadway from the Public in
1975, less than a decade after "Hair," it had become standard practice for
Broadway theater owners to turn to nonprofit theater companies, whether Off
Broadway or beyond New York, for the plays and musicals that could fill their
houses. That "A Chorus Line," the quintessential Broadway musical, had
originated Off Broadway was the final blow to Broadway's once unchallenged
position of supremacy. Today, virtually all Broadway plays and musicals are
transfers from nonprofit theaters like the Public, the only perennial exceptions
being Neil Simon plays and London imports.

While Mr. Papp was hardly the first and certainly not the sole author of this
revolution, he was the most visible and successful of its firebrands. He did not
invent either Off Broadway or the nonprofit theater movement, both of which
predated his arrival, but he consolidated the new system and made it flourish.
He not only gave Broadway the hit musicals to which it is addicted -- a role
never contemplated by the early Off Broadway movement -- but he also supplied it
with prickly yet crowd-drawing plays like "That Championship Season," "For
Colored Girls" and "Plenty."

Paradoxically enough, he beat Broadway at its own game by reviving the lost arts
of high-stakes artistic gambling and nonstop promotion that had once made the
Great White Way an electrifying venue. His motives, to be sure, were different
than those of most commercial producers. He was not out to make money for
himself (though he was not always above searching for patently commercial
projects to shore up institutional deficits, especially with his post-"Chorus
Line" musicals). He believed in a truly public theater -- one that, ideally,
would not only have free admission (achieved in the park, not at the Public) but
would also cater to many tastes, including those excluded from Broadway by high
ticket prices and middlebrow, middle-class values. He wanted a racially and
ethnically diverse theater on both sides of the footlights, one that might
change, or at least nudge, the world.

Even so, he practiced many of the same skills that had once defined
razzle-dazzle Broadway entrepreneurship. Though he did not need to hunt down
investors eager for glamour and profit, he did have to solicit contributions
from public and private sponsors looking for civic prestige. Though he did not
have to fill seats to meet his payroll, he did have to fill seats to keep the
Shakespeare Festival in the public eye -- for without prominence, his theater
could not attract exciting artists and its essential philanthropic subsidies.
Most important, Mr. Papp, like any prolific commercial producer, had to gain the
loyalty of writers, directors and actors of all sorts, unknown and famous alike,
and he had to do it by the sheer force of his personality and that of his
theater, not by financial inducements that could hope to match Broadway's, let
alone Hollywood's.

Entr'acte
An Autocrat Partial to Schmaltz

When Mr. Papp had been in the service in World War II, he was called "Mr. Show
Biz" for the variety entertainments he produced (and sometimes emceed) for the
stateside United States Naval Reserve. And Mr. Show Biz he remained. Just as he
broke Broadway's rules, so he broke Off Broadway's, refusing to strike the notes
of pious altruism and cultural high-mindedness that have inflated too many of
the pioneers and apostles of the nonprofit theater movement (and some of their
theaters) into pompous bores.

Mr. Papp wrote his own ticket. Like an egomaniacal showman out of the Ziegfeld
era, he chomped a cigar in television commercials, plastered his name (and
sometimes his picture) over advertisements and marquees, gave outrageous
interviews and announced grandiose projects that never materialized. He actually
put together a nightclub act, performed with top hat and tails and drenched in
schmaltz, in the late 1970's.

Nor did Mr. Papp shy from public squabbles with city officials and journalists
when he wanted publicity or felt his theater or others, including Broadway's,
were threatened. If there is a critic Mr. Papp did not yell at in the Public
lobby -- certainly I was not exempt -- chances are Mr. Papp did not read him.
Probably few playwrights or directors, no matter how sacrosanct, were exempt
from the Papp fury, either.

Make no mistake about it: Mr. Papp sold his shows to the hilt, even if the goal
was not to line his own pockets. Not the least of his achievements was to sell
the public on Shakespeare, for without Mr. Papp's Shakespeare productions, as
wildly variable as they are and always have been, it is hard to see what would
have kept the canon a continuous presence in the New York theater, as opposed to
the classroom, over 35 years.

Like most great producers in any branch of show business, Mr. Papp was an
autocrat; there were no committee decisions at the Shakespeare Festival, as
there had been at the fractious, short-lived Group Theater of the 1930's, whose
goals Mr. Papp's company sometimes shared. And he had his own strong tastes,
which were esthetically conservative and politically progressive, not unlike the
activist theater, at the Group and elsewhere, of the Depression he grew up in.

The plays closest to Mr. Papp's heart, Shakespeare's always excepted, were those
that challenged the establishment about issues like the Vietnam War, race
relations and the AIDS crisis and revealed the lives of the underclass. Yet his
curiosity compelled him to reach out in other, seemingly contradictory
directions. For all his preoccupation with the theater of current events, Mr.
Papp was sentimental enough about the past to revive the likes of "The Pirates
of Penzance" and "Cafe Crown." For all his championing of American writers (and
distinctly American productions of Shakespeare), he embraced English and
European playwrights whose social activism echoed his own (notably Vaclav Havel,
David Hare and Caryl Churchill). For all his apparent affection for naturalistic
agitprop, he encouraged theater that experimented in form, including that of the
Mabou Mines, the troupe that introduced him to his successor, JoAnne Akalaitis.

What other producer right now, in the nonprofit or commercial theater, could
attract (and work with) talents as varied as Michael Bennett and Richard
Foreman, Miguel Pinero and John Guare, Linda Ronstadt and James Earl Jones,
David Henry Hwang and Wallace Shawn, Meryl Streep and Eric Bogosian? The mix
served Mr. Papp and the New York theater audience equally well because the
Shakespeare Festival's more commercial work inevitably helped underwrite its
more daring experiments, just as those hits would also lure some of their
mainstream audiences into becoming subscribers who would then sample the offbeat
productions on the Papp schedule.

This was smart producing of the old school updated for a new age. However
inadvertently, the Papp program at the Public echoed the Theater Guild's
between-the-wars seasons in which ground-breaking premieres of Shaw and O'Neill
would mix with an unconventional, unexpected musical hit like "Oklahoma!" In
both his flair for publicity stunts and his eclectic producing schedule, Mr.
Papp was not even so far removed from a Broadway archetype like David Merrick,
who would use some of the cash generated by a "Hello, Dolly!" (and, in his case,
the tax advantage of a nonprofit foundation) to bring New York an angry John
Osborne play or the shocking Peter Brook "Marat/Sade."

Who will fill the leadership role of producer in the New York theater now? On
Broadway, where producing today is mostly the province of theater owners who
book and bankroll shows without creating them, the last attention-grabbing
showman, Cameron Mackintosh, is British and only interested in musicals. The
other New York producers able to muster more than one show a season are, like
Mr. Papp, the artistic directors of nonprofit Off Broadway companies, many of
which were founded in emulation of the Public.  While none of these producers
has yet operated at Mr. Papp's epic scale, Lynne Meadow, at the burgeoning
Manhattan Theater Club, and Andre Bishop, soon to move from Playwrights Horizons
to Lincoln Center, are poised to expand their already important roles in a
brighter economy.

The Curtain Rises
A Solo Spotlight, A New Performer

As for Ms. Akalaitis, she is in an impossible position under the best of
circumstances, given the act she must follow, and the circumstances are awful,
given the Shakespeare Festival's financial crisis. An ambitious, if uneven,
stage director with a knack for stirring up controversy but scant record of
collaborating with living American playwrights, Ms. Akalaitis is smart enough to
know that she cannot imitate Joseph Papp and must follow her own instincts. But
are her instincts those of a producer?

The answer will have little or nothing to do with her talents as a director. If
she's doing her job to the fullest, she probably will be directing infrequently
anyway. Nor will her producing prowess have much to do with her abilities as an
administrator, or her nose for possible Broadway transfers, or her public
positions about the Palestinians.

The proposition is simpler than that. Ms. Akalaitis has six theaters at her
disposal, five in the Public Theater complex on Lafayette Street and one in
Central Park, and her success or failure will ride on her ability, in a highly
competitive environment, to attract the broad spectrum of artists and audiences
required to make life happen in them.  Working in the nonprofit arena, she
should not be under any obligation to find the next "Chorus Line," which cannot
be divined in any case. But Ms. Akalaitis does live in the real,
all-too-American theatrical world; she is not working in a basement performance
space or, conversely, in a utopian state-supported theater.

One need look at the season schedule of any company of similar size to the
Public, from Arena Stage in Washington to the Goodman Theater in Chicago to the
Guthrie in Minneapolis, to see that artistic directors, however different their
own creative personalities, follow the Papp example of reaching out to many
tastes, many artists.

Ms. Akalaitis will soon be buffeted on all sides by demanding subscribers, board
members and donors, with all their various interests. She will have to give them
and other audiences reasons to come to her theater by engaging them, challenging
them, provoking them and maybe even, on occasion, entertaining them. She cannot
cause a stir with every production, heaven knows -- the Public has traditionally
been the site of as many fiascos as any other long-running theatrical
institution -- but with the sum of what must be diverse, searching and
professional seasons. It will take time, though how much time the increasingly
pressed board of the Festival can or will give her is a fiscal and temperamental
matter known only to them.

One hopes that JoAnne Akalaitis will be the producer that no less an authority
than the man who appointed her thinks she can be. If she is, the New York
theater will then only have to find a good half-dozen more like her if it is to
begin to fill the almost unfathomable void in vision, energy and sheer guts left
by the exit of Joseph Papp.

NAME: Joseph Papp

LOAD-DATE: September 22, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Joseph Papp with a poster for a Shakespeare Festival production
of "Hamlet" in the mid-1970's, when his influence was at a peak--lessons for the
future (Jack Manning/The New York Times) (pg. 1); "The Merchant of Venice" at
the Delacorte Theater in Central Park in 1962--Mr. Papp wanted a racial and
ethnic diverseness on both sides of the footlights, one that might change, or at
least nudge, the world (The New York Times); A poster adapted from a 1978 Paul
Davis drawing--Mr. Show Biz (pg. 7)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              214 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 22, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THE NATION;
AT Stake at the Gates Hearing: How to Reincarnate the C.I.A.

BYLINE: By MICHAEL WINES

SECTION: Section 4; Page 5; Column 1; Week In Review Desk

LENGTH: 1157 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


A WEEK of submicroscopic study by the Senate Intelligence Committee and the
press has produced a clear portrait of Robert M. Gates, President Bush's choice
to lead American espionage into the post-Soviet era: He is a cold warrior,
smart, politically supple, upwardly loyal, largely unreconstructed.

Less clear is what kind of person the committee and the American people want to
run the Central Intelligence Agency and the other spy agencies these days. That,
more than Mr. Gates's credentials or his five-year-old brush with Iran-contra,
is what is making the debate over his confirmation such a protracted and
occasionally corrosive affair.

The C.I.A. has always mirrored the dark recesses of the American id, probably
because it is such a personal creature of the President and, thus, those who
elect him. Properly suspicious of secrecy, Americans get seduced by the romance
of espionage and the passion of a patriotic cause, only to be shocked and
chastened when they find out what has been going on behind their backs.

Thus the Eisenhower C.I.A. was the front line against the Red Menace, planting
puppets in every pro-Soviet backwater before it foundered on the beaches of the
Bay of Pigs in the first days of the Kennedy administration. The Johnson and
Nixon C.I.A. reflected the White House obsession with Vietnam, and wound up
shackled and shrunken under President Jimmy Carter. Ronald Reagan's C.I.A.
sometimes seemed like an international Rambo until it reaped the excesses of its
association with Iran-contra.

A New Direction

Now it is Mr. Bush's turn to set a direction, but there is no consensus on what
course to take. By nominating Mr. Gates, the President signaled both that he
wants an insider back atop the intelligence bureaucracy -- Mr. Gates spent 20
years in the C.I.A. before coming to the White House in 1988 -- and that he
wants someone who will be personally loyal and responsive to his bidding.

In normal times, a seasoned professional who pledges to remain on a short leash
would be a prized possession. But half a decade after Iran-contra, Congressional
confidence in the agency's ethics and its judgment on world events remains low.

On paper, Mr. Gates is easily the best qualified person ever to seek the job. At
age 47 -- he turns 48 on Wednesday -- he has held six senior C.I.A. posts and
served at the White House under Presidents Ford, Carter and Bush. In interviews,
former bosses shower him with unqualified praise. "He was terrific," said
Zbigniew Brzezinski, Mr. Carter's national security adviser, whom Mr. Gates
served for a year. "He's reliable, intelligent, and he has political savvy in
the sense that he knows how the system works."

But Mr. Gates's competence is not at issue. To the limited extent that there are
questions that might threaten the nomination, they center on trust, the same
issue that cost him the top C.I.A. job when President Reagan first nominated him
in 1987. Now nominated for a second try, Mr. Gates last week was not merely
grilled by the intelligence committee on the subject, but fricaseed.

Anti-Soviet Speeches

Senator Bill Bradley, a New Jersey Democrat, suggested that the nominee had
forced his own cold-warrior views when he headed the agency's analytical shop in
the mid-1980's. Using one's post as an intelligence analyst to promote
ideological or political views is considered a mortal sin in intelligence, and
Mr. Gates was forced to admit by mid-week that he had sinned in making some
public and pointed anti-Soviet speeches while at the C.I.A. Even Gates
supporters were surprised by the committee's disclosure of his 1984 internal
memorandum warning that Nicaragua could become another Cuba and suggesting air
strikes against Soviet-made aircraft in the country. The committee has not yet
asked Mr. Gates about the memo.

It is Iran-contra that epitomizes the committee's fears. Mr. Gates had already
testified in at least six forums, usually under oath, that he knew virtually
nothing about Oliver L. North's secret arms pipeline to the contras when he
served as deputy to C.I.A. director William J. Casey in 1986, as the scandal
began to unfold. When rumors of wrongdoing reached him, he has argued, he took
steps to look into them that seemed reasonable at the time, even if hindsight
now judges them tepid.

The question of whether Mr. Gates acted with vigor, or looked askance as other
senior C.I.A. officials sought to limit the spread of the scandal, has always
been viewed as the smoking gun of the hearings. The picture that emerged last
week was not that of a wrongdoer, but of someone who may himself have seen the
smear of Iran-contra on the horizon, and quietly edged out of its way.

Mr. Gates had long testified that when he was warned in October 1986 about the
scandal's core he took the information to his boss, Mr. Casey, and eventually to
John M. Poindexter, the White House national security adviser. That the two now
appear to have been Oliver L. North's overseers in Iran-contra is unfortunate,
Mr. Gates has implied, but not his fault; he had been duped.

That explanation looked better before last week's star witness, Alan D. Fiers,
testified that he, too, had warned superiors about Mr. North's work for the
contras in a meeting two years earlier. Mr. Casey then confronted Mr. North with
the accusation in a carefully staged meeting with Mr. Fiers, then the agency's
chief Central America hand. Mr. Fiers said he quickly realized, as a senior
C.I.A. official told him, that the session had been a charade aimed at giving
Mr. Casey deniability.

Such charades have been played out before when the President's spies overreached
themselves. John Ranelagh's exhaustive history of the C.I.A., "The Agency,"
recounts an almost identical session in 1961, when senior agency officials held
a sham meeting to deny that they would ever mount an assassination plot then
under way in the Congo. That was some seven years before Mr. Gates joined the
espionage agency.

Mr. Bush could have chosen an outsider for the top C.I.A. job and avoided any
controversy. Instead, he chose a consummate insider, and in so doing ignited all
the smoldering suspicions that still surround not just the C.I.A.'s professions
of virginity in the Iran-contra matter, but those of the White House as well.
Mr. Gates's friends say this is part of the price for getting sound, competent
leadership in the intelligence bureaucracy.

"Anybody who has been in the intelligence business carries a lot of baggage,"
said David L. Aaron, a top national security official under President Carter who
employed Mr. Gates as an assistant. "It's one of those worlds where you're
always trying to make correct decisions, and when things are looked at
subsequently, in light of different ethics or political arguments, you're
criticized for not doing the best thing. Well, you either get someone who's
ignorant, or you get someone who has baggage."

LOAD-DATE: September 22, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Robert M. Gates at confirmation hearings last week before the
Senate Intelligence Committee on his C.I.A. nomination. (Paul Hosefros/The New
York Times)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              215 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 23, 1991, Monday, Late Edition - Final

THE MEDIA BUSINESS;
Disabled People Gain Roles in Ads and on TV

BYLINE: By JONATHAN RABINOVITZ

SECTION: Section D; Page 14; Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 838 words


NBC could easily have promoted the premiere of "Reasonable Doubts" as a
recedent-setting event in the struggle of disabled Americans to enter mainstream
society.

The series, which makes its debut Friday at 10 P.M., Eastern time, arguably
breaks new ground by featuring a deaf actor, Marlee Matlin, who plays an
assistant district attorney and delivers some lines in sign language. The plots
of each episode -- the prosecution of criminals and romance with Mark Harmon,
the co-star -- have little to do with disability.

Indeed, NBC executives bristle when the series is described as a program about
the disabled. "This is a provocative adult drama," said Charisse McGhee, the
network's vice president of current dramatic programming. "It's not that we
don't take into account Marlee's hearing impairment, but that's not where the
story line comes from."

A Growing Media Trend

Still, the character in "Reasonable Doubts" is an example of a growing trend in
television, advertising and marketing. From Corky, who has Down syndrome on the
ABC series "Life Goes On," to models in wheelchairs in catalogues for retailers
like Eddie Bauer and Nordstrom, to shots of wheelchair marathoners and people
talking in sign language in commercials for companies like Chrysler and
McDonald's, there is a steady stream of what advocates for the disabled call
more "real life parts."

While ads including disabled people have been appearing since the early 1980's,
more recent ones are displaying them in a greater variety of roles and are even
treating disability with some humor. One commercial had the quarterback Joe
Montana laughing as the singer Ray Charles, who is blind, was handed a Diet Coke
instead of a Diet Pepsi.

"When I first saw it, I thought, 'Whoa, they're walking a fine line there,' "
said Ted Bell, president of Leo Burnett U.S.A., which creates ads for
McDonald's. "But it works. Ten years ago, you would never have done something
like that."

The change comes as the Federal Government begins enforcing a Federal law that
bans discrimination based on physical or mental impairments. Groups that lobbied
for the law, like Media Access and the National Easter Seal Society, have also
been working to change media and advertising portrayals of handicapped people.

'Slowly Beginning to Change'

"Our situation is slowly beginning to change in the same way as it changed for
people of color," said Paul K. Longmore, a visiting professor of history at
Stanford University who is disabled and has been researching media protrayals of
the handicapped. But, he added, "We're still at a point with disability where a
lot of advertisers fear that we will drive viewers away."

Robert G. Thatcher, vice president of marketing at the Target discount division
of the Dayton Hudson Corporation, said that when an employee suggested that a
photograph of a child in a wheelchair be included in a sales circular, he was
enthusiastic, but also wary. Mr. Thatcher has a daughter who was born without a
left hand, but he feared the ad could lead to complaints that Target was
exploiting the handicapped.

The photograph, however, drew an opposite reaction. Target has received more
than 2,000 letters of praise, Mr. Thatcher said.

Advocates for the disabled attribute such changes, in part, to a recognition of
the economic power of handicapped people. They note that disabled people
represent a large market that buys soap and toothpaste, and watches television,
like other consumers. But many advertisers that have used disabled people in
their ads say they are trying to reach a broad audience, not a niche market.

"Our customer base is everyone who eats," said Chuck Eberling, a spokesman for
McDonald's.

Problems With Stereotypes

But while disabled people have become much more prevalent in ads and television
programs, advocates for the handicapped worry that certain stereotypes have
arisen. Alan Toy, a disabled actor who uses crutches or a wheelchair, described
how he usually auditioned for parts as an alienated Vietnam veteran or an
embittered accident victim. While he recently appeared as a businessman in a
commercial, he added, many advertisers and their agencies want wheelchair
marathoners.

And the advocates say older stereotypes still prevail. "Good and Evil," an ABC
situation comedy that will make its debut on Wednesday, has been sharply
criticized by the National Federation of the Blind. In the opening epsiode of
the satirical comedy, a blind man walks into a laboratory and, waving his cane
in the air, proceeds to smash beakers.

An ABC spokesman said every character in the series was meant to be ridiculous
and unrealistic.

For disabled people, "Reasonable Doubts" is a test of whether television viewers
are ready to accept a disabled star on a weekly series that has little to do
with disability.

"If this fails, it's going to be blamed on the disability issue," Mr. Toy said.
"They're not going to do demographics that show Mark Harmon isn't cute any
more."

LOAD-DATE: September 23, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Disabled models are finding acceptance with some advertisers,
including Target stores, which used a child in a wheelchair in a sales circular.
(Dayton Hudson)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              216 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 23, 1991, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Review/Film;
Paying Off a Vietnam Debt In a Colombian Drug War

BYLINE: By STEPHEN HOLDEN

SECTION: Section C; Page 15; Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 377 words


James Glickenhaus's action-adventure film "McBain" might charitably be described
as a contemporary historical fantasy, although lurid cartoon would be more
accurate.

The title character is a Vietnam veteran who rounds up his former brothers in
arms to go to Colombia and aid a people's rebellion against the Noriega-like
strongman who rules the country. McBain's motives are personal. Eighteen years
earlier, the rebels' leader, Santos (Chick Vennera), saved his life at a
Vietcong prisoner-of-war camp. So when the slain Santos's sister Christina
(Maria Conchita Alonso) calls on McBain in New York, it is understood he must
drop everything, round up his old army buddies and avenge the killing.

A major obstacle is raising the $10 million necessary to carry out the
operation, but that is quickly solved by kidnapping a Mafia chieftain and
scaring him into depositing the money in a Swiss bank account. Moments later the
rebels are armed and ready to fight, led by Christina, who wears the same grimy
purple tank top throughout the movie.

"McBain" is the kind of film in which unexplained characters pop up out of the
blue, then disappear just as mysteriously. The screenplay is filled with
portentous exclamations like: "Let's do it! Let's go on to the palace!"

But the most ludicrous moment in the film, which finds Christopher Walken
glowering embarrassedly through the thankless title performance, is the
appearance of a George Bush-like President who blithely proclaims that
henceforth all money will be printed on red-white-and-blue paper.

"McBain" is rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian).
It includes strong language and scenes of torture.

McBain

Directed and written by James Glickenhaus; director of photography, Robert M.
Baldwin Jr.; edited by Jeffrey Wolf; music by Christopher Franke; production
designer, Charles C. Bennett; produced by J. Boyce Harman Jr.; released by
Shapiro Glickenhaus Entertainment. Running time: 103 minutes. This film is rated
R.

McBain . . . Christopher Walken
Christina . . . Maria Conchita Alonso
Frank Bruce . . . Michael Ironside
Eastland . . . Steve James
Dr. Dalton . . . Jay Patterson
Gill . . . T. G. Waites
Santos . . . Chick Vennera

LOAD-DATE: September 23, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              217 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 23, 1991, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Leaving Subic Could Be a Blessing

SECTION: Section A; Page 16; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 360 words


What the eruption of Mount Pinatubo did to Clark Air Base, the Philippine Senate
may do to Subic Bay Naval Station: push Americans out. The Senate voted not to
ratify a 10-year extension of the U.S. lease on Subic Bay. President Corazon
Aquino is seeking to overturn the vote by referendum. If she fails, the U.S.
would be right to leave. The base is now little more than a convenience.

Indeed, the potential departure of Americans from Subic Bay gives Defense
Secretary Dick Cheney a much-needed opportunity to rethink U.S. naval
deployments in the Pacific and convert a temporary inconvenience into long-term
savings. Some naval presence is surely required to secure U.S. interests. But
the retreat of Soviet power argues for reducing it.

The only American ship permanently based in Subic Bay, a cruiser, could easily
be reassigned to another port. And visiting ships could pay port calls elsewhere
in the region. Subic's advantage is its ship repair facilities and highly
skilled, low-wage work force. But these facilities are likely to remain
available on a commercial basis. The U.S. also possesses underused if more
costly facilities in Guam, Tinian and Hawaii.

The U.S. presence in the Pacific has been rationalized on the grounds that war
with the Soviet Union would be global. By posing a threat in the Pacific, the
Navy could compel the Soviets to divert resources from Europe. And it needed to
secure sea lanes to Japan. The "great circle route" across the North Pacific
brings ships perilously close to Soviet land-based air power. Subic Bay lies
astride the safer southern route via Hawaii and Guam, and within short sail of
the South China Sea.

But now that the threat of war with the Soviet Union has disappeared, along with
the Soviet naval base at Vietnam's Cam Ranh Bay, the U.S. faces far less
demanding regional contingencies.

U.S. allies in the region from Australia to Singapore worry about the growing
naval power of China, Japan and India, and find some American naval presence
reassuring. But that presence can prudently be scaled down. The prospect of
leaving Subic Bay provides an opportunity to do just that.



LOAD-DATE: September 25, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              218 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 27, 1991, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Sihanouk, at U.N., Urges Ban on Land Mines

BYLINE: By JERRY GRAY,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 9; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 401 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, Sept. 26


With thousands of Cambodians being killed or maimed by land mines left over from
two decades of warfare, Prince Norodom Sihanouk of Cambodia asked the United
Nations today to ban the use of mines.

"These land mines have already handicapped a great number of our compatriots of
both sexes and pose a permanent threat to our existence," the Prince said. "I
wish today to call for a worldwide ban on mines, beginning in Cambodia."

Asia Watch, a human-rights group based in New York, said that land-mine
explosions have given Cambodia, with a population of 8.5 million, the highest
percentage of physically disabled inhabitants of any country in the world. It
said that there are now more than 30,000 amputees in Cambodia and up to 6,000
more in refugee camps along the Thai border, all of them victims of land mines.

"Mine accidents now rank with malaria and tuberculosis as one of Cambodia's
three greatest public-health hazards," according to a statement released
Wednesday by Asia Watch and the Physicians for Human Rights, who jointly
prepared the report.

Prince Sihanouk said Cambodian soil was almost saturated with land mines.  A
spokesman for Asia Watch, Eric Stover, said that most of the mines were planted
during the last 12 years by the Vietnam-backed Government in Phnom Penh and the
three resistance forces that fought the Government until a peace accord was
signed this summer.

"Even today, as a cease-fire takes effect and a peaceful settlement to the
Cambodian conflict appears likely, Government and resistance soldiers continue
to lay land mines along footpaths, rice paddies, riverbeds, and around
villages," the Asia Watch report said.

Prince Sihanouk, president of the Supreme National Council of Cambodia, which
was set up under the peace accord, opened his speech with a surprise appeal to
Secretary General Javier Perez de Cuellar "to continue at the helm of the U.N.
for some years."

Mr. Perez de Cuellar has said he will retire at the end of this year after
serving 10 years as Secretary General.

The Vietnamese-installed Cambodian Government and the three major rebel groups
-- the followers of Mr. Sihanouk, the rightist Khmer People's National
Liberation Front, and the Communist Khmer Rouge -- have met four times since
June to work toward a peace plan.

The last meeting, held last Friday at the United Nations, produced a
breakthrough on elections.

LOAD-DATE: September 27, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              219 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 28, 1991, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Peru's President: A Good Bet

SECTION: Section 1; Page 18; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 372 words


Despite concerns about human rights, Congressional committees are about to
release economic and military aid to help Peru's President Alberto Fujimori
fight the cocaine trade. The concerns are valid, but Mr. Fujimori still deserves
the show of confidence.

The Bush Administration's plans for $34.9 million in military aid, including 50
military advisers, stirred fears of United States involvement in a Vietnam-like
quagmire. The Peruvian military's human rights record, as sorry as any in the
Americas, makes the idea seem even more dismaying.

Yet a realistic attack on the drug problem requires some participation of the
Peruvian military, since the Shining Path rebels exert strong influence over
much of the highland areas where coca is grown. The rebels, who seek power
through terrorism and intimidation, extort money from drug traffickers and
protect coca farmers from Government attack.

Mr. Fujimori also insists that drug policy depends on much more than the
military. Coca growers, he argues, don't deserve to be lumped together with
criminal drug traffickers. Most are poor people for whom Peru's collapsed
economy offers few options; many who had hoped to get rich growing coca are now
disappointed: the growers' income averages only $400 per year.

Mr. Fujimori's response calls for military pressure on the Shining Path
accompanied by ambitious economic restructuring, for which Washington would
contribute an additional $60 million.

In exchange for their agreement to substitute other crops for coca, Mr. Fujimori
would grant campesinos title to their lands, a step that would give them a
personal stake and allow them to organize for sale of legitimate crops to big
purchasers. He would also develop roads to ease transportation of substitute
crops. And he would promote other development strategies in hopes of creating
low-end jobs.

The total $94.9 million aid package is far less than what Peru might eventually
require to regain control of the highlands and restructure its economy. But the
money will make clear that Washington believes Mr. Fujimori deserves support.
Such an endorsement would reinforce his influence over the military, with the
promise of better performance on human rights.

LOAD-DATE: September 28, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              220 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 29, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

New & Noteworthy

BYLINE: By GEORGE JOHNSON

SECTION: Section 7; Page 34; Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 822 words


NEMESIS, by Rosamond Smith. (Onyx, $5.50.) After a composer-in-residence at a
Connecticut school rapes a young male student, revenge comes in the form of a
poisoned box of chocolates. Last year our reviewer, Teresa Carpenter, said the
novel, written pseudonymously by Joyce Carol Oates, "calls to mind a David Lynch
film, a work full of grotesqueries and intrigue appealing irresistibly to the
curiosity though not necessarily to the emotions."

A NATURAL HISTORY OF THE SENSES, by Diane Ackerman. (Vintage, $11.) Whether
scuba diving off the Bahamas, listening to icebergs or holding forth on the
history of the potato chip, the evolution of the kiss or how perfumes are made,
Diane Ackerman invites readers to celebrate the portals through which we
experience the world. "To borrow a phrase from Allen Ginsberg, she is a 'great
experiencer,' and she is eager to share her experiences with us," Anatole
Broyard said here last year. "Her book is rather like an ecology of the body. It
fairly buzzes with information."

ALL NEW PEOPLE, by Anne Lamott. (Bantam, $8.50.) A failed marriage behind her,
Nan Goodman returns to Marin County and the ghosts of the cultural revolution of
California in the 1960's. Last year our reviewer, Richard Bausch, said this
novel's "strong, clear, self-deprecating and witty voice takes immediate hold
and refuses to let go."

AGENTS OF INFLUENCE, by Pat Choate. (Touchstone/Simon & Schuster, $11.) The
reason the Japanese are prevailing, the author argues, is because they have
learned to play American politics better than the Americans. Last year our
reviewer, Jeffrey E. Garten, said Pat Choate sometimes "uses wildly exaggerated
language," but he "has sounded an alarm, clearly, forcefully and with passion."

CRAZY LADIES, by Michael Lee West. (Ivy, $4.99.) Beginning in Tennessee in 1932,
this novel tells the story of three generations of women and how they were
affected by World War II, the civil rights movement and Vietnam. Last year our
reviewer, Katherine Ramsland, said she found herself "rereading sections of this
fine novel, just for the pure pleasure of it."

GREAT MAMBO CHICKEN AND THE TRANS HUMAN CONDITION: Science Slightly Over the
Edge, by Ed Regis. (Addison-Wesley, $8.95.) What is the best road to
immortality: freezing brains with liquid nitrogen or downloading human minds
into computers? Last year our reviewer, Alexander Kohn, said Ed Regis's trips to
the fringes of science make for "a very well-written compendium of some bizarre
thoughts and the mathematical, physical, biological and technological
developments that led to them."

HARRY AND CATHERINE, by Frederick Busch. (Vintage Contemporaries , $10.) In
upstate New York a divorced mother finds two men vying for her affections -- an
engineer trying to build a shopping mall parking lot and a senator's aide trying
to stop him. This novel "is about rich, deep intimacy, about the larger loves
that people come to in maturity," Ron Carlson said in The Book Review in 1990.

THE AWAKENING OF THE SOVIET UNION, by Geoffrey Hosking. (Harvard University,
$10.95.) A professor traces the roots of perestroika beyond Mikhail Gorbachev to
the history and culture of the Soviet people. The book is "among the most
enlightening and informative accounts of what has already been one of the most
amazing peaceful revolutions in modern times," Adam B. Ulam said here last year.

A RELATIVE STRANGER, by Charles Baxter. (Penguin, $8.95.) In the title piece of
this collection, two brothers who are reunited after being separated in infancy
find that they look at the world in very different ways. "Though in one way or
another each story ends in disillusionment, the road that leads us to that
dismal state is so richly peopled, so finely drawn, that the effect is oddly
reassuring," William Ferguson said in these pages last year.

MOTHER, MAY YOU NEVER SEE THE SIGHTS I HAVE SEEN: The Fifty-Seventh
Massachusetts Veteran Volunteers in the Army of the Potomac, 1864-1865, by
Warren Wilkinson. (Quill/Morrow, $15.) The 57th Regiment may have lost more men
than any other on the Union side of the Civil War. "Seldom does one encounter a
history of a military unit that so compellingly reproduces its experiences,"
David Haward Bain said in The Book Review in 1990.

IF EVER I RETURN, PRETTY PEGGY-O, by Sharyn McCrumb. (Ballantine, $4.99.) A folk
singer's search for solitude in a small Tennessee town is shattered when she
receives threats from an old flame. Last year our reviewer, Marilyn Stasio,
praised Sharyn McCrumb for her "suspenseful narrative."

REAL FARM, by Patricia Tichenor Westfall. (Avon, $7.95.) Two academics find
their marriage falling apart after they move onto a small farm in Iowa. The
author's experiences, "described so vividly in this entertaining little book,
gave her an enduring knowledge of her own strengths and limitations," Suzanne
MacNeille said in The Book Review last year.

LOAD-DATE: September 29, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Diane Ackerman (James McGoon/Random House)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              221 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 29, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

FILM VIEW;
Pop Music as Spice: Just Be Certain To Use With Care

BYLINE: By Janet Maslin

SECTION: Section 2; Page 15; Column 1; Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 941 words


In the past it may have been commonplace to walk out of films humming their
theme songs, but these days an audience is more likely to be humming on the way
in. Films have learned to rely on pop music for its catchiness while the credits
roll, its help in glossing over continuity gaps and its effectiveness as a kind
of shorthand. Music can establish mood or character in the space of only a few
bars. For a film with problems, tacking on a hit record can be the aural
equivalent of a Band-Aid, and an easy way out.

In almost any set of movie trailers, there's bound to be one in which a hit song
is played so prominently that it becomes the tail wagging the dog. When the hit
is noticeably bigger than the movie -- Prince's "Delirious" or Roy Orbison's
"Only the Lonely" -- this tactic seems especially ill-advised. And when the hit
is too familiar ("Born to Be Wild" and "Bad to the Bone" should be off limits
for motorcycle movies forever after), it can create an instant sense of deja vu.
But this gambit is becoming more and more popular because it can be so powerful.
In the right directorial hands, pop music becomes as central to a film as any
flesh-and-blood character.

Nancy Savoca's "Dogfight," surely the only film to have accompanied a bedroom
scene with Bob Dylan's raspy, acoustic "Don't Think Twice, It's All Right,"
makes subtle, funny use of a soundtrack that understands the characters better
than they understand themselves. The score divides itself between sunny, vapid
pop hits suitable to its 1963 time frame, like "Sugar Shack" and "Travelin'
Man," and folk music that sounds sweetly, painfully earnest by comparison. When
else has a movie heroine consoled herself by listening to Joan Baez's mournful
rendition of "Silver Dagger" after a bad date?

And when else has one ever tried on dresses to a Woody Guthrie song or tried to
explain "We Shall Overcome"? Ms. Savoca, who is as delicately witty about
popular music as she is about tense, uneasy relations between the sexes, sets up
a wall of sound behind her film's thoroughly incompatible young lovers and lets
the schism between their favorite songs become a running commentary. Within the
overall scheme of the film, music takes on a pivotal role.

Pop music has comparable importance for "The Commitments," Alan Parker's vibrant
Irish valentine to American rhythm-and-blues. In addition to finding something
enjoyably comic about the way every last person in the film lives and breathes
music and the way musical tastes in this atmosphere provide an ready definition
of character, "The Commitments" eagerly capitalizes on the sheer entertainment
value of its score. It will surprise no one that the movie's singing group has
now undertaken engagements in real life, or that the film's outstanding
performer, Andrew Strong, is now a prospective pop star. In this case, a
symbiotic link between life and art has worked to the advantage of both.

Certainly pop music lent a lot of punch to "Thelma and Louise," and there again
the music made a point. The powerhouse feminine energy of tracks by singers like
Toni Childs and Charlie Sexton, or the version of Van Morrison's "Wild Night"
belted out by Martha Reeves, contributed greatly to the film's breakaway spirit;
in fact, just about every song on the soundtrack is a passionate embrace of
freedom in one form or another. A lot of the music mixes doom with exuberance,
thus enhancing the film's air of good-time characters headed for a bad-time
fate. And all of it reinforces the film's wind-in-your-hair brand of
exhilaration.

Ever since film makers and audiences of baby-boom age began examining their
past, pop music has gone beyond amplifying a film and sometimes been central, as
in "The Buddy Holly Story," "La Bamba" or "The Doors." Even the recent and
forgettable "A Matter of Degrees," about college life in Providence, R.I.,
focused on the fight to keep a local radio station free to program its own
rock-and-roll, with disk jockeys sounding the message "Rock-and-roll can save
you." In last year's "Pump Up the Volume," gaining control of the airwaves was
also accorded the importance of a subversive act.

The effort to keep pop pure and meaningful takes on a certain desperation when a
jingle like "Help Me, Honda" can be heard in a car commercial, and when so many
films labor to include the obligatory rock video sequence (e.g., Julia Roberts,
in "Sleeping With the Enemy," trying on costumes to the irresistible strains of
"Brown-Eyed Girl"). So it's all the more pleasing when pop music is used as
thoughtfully in movies as it has been by directors like Martin Scorsese,
Jonathan Demme and Oliver Stone, all of them outstandingly adept at creating the
kind of Greek chorus that makes an audience tap its toes. In "Goodfellas" and
"Born on the Fourth of July," Mr. Scorsese and Mr. Stone, respectively, created
rich chronological backdrops for their stories by using the right songs. And Mr.
Demme's "Something Wild" was made a lot wilder by Mr. Demme's unusually broad
and buoyant musical tastes.

Sean Penn's "Indian Runner" draws on both the memory of the Bruce Springsteen
song ("Highway Patrolman") on which the film is based and on several Vietnam-era
hits that are used to fine, insinuating effect. Mr. Penn's only musical lapse,
among otherwise sensible choices, is the use of Bob Dylan's "I Shall Be
Released," as performed by the Band, over the closing credits. This is the pop
equivalent of ending a film with "Amazing Grace," which has been done well (as
in "Silkwood") but overdone. Music in movies shouldn't amount to a short cut; it
should be shorthand.

LOAD-DATE: September 29, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Lili Taylor in "Dogfight"--The subtle soundtrack understands the
characters. (Warner Brothers)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              222 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 29, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

For Americans and Filipinos, Basics of Life Are at Stake in Fate of Navy Base

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHENON,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 21B; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1547 words

DATELINE: SUBIC, the Philippines, Sept. 25


Their memories of the base are starkly different, but the American sailors who
lived or took liberty at the Subic Bay Naval Station and the thousands of
Filipinos who repaired the American warships and swept the Americans' floors
agree that a way of life is in jeopardy.

"Subic is paradise," said Robert Buttrey, a ruddy-faced 49-year-old retired Navy
Seabee from Framingham, Mass., who married a Filipino he met while on duty at
Subic, settled his family near the large American naval base and now owns an
off-base saloon that bears his nickname, Bubba.

"But if the base goes," he said, taking another gulp of pale Philippine beer
that retired Navy men insist is the only protection from the effects of these
long, steamy nights in the tropics, "well, then this will all become a ghost
town."

A few blocks away, up a rain-soaked stairway to the converted second-floor
discotheque that now serves as a union hall, the threat by the Philippine
Government to oust the United States Navy from the base has, it seems, become
the only topic of conversation among the more than 20,000 Filipino civilian
workers employed at the base.

Roberto Flores, the president of the union, the Federation of Filipino Civilian
Employees, was hired as a utility man by the base in 1964, at age 19, at the
equivalent of 49 cents an hour.

He said he remembered the days when the Americans "didn't even treat us like
human beings" -- disciplining or dismissing Filipino workers with insufficient
cause, forbidding Filipinos to speak their native language, routinely breaking
into the storage lockers ofFilipino employees on the pretense of searching for
stolen goods.

"They could be very rude," Mr. Flores said of the Americans. "There were many
abuses when I first arrived at the base."

Decline in Discrimination

Yet in the 20 years since the introduction of collective bargaining at Subic,
"things have become much better," he said, insisting that most of his union's
members bore no lingering resentment over the harsh treatment of Filipinos
decades ago.

"The admirals at the base will act when we bring them complaints of
discrimination," he said. "We want the Americans to stay. These are some of the
best jobs in the Philippines."

The union represents every type of civilian worker at the base, from mechanics
and secretaries to the teams of Filipino janitors who, for most of the last
three months, have been sweeping up the tons of volcanic ash dumped on the base
in June by nearby Mount Pinatubo.

Virtually all of the Filipino workers will find themselves without jobs if Subic
is shut down, a fate they would share with thousands of other Filipinos who were
employed by the United States Air Force at Clark Air Base, which was abandoned
after the ash buried its runways, 50 miles southwest of here.

Reprieve for Life Style

Whatever their reasons -- for the Americans, trying to protect a military life
style of almost legendary bounty and comfort; for the Filipinos, maintaining
economic survival in an impoverished nation -- there is the oft-stated hope here
that somehow the Subic Bay Naval Station, at 14,400-acres the largest American
military base in Asia, will be allowed to remain open.

It appears that their wish will be granted, at least temporarily.

In what many of its members described as a long-postponed demonstration of
sovereignty, the Philippine Senate voted last week to reject a new American
lease on the base.

But President Corazon C. Aquino, a proponent of the base, effectively overruled
the Senate when she withdrew a year-old eviction notice on Subic and called for
a national referendum on its future.

2,000 Retired U.S. Seamen

The possibility that the Navy will remain has produced some cheer in the
neon-flooded bars and dance halls of Olongapo and Subic, cities that border the
base and cater almost exclusively to the American military and to a community of
retired American seamen that is said to number about 2,000.

Several beers closer to sunrise, a small group of the retired sailors was still
gathered in an Olongapo bar called the Watering Hole, swapping stories about
what had made Subic Bay, to their minds, the most desirable post anywhere in the
United States Navy.

"It's been said that this is an adult Disneyland," said Martin Tubbs, a
50-year-old retired warrant officer from Houston who is the manager of the bar,
which also serves as Branch 213 of the Fleet Reserve Association, an
organization of mostly retired American sailors. He does not quibble with the
Disney comparison.

"I first saw Subic in 1961, when I was a 20-year-old sailor, and I loved it,"
Mr. Tubbs recalled wistfully, remembering a time when Subic had a reputation as
one of the wildest liberty ports in Asia, a reputation that grew to legend when
American warships docked here during the Vietnam War.

"I retired two years ago from the Navy and went to Los Angeles," he said. "But
after a while, I decided I had to come back here to live, because my friends
were here and because the life is so good."

For generations of American sailors, he said, Subic had made possible a way of
life that could never be duplicated on a Navy salary back home: Spacious houses
with what are now $20-a-week maids; private white-sand beaches along the bay
dotted with private cabanas and gently swaying palms; stables and horse trails
close to the pristine shoreline; privileges at a well-manicured,
professional-quality 18-hole golf course, and a seemingly endless supply of
available women and cheap beer.

There are other American naval bases in Japan and on the Pacific islands of Guam
and Okinawa; but they have fewer amenities, and many American sailors consider
the living costs there prohibitively high.

"Subic is the only place I've ever been where the beer is cheaper off base than
on," Mr. Tubbs said.

For married sailors and their families, the base has long offered fine schools
and every sort of entertainment, including movie theaters and several
Government-subsidized restaurants. There is a McDonald's and two outlets of
Baskin Robbins Ice Cream, which are closed for now because of damage from the
volcanic ash.

Men Love It, Women Hate It

"Despite all the advantages, I still don't think the wives of American sailors
ever looked on Subic as a good assignment," said John J. Stauffer, an industrial
arts teacher at the base's George Dewey High School, named for the American
admiral who defeated the Spanish fleet in Manila Bay in 1898.

"Subic's reputation has always been that the men love it and the women hate it,"
said Mr. Stauffer, who has been teaching at the base for 25 years, and who has
seen many Navy marriages ruined when an American sailor became enchanted with
one of the Filipinas employed as hostesses at the honky-tonk bars and dance
clubs, with names like Love Disco and Hot Lips, that surround the base.

"I can think of maybe a dozen different families in which I first taught a
sailor's American children and then, maybe 10 years later, I taught his second
set of kids by a new Filipino wife," Mr. Stauffer said.

There are so many marriages between Filipinas and American sailors at Subic, as
many as 15 a week, that the Navy sponsors what is known as the bride school, a
series of seminars on American culture for the wives-to-be.

Intermarriage and Bias

John Godard, a 34-year-old Navy operations specialist at the base who is married
to a Filipina, said he thought the frequency of American-Filipino marriages had
"helped prevent discrimination against Filipinos from becoming a big problem."

I think the Filipinos really like us, and we like them so much that we marry
them," he said.

At the union hall, Domingo A. Jadloc, a 37-year-old Filipino who is a crane
inspector on the base, said he had come to believe that after working at Subic
for more than a decade that "there are two kinds of Americans, one type that
causes problems for the Filipinos, another type that wants to solve the
problems."

"There is still discrimination," he said, recalling a recent incident in which
an American supervisor on the base called together Filipino employees and told
them in so many words that "I am the boss, the Americans are the leaders, and
the Filipinos are the followers."

Yet he said incidents of discrimination had become increasingly rare. "I have
many good friends who are Americans," Mr. Jadloc said. "They come to my house, I
go to theirs."

Top Pay From the Navy

The United States Navy is a much-desired employer in the Philippines, where the
per capita annual income is less than $700, making it one of the poorest nations
in Southeast Asia.

At Subic Bay, the average salary for Filipino civilian workers is about 35 pesos
an hour, or about $1.30, double or triple what most people earn in the cities
that adjoin the base.

"Subic is our bread and water," said Mr. Jadloc, who supports a wife and four
children on what is, by Philippine standards, a handsome salary of about $5,000
a year.

"If the base closes, I will have to find work outside my country, maybe in
Australia or Canada," he said. "I would say 99.9 percent of the workers at the
base want the Americans to stay. There are no other jobs like this in the
Philippines for me."

LOAD-DATE: September 29, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Subic Bay Naval Station in the Philippines, described as
"paradise" and an "adult Disneyland," has given many an ideal way of life that
may end if the base closes. Sailors patronized a bar in Olongapo in 1985. The
city caters to the military and a community of about 2,000 retired American
seamen. (Susan Meiselas/Magnum Photos)

Map of the Philippines indicating Subic Bay.

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              223 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 29, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

10 Members of Violent Vietnamese Gang Indicted

BYLINE: By CONSTANCE L. HAYS

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 31; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 608 words


Ten members of a violent Vietnamese gang, including the man said to be its
leader, were indicted last week on Federal racketeering charges linking them to
robbery, murder and a foiled bombing of a Chinatown restaurant.

Gangs have been a fixture in Chinatown for generations, but the violence of this
70-member gang, called "Born to Kill," created ripples of fear in Asian
neighborhoods around the metropolitan area. Its members, mostly in their late
teens and early 20's, are known for terrorizing restaurant owners, storekeepers
and other merchants.

Formed within the last three years, the gang -- which took its name from a
slogan painted on some American infantry helmets during the Vietnam War --
gained notoriety last year when a funeral in New Jersey for a member was
shattered by gunfire from a rival gang. Seven people were struck by bullets and
others were hurt trying to escape. Less than a month later, Vinh Vu, said to be
the gang's second in command, was shot to death on a Chinatown street corner.

The man who the authorities say is the leader of Born to Kill, David Thai, 35
years old, was arrested on robbery charges in August in an early morning raid on
a house in Melville, L.I. Two men described as Mr. Thai's lieutenants were also
arrested on similar charges.

On Friday, the day after the indictment was returned by a Federal grand jury in
Brooklyn, Mr. Thai's lawyer maintained that his client was not guilty.

A Watchmaker, Lawyer Says

"He hasn't got a dime," Mr. Murphy said. "If he's the leader of the B.T.K., it's
an awfully poor organization."

Mr. Murphy described his client as a hard-working refugee who had fled Vietnam's
Communist regime by boat. "Some folks from Indiana sponsored him out of Vietnam,
" he said.

Mr. Thai worked as a waiter and paid for his sister and brother to come to the
United States, Mr. Muprhy said. Their father was assigned to a "re-education"
work camp in Vietnam; their mother died.

"His biggest crime," Mr. Murphy said, "was making watches and selling them
without a license. He has had a very, very difficult life. He absolutely denies
being any leader at all, and his only involvement is an attempt to get some sort
of assistance for other, younger kids that were coming out of Vietnam and
wandering the streets."

But a prosecutor, Alan Vinegrad, said Mr. Thai had planned to bomb a Vietnamese
noodle restaurant, Pho Bang, in Chinatown in August, and had murdered a man in
Chinatown this year. The indictment charges him and the others with murder,
robbery and extortion in violation of the Federal Racketeer Influenced and
Corrupt Organizations Act, or RICO.

The two men accused of being Mr. Thai's lieutenants in the organization were
identified as Lan Ngoc Tran, 29, and L. V. Hong, 28. Mr. Hong's lawyer, David
Secular, said his client "maintains his innocence." Mr. Tran's lawyer, Harold
Meyerson, could not be reached for comment.

Raid in Long Island

When they raided the Long Island house, agents from the United States Bureau of
Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms confiscated guns and gun parts, assorted rounds of
ammunition, a silencer and materials used for making bombs, Mr. Vinegard said,
although that was disputed by Mr. Murphy.

Most of the other defendants were already in prison on earlier charges, Mr.
Vinegrad said.

"We hopefully have taken out the nucleus, if not the entire molecule," of Born
to Kill, Mr. Vinegrad said.

If convicted, each of the 10 men face up to 40 years in prison and a $500,000
fine. Mr. Thai, who is charged with additional counts of murder and weapons
possession, faces at least 10 additional years in prison.

LOAD-DATE: September 29, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              224 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 30, 1991, Monday, Late Edition - Final

3-Faced Industry: Complaints, Sniping, Bad Luck

BYLINE: By BERNARD WEINRAUB

SECTION: Section C; Page 13; Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1707 words

DATELINE: HOLLYWOOD, Sept. 29


At expense-account movie hangouts like Le Dome and the Ivy, the producers and
agents and studio executives are hardly beset by the kinds of questions and
concerns that rack ordinary people. Forget the floundering economy and Saddam
Hussein. Forget house payments, school bills and the Mastercard account. The
only names that seem to be mentioned are Michael and Jeff (as if they were one
word), Bruce, Meryl, Frank and "Hook."

Michael and Jeff -- Michael Eisner, chairman of the Walt Disney Company, and his
close friend Jeffrey Katzenberg, chairman of Walt Disney Studios -- are two
millionaire executives whose film company, for the first time in years, is
taking a critical and financial beating. By all accounts the two men spend a lot
of time yelling at each other, but like a lot of people here, the two men yell
at each other even in the best of times. These are not the best of times, and
the two men, who treat each other as if they were an older and a younger
brother, are fully aware of it.

When Mr. Eisner first saw "V. I. Warshawski," starring Kathleen Turner as a
detective, he used an unprintable word to describe it. Mr. Katzenberg agreed.
The two men probably used similar words to describe other flops, including "One
Good Cop," "Scenes From a Mall," "Oscar," "Shipwrecked" and "The Marrying Man."
Several other films are financial successes, such as "What About Bob?" and "The
Doctor." But Disney's major summer movie, "The Rocketeer," fell way below
expectations. And "Billy Bathgate," the estimated $40 million adaptation of the
E. L. Doctorow novel with Dustin Hoffman, is scheduled to open next month amid
considerable concern among Disney executives.

The result has been a spate of rumors about the studio, which has sustained
extraordinary growth, success and executive job stability since Mr. Eisner and
his team took over in 1984. Disney officials, and for that matter most industry
executives, say the prospects of an executive shift at the company are out of
the question. Friends of both men say the rumors that the two are at odds say
more about Hollywood than about the Eisner-Katzenberg team. "It's so typical of
this town," said one of Hollywood's most powerful brokers, a friend of both men.
"People don't just wish you ill, they wish you dead. It's a mean place. A
jealous place. They've been jealous of Jeffrey and Michael for years. And now
they're getting even."

"Have they produced disasters like 'Howard the Duck' or 'In Heaven's Gate'?"
asked Howard Rosenman, a producer and a friend of Mr. Katzenberg. "Of course
not. Have they had a string of bad luck? Yes. Who hasn't. Jeffrey is the first
one to realize it. He's gone to talent agencies all over town and said: 'What
are your complaints? What are we doing wrong? How can we do it better?' "

Writers complain that Disney treats them more shabbily than most studios,
including an especially galling system of calling several in for separate
meetings, giving them a single-sentence idea for a movie, waiting for each
writer to shape and elaborate the story, then deciding which idea is most
effective.

Mr. Katzenberg has acknowledged that the studio is cutting costs and that there
will be no more extravaganzas like "Dick Tracy," which may have cost more than
$100 million to make, market and distribute and was hardly a blockbuster. Some
film industry executives say that making "Dick Tracy" distracted Mr. Katzenberg,
leading to the recent spate of poor films.

Privately, the bespectacled studio chief shrugs off any possibility of
estrangement with his boss, Mr. Eisner. Mr. Katzenberg points to Disney's major
successes, including "Pretty Woman," "Three Men and a Baby," "Good Morning,
Vietnam," and "Who Framed Roger Rabbit." The careers of Bette Midler, Robin
Williams, Richard Gere and Richard Dreyfuss have blossomed under Disney. In the
next three months, Disney has staked its hopes largely on several films,
including a remake of "Father of the Bride" and a low-budget shock film, "Hand
That Rocks the Cradle."

One well-known writer who has tangled with Mr. Katzenberg said it was still too
early to judge the studio chief and quoted a well-known dictum by Lew Wasserman,
once the most powerful man in Hollywood, who said the only way to judge the
success or failure of a studio was in 10-year increments.

The trouble is, no executive stays in the same job now for 10 years in
Hollywood. Mr. Katzenberg has been in his job seven years.

The brutal vulnerability of Hollywood stars, despite their wealth and fame, is
evident in the turmoil of the careers of two of them, Bruce Willis and Meryl
Streep.

Mr. Willis's recent high-priced films, "Hudson Hawk" and "Bonfire of the
Vanities," have been disastrous. He is not deemed a "bankable" star, like Mel
Gibson or Arnold Schwarzenegger or Kevin Costner or Tom Cruise or Julia Roberts,
who can "open" a movie with strong audience attendance on its first weekend.
("Dying Young" did fail, but the blame was placed on poor word of mouth after
its first weekend and not on Julia Roberts.)

"There's a Willis watch," one studio executive said. "Bruce falls in that
unenviable position that if his next movie is not a success, he'll be in
trouble." (His next picture, "The Last Boy Scout," a blood-and-guts Warner
Brothers film, is scheduled for release around Christmas.) A well-known producer
said that the rise and perhaps fall of Bruce Willis as a major star was
instructive on the Hollywood of today, and that even Sylvester Stallone is not
now seen as "bankable."

Mr. Willis, who often portrays himself as a working-class hero, has not endeared
himself to Hollywood by blaming unions for the industry's problems while earning
at least $6 million, and probably far more, for "Hudson Hawk," which cost about
$57 million and grossed only $17 million.

The case of Meryl Streep is in some ways more complicated. Except for "Out of
Africa," her films have never been big moneymakers. The actress has now
undergone a major career change: she has moved to Los Angeles from Connecticut
and switched her agents, from Sam Cohn at International Creative Management in
New York City to the Creative Artists Agency in Los Angeles. The breaking point,
executives said, was her inability to get Mike Nichols, a Cohn client, to cast
her in "The Remains of the Day," the film based on the best-selling novel by
Kazuo Ishiguro.

"She's a brilliant actress, but are there that many parts left for 42-year-old
women?" one well-known agent said. "It's not like Harrison Ford or any one of a
number of other male actors in their 40's. It's brutal but true. Parts get
scarcer for women."

And the head of a major studio said: "Meryl made some mistakes of choice. You
make mistakes and you get scared. There are a lot of scared movie stars. The
most successful people in the business tend to work very little. They know a big
secret. That is, you're a movie star until your next movie. Sometimes it comes
at a price. It's a gamble. Look at Redford. He waited years and made 'Havana.' A
bomb. Now he's really scared. But if you're Barbra Streisand, you make 'Prince
of Tides.' That'll work for her."

In her new career, Ms. Streep is starting to work on a Bob Zemeckis comedy with
Goldie Hawn. She has also written a screenplay with Carrie Fisher. And she may
end up playing the witch in the film version of Stephen Sondheim's "Into the
Woods."

"Breathtaking, breathtaking," repeated one studio chief in his beige and leather
office the other morning as the discussion began on what is known as either "the
Frank Price affair" or "the Peter Guber disaster." Mr. Price, the chairman of
Columbia Pictures, is scheduled to be replaced this week by Mark Canton, a
former Warner Brothers executive and a friend of Mr. Price's boss, Peter Guber,
the chairman of Sony Pictures Entertainment.

Mr. Price has been in the job only since March 1990, hardly enough time to make
a dent. So his scheduled high-priced departure is a result of Mr. Guber's
yearning to place a friend and contemporary with a mixed record in the industry
in the powerful job. The deal will leave Mr. Price, a 61-year-old film
executive, even richer than he is. According to one film industry executive, Mr.
Price will walk away with a $20-million-to-$30-million deal that includes
producing some of his own films. Officials at Sony Entertainment, seeking as
much damage control as possible, tend to use lower figures, especially after
their $3.4 billion purchase of Columbia and their subsequent huge recent buyouts
and deals with other enertainment executives. "Unbelievable," said the amazed
studio chief. "What are these people doing?"

Typically, the most-talked-about film is one very few people have actually seen.
Over the weekend, trailers for the widely publicized film "Hook" began appearing
at some Los Angeles theaters. The movie is directed by Steven Spielberg. Its
stars are Dustin Hoffman, Robin Williams and Julia Roberts. The common wisdom
is, no matter how dazzling or disasterous the film is, it will not make a dime
for its studio, Tri-Star, because of the potentially huge benefits to the three
stars and the director. (The studio denies this.)

Film budgets are secret and are sometimes toyed with, but the head of one film
studio estimated that "Hook" would probably cost $80 million without the
salaries of the key players. But then the three stars and director will divvy up
more than 40 percent of the gross, a potentially extraordinary windfall for the
four. As a result, "Hook" will have to be an enormous blockbuster, similar to
"E.T. the Extra-Terrestrial" or "Star Wars," for the studio to make money.

Mike Medavoy, the head of Tri-Star, bristled when he was asked about the deal,
saying: "Can we make money on this deal? Of course we can. Do I look like an
idiot? Do I sound like an idiot? Do you think I'd make a deal where we couldn't
make money?" Mr. Medavoy said the $80 million figure was ridiculous but declined
to be specific.

"No one knows what the deal is except Mike Ovitz, the lawyers and us," said Mr.
Medavoy, referring to the head of Creative Artists Agency. "If the picture's an
unmitigated disaster, we won't make money. But we'll make money, believe me,
we'll make money."

LOAD-DATE: September 30, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              225 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 30, 1991, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Review/Television;
Reopening the Wounds Of an Old Murder Case

BYLINE: By JOHN J. O'CONNOR

SECTION: Section C; Page 16; Column 3; Cultural Desk; Word and Image Page

LENGTH: 499 words


Picking through this season's crop of television movies can be more challenging
than a Saturday morning trip to the neighborhood farmers' market. There are an
awful lot of rotten apples in the electronic barrel. Generally, though, the most
reliable clues to possible quality can be found in the credits; solid track
records can't be easily dismissed. And "Carolina Skeletons," the "NBC Monday
Night at the Movies" presentation tonight at 9, is bursting with them. In this
instance, talent wins out.

Directed by John Erman ("An Early Frost," "The Two Mrs. Grenvilles") and written
by Tracy Keenan Wynn ("The Autobiography of Miss Jane Pittman"), "Carolina
Skeletons" is based on a 1989 Edgar Award-winning novel by David Stout, an
editor at The New York Times, that was in turn inspired by an actual incident.
The year is 1967. James Bragg, a black man and a Green Beret much decorated in
Vietnam, returns to the small town of Crawfordville, S.C. He promises his dying
mother that he will find the real culprit behind the 1934 murders of two young
white girls, a crime for which his 14-year-old brother, Linus (Kenny Blank), was
executed.

James is played by Louis Gossett Jr., an actor who invariably brings his own
special brand of heft and authority to a role. His James gives this somewhat
melodramatic story an unshakable center of gravity. This man's simmering anger
and determination are not to be tampered with. The town is no longer racially
segregated, legally, but whites and blacks continue, for the most part, to
circle one another warily. James' investigation reopens long-festering wounds. A
good many townspeople are bitterly resentful.

The supporting cast is as solid as they get in television movies. Bruce Dern is
Junior Stoker, the local sheriff, whose father (G. D. Spradlin) was the sheriff
who wrangled a confession out of young Linus. James warns Junior that Linus will
be exonerated "with or without you." Among those James visits are Elijah Crooks
(Bill Cobbs), an old black man who was used by the prosecution as an eyewitness;
T. J. Campbell (Paul Roebling), the town's rich boy, who discovered the bodies
of the girls, and Judge Judah Brickstone (Henderson Forsythe), who was Linus's
defense attorney, paid the grand sum of $10.

Linus's innocence quickly becomes apparent through a series of flashbacks. There
is not likely to be a more harrowing scene in television movies this year than
the one in which the confused, whimpering child is very carefully strapped into
the electric chair. The pathos is just about unbearable. James continues his
quest methodically, getting help from a young woman named Cassie (Melissa Leo),
who turns out to be Junior Stoker's daughter.

The list of suspects keeps getting shorter, and the identity of the true villain
is fairly obvious about two-thirds of the way through the film. But Mr. Erman,
Mr. Gossett and colleagues will keep you riveted right up to the final credits.
Care has been taken, and it pays off.

LOAD-DATE: September 30, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              226 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 30, 1991, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Review/Television;
Behind the Scenes in 'L.B.J.' To Catch the Good and the Bad

BYLINE: By WALTER GOODMAN

SECTION: Section C; Page 13; Column 4; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 930 words


For a few minutes of "L. B. J.," David Grubin's four-hour biography of Lyndon B.
Johnson tonight and tomorrow at 9 on Channels 13 and 49, two aides of the former
President recall a 1965 conversation between Johnson and Gov. George C. Wallace
of Alabama. It was shortly after the nation had been outraged by "bloody
Sunday," the beatings of black marchers in Selma by state troopers, in plain
view of network cameras. Johnson was under pressure to crack down but was
worried about his political support in the South and wanted to work a deal with
Mr. Wallace.

To photographs of the big President physically dominating the short Governor,
Richard N. Goodwin and Nicholas deB. Katzenbach tell how Johnson maneuvered Mr.
Wallace into a joint public appearance to deplore violence. That eased the way
for calling out the National Guard to protect marchers on their return to Selma
and for the 1965 Voting Rights Act, probably the most important civil-rights
measure in American history.

In his use of the Johnson-Wallace vignette as an entree into behind-the-scenes
manipulations in a critical hour, Mr. Grubin demonstrates the mastery of the
television documentary that makes his work an absorbing start to a new season of
"The American Experience." Avoiding the often distracting techniques of more
self-indulgent producers, he manages quickly, deftly, pungently to get at the
political style of a formidable practitioner. The result is a searching look
into the often devious mind of a politician whose place in history remains as
restless as the man himself.

Tonight's opening episode uses flavorsome newsreel clips to chronicle Johnson's
odyssey from rough-and-tumble Texas politics into Congress as a New Dealer; into
the Senate, which he dominated as majority leader; into the Vice Presidency,
where he was scorned by the Kennedy entourage, and suddenly into the White House
after John F. Kennedy's assassination.

Dealing with Johnson's early career, particularly his victory in the 1948
Senatorial primary, which it is generally agreed was not a model of clean
politics, Mr. Grubin tends to follow the version of Robert Dallek, the author of
"Lone Star Rising," an adviser to the series and one of several historians who
appear on screen. Unlike Robert A. Caro, who in the second volume of his much
discussed Johnson biography, "Means of Ascent," portrayed Johnson's opponent,
Coke Stevenson, as something of a paragon, Mr. Dallek describes him as a
reactionary racist. In what may be a dig at Mr. Caro, who is not heard from, Mr.
Dallek refers dismissively to "some people" who have idealized Stevenson.

But there is no disagreement here about the force of Johnson's personality, the
effectiveness of his style of politicking or the depth of the populism, rooted
in his own experience of poverty, that generated his Presidency's astonishing
burst of legislation on education, health care, housing and more, all part of
what his speechwriters labeled the Great Society.

His remarkable one-on-one impact comes through in the recollections of such
intimates as Jack Valenti, George E. Reedy and John B. Connally (who tells of
urging Johnson to "blow Hanoi off the face of the earth"), and those of more
critical subordinates such as George W. Ball, Daniel Ellsberg and Roger Wilkins.
Mr. Wilkins, who was an assistant attorney general in the late 1960's, seems to
be speaking for many who were close to the President when he says: "There was
part of me that never stopped loving him. And there was part of me that hated
him."

The interviews, intelligently conducted and smartly edited, reveal how the
wheeling-dealing skills that had served Johnson so well turned against him when
it came to Vietnam. Mr. Valenti recalls him saying, "If I could just sit in a
room with Ho Chi Minh, I think we could cut a deal." But as tomorrow's grim
final hours of the documentary reveal, he could never understand Ho or even
groups in the United States like antiwar protesters and inner city rioters,
glimpsed vividly here, who turned his final years in the White House into what
he called "a continuous nightmare." David McCullough, the narrator, gives
deserved credit to Yoichi R. Okamoto, President Johnson's personal photographer,
whose pictures expose the ravages of the President's last years.

Tomorrow night's episodes are particularly troubling in the reminder that with
the exception of Mr. Ball, Johnson's chief advisers, like Robert S. McNamara and
Dean Rusk, encouraged his most destructive inclinations in Vietnam. (Mr.
McNamara eventually stopped seeing the light at the end of the tunnel and
resigned. Mr. Rusk tells his interviewer, in his bland way, that he made two
mistakes: underestimating the tenacity of the North Vietnamese and
overestimating the patience of the American people.) To put the case more simply
than "L. B. J." does, Johnson's inability to go beyond the lessons he had
learned in Texas and practiced so effectively on Capitol Hill cost him his
office and ruined what might have been a glorious record.

It is a powerful story, powerfully rendered. However one finally assesses
Johnson's accomplishments against his disasters, he seems more appealing here
than he did a quarter-century ago. Most Americans knew him only through
television, which the documentary shows brought out his worst side -- the
dishonesty, the fake sentiment, the vulgarity. But "L. B. J." also shows how
much more there was to him. The comment of Ronnie Dugger, a Johnson critic,
applies as much to the program as to the man: "He was just interesting as hell."

LOAD-DATE: September 30, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: "L. B. J.," a four-hour biography, begins tonight. (Lyndon
Baines Johnson Library)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              227 of 227 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 30, 1991, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Flight Attendants Toast Their Pan Am as It Flies Into the Sunset

BYLINE: By ALISON LEIGH COWAN

SECTION: Section B; Page 3; Column 2; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 978 words


Other Pan Am attendants were swapping business cards in the ladies' room
Saturday night at El Morocco, but in the cavernous bar Susan Walstrom was
remembering the happier times: Omar Sharif at her parties, Spiro T. Agnew conked
out on her couch, gin bottles in her flight bag.

"I'm the wrong person to interview because it makes it sound too wild," Ms.
Walstrom said of the life she might soon have to give up. After a moment, she
added with a smile, "But it was."

She was but one of some 600 current and former flight attendants of Pan American
World Airways who left their regulation-blue uniforms at home and trekked to New
York this weekend in sequins, rhinestones and dancing shoes for one last crew
party.

Though the reunion was thought up well before the bankrupt airline announced in
August that it would be reorganizing as a much smaller Latin American carrier,
guests at the party seized the chance, perhaps their last, to toast the airline
that was.

"Pan Am is a family," said Anne Sweeney, a former flight attendant who has her
own public relations firm. "A dysfunctional family, but a family. It breaks my
heart that the airline could not have been saved in a bigger form."

Delta Air Lines is expected to hire only about 1,800 of Pan Am's roughly 4,500
flight attendants for the trans-Atlantic routes and Northeast shuttle that Delta
is taking over. And since the new Pan Am will have room for another 1,750, those
at the party understood that many of them will soon be "off the line," as they
describe it.

"They haven't called me yet," said Ms. Walstrom, who, during her Pan Am tenure
flew as a volunteer on rescue missions to Saigon, Tehran and Beirut but worries
about Delta's stated preference for people with strong foreign language skills.
"My French was awful," she sighed.

The line outside El Morroco on East 54th Street in Manhattan started to form at
the unfashionably early hour of "1800 hours local," as the guests put it.  On an
evening in which attention was divided between networking and nostalgia, the
guests watched a video compiled from old snapshots. They hummed along to old Pan
Am jingles like, "You can't beat the experience, Pan Am."

The women joked about how confusing it became trying to remember when to take
birth control pills while hopping back and forth over the international date
line. And when someone accidentally tripped, Ms. Sweeney leapt into action.
"Does someone need CPR?" she asked.

Everyone compared notes on his or her favorite passengers.

"Eleanor Roosevelt always wanted the same thing," recalled Joseph Kapel, a
purser of 34 years who retired six years ago. "She would sit in economy and say,
'No autographs please.' Rose Kennedy always had three seats in the back, brought
her own food and said, 'tell the girls not to bother me.' "

Other veterans recalled serving everyone from Miles Davis, who had just died, to
Charles A. Lindbergh, who politely asked whether he might sit in the cockpit. It
was quickly arranged.

Ms. Walstrom managed to befriend many of her celebrity passengers. She met Mr.
Sharif when he was flying to Delhi to make a movie and Mr. Agnew shortly after
he resigned from office. She asked the former Vice President if he was a thief.

"Well, what constitutes a thief?" she said he replied, wanting to know, for
instance, if cheating on your income taxes counted.

Oddly, no one interviewed blamed Pan Am's latest management team led by Thomas
G. Plaskett, its recently departed chief executive, for the airline's demise.
They did blame Pan Am's former chairmen, C. Edward Acker and William T. Seawell,
however, and the executives' wives for expensive tastes that the guests said far
outlived financial well-being.

Judy Seawell, for instance, hired two of her favorite designers, Cacharel and
Adolfo, to redo the flight attendants' uniforms. Next to the miniskirts that
used to ride up the flight attendants' thighs whenever they reached for the
overhead compartments, the Adolfo outfits were hated more than any other.

More predictably, there was the much fretting about the future.

"Any business you refer will be appreciated," said Sebastine Amedume-Beaumier, a
part-time caterer, handing her business card to a co-worker in the ladies' room.
The co-worker stuffed the card in her bra with the others.

'Used to Be a Special Treat'

But mostly they talked about the glorious past, the days when Pan Am required a
new flight attendant to have two years of college, speak a foreign language and
wear a girdle. Air travel was still considered the height of chic, and it
attracted a genteel crowd.

"Flying used to be a special treat," said Nancy Dodson, who recently hooked up
with United. "Passengers got on airplanes all dressed up. Getting on an airplane
now is as common as getting in your car or getting on a Greyhound bus."

Others who found work with Delta or United, which purchased Pan Am's routes to
Heathrow earlier this year, spoke about the painful adjustment.

"To be on probation when you're 54 years old and have 30 years of experience is
humiliating," said Janet Morgan, another recent United hire.

By comparison, Joseph Nation's transition was a success story.

After getting a master's degree in public policy while still a flight attendant,
he went on to get a doctorate and is now running for a vacant Congressional seat
from California.

"I will be the first flight attendant elected to Congress," Mr. Nation
predicted, handing out campaign buttons.

Along with the litany of sacrifices that accompanied the hard and frequent
travel, Mr. Nation remembered some benefits of his old job. As one of the few
male flight attendants at Pan Am, he said, he found it relatively easy to find a
wife.

"On my first flight, there were 14 crew members, 12 of whom were gorgeous
girls," he said. "I said, 'I think I'm going to like this job.' "

LOAD-DATE: September 30, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Anne Boeley, left, and Gladys R. Torres, Pan Am flight
attendants for more than 25 years, standing with a cutout of a flight attendant
from 1975 at a reunion on Saturday in Manhattan. (Michelle V. Agins/The New York
Times)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company
